See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	http://www.researchgate.net/publication/279834535
ENSEMBLE	LEARNING	METHODS	FOR
DECISION	MAKING:	STATUS	AND	FUTURE
PROSPECTS
CONFERENCE	PAPER	·	JULY	2015
DOWNLOADS
5
VIEWS
15
3	AUTHORS,	INCLUDING:
Sreenivas	Sremath	Tirumala
UNITEC	Institute	of	Technology
14	PUBLICATIONS			3	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
Abdolhossein	Sarrafzadeh
UNITEC	Institute	of	Technology
69	PUBLICATIONS			228	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
Available	from:	Sreenivas	Sremath	Tirumala
Retrieved	on:	01	August	2015
ENSEMBLE LEARNING METHODS FOR DECISION MAKING: STATUS AND
FUTURE PROSPECTS
SHAHID ALI1, SREENIVAS SREMATH TIRUMALA2, ABDOLHOSSEIN SARRAFZADEH1
1 Department of computing, UNITEC institute of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
2School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences, AUT University, Auckland, New Zealand
E-MAIL: alis12@wairaka.com, ssremath@aut.ac.nz, hsarrafzadeh@unitec.ac.nz
Abstract:
In real world situations every model has some weaknesses and
will make errors on training data. Given the fact that each model
has certain limitations, the aim of ensemble learning is to super-
vise their strengths and weaknesses, leading to best possible de-
cision in general. Ensemble based machine learning is a solution
of minimizing risk in decision making. Bagging, boosting, stacked
generalization and mixture of expert methods are the most popu-
lar techniques to construct ensemble systems. For the purpose of
combining outputs of class labels, weighted majority voting, be-
haviour knowledge space and border count methods are used to
construct independent classifiers and to achieve diversity among
the classifiers which is important in ensemble learning. It was
found that an ideal ensemble method should work on the principal
of achieving six paramount characteristics of ensemble learning;
accuracy, scalability, computational cost, usability, compactness
and speed of classification. In addition, the ideal ensemble method
would be able to handle large huge image size and long term his-
torical data particularly of spatial and temporal. In this paper
we reveal that ensemble models have obtained high acceptability
in terms of accuracy than single models. Further, we present an
analogy of various ensemble techniques, their applicability, mea-
suring the solution diversity, challenges and proposed methods to
overcome these challenges without diverting from the original con-
cepts.
Keywords:
Support vector machine (SVM), ensemble, classifier, diversity.
1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) is the paradigm to be adopted for
problem solving using self-learning procedures[1]. This prin-
ciple is applicable to discrete problem solving method where a
difficult task is divided into number of sub tasks. Further, a sec-
tion of ML called meta machine learning is dedicated for iden-
tifying efficient methods to segregate a problem into number of
sub problems that can be solved using any simple technique. In
meta machine learning researchers have adopted the approach
of using multiple learners to solve the problem and combined
their decisions. This meta machine learning has been in fo-
cus since a decade has been named as ensemble or committee
machine. There are different ways machines can learn that will
make up an ensemble and there are various methods to combine
the decisions of these learners.
An ensemble is a supervised learning algorithm which im-
plies that it can be trained and deployed for predictions. The
trained ensemble generates single hypothesis. However, this
hypothesis is not essentially contained in the hypotheses space
of the models from which it is built. Ensembles have shown
more flexibility in representation [2]. This flexibility in theory
results in over fitting the training data than a single model. But,
the practical ensemble techniques tend to reduce over fitting of
the training data [3].
The main objective of ensemble learning is to find a optimal
performance through the combination of multiple classifiers. In
ensemble learning a single or multiple algorithms are deployed
to generate different base classifiers. These base classifiers are
strategically combined together through a combination method
decisions making in classifying new data instances. Since en-
semble is a combination of multiple methods, assessing the pre-
diction of an ensemble requires a lot of computation compare
to that of a single model. So ensembles may be consider as a
technique by working on poor learning algorithms by perform-
ing a lot of computations [4].
This paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces
related work on ensemble based systems for critical decision
making. Section III provides the methods for evaluating ensem-
ble based decision making systems. Conclusion and direction
for future work is presented in section IV.
2 Related Work
Perhaps the earliest work on ensemble systems was started
in 1979 where researchers proposed to use ensemble systems
in divide-and-conquer principle by dividing the feature space
into two or more classifiers [5]. Over a decade later, variance
reduction property ensemble system was proposed [6]. In this
study it was concluded that generalization performance of a
neural network can be enhanced by deploying an ensemble of
similarly configured networks. In 1990, the ensemble systems
are brought to the heart of machine learning research by pro-
viding the strong classifier in Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) by combination of weak classifiers through a method
called boosting[7]. Method for separating points in multidi-
mensional spaces was proposed with the help of stochastic pro-
cesses named Stochastic Determination (SD) approaches [8].
The basic philosophy of this method is, that it takes poor solu-
tions as an input and exhibits good solutions. Stochastic pro-
cesses looked promising that led later on to random subspace
method for constructing SVM based ensemble systems.
Stacked generalization method was proposed in 1992[9] with
the philosophy of minimizing the generalization error rate of
one or two generalizers. A general theoretical framework was
proposed for ensemble methods construction In another study,
results from multiple neural networks were combined through
fuzzy logic, which displayed precise classification [10].
The performance of bagging and boosting methods were
compared [11].This was found that bagging performs better
than boosting in low noise system. Additionally, it was stated
that bagging outperforms single classifier. Generally bagging
method was considered to be more suitable for constructing
ensembles. Robust driven ensemble approach for classifica-
tion was invented for classification [12]. Bagging, boosting and
random subspace methods were used. This was concluded that
bagging is effective for weak and unstable classifiers and boost-
ing is beneficial for weak and simple classifiers. Moreover, it
was evident from the study, that random subspace method is
helpful for weak and unstable classifiers, which has decreasing
learning curve.
The relationship of various classifiers combination methods
were investigated [13] and found that double fault measure of
diversity and the measure of difficulty both showed correlation
with majority of vote and Naive Bayes combinations, which
was not expected. Constructing different classifiers through
stacked generalization was investigated [7]. This study proved
that stacked generalization performs better in choosing best
classifier in ensemble compare to cross validation. Two ex-
tended versions of stacking: probability distributions and multi-
response linear regression were proposed. The extended ver-
sions of stacked generalization performed well compared to ex-
isting stacking and cross validation methods versions.
Boosting margin in SVM based ensemble creation was inves-
tigated [13]. It was derived from the research that boosting the
margin results in boosting classifier complication and maximiz-
ing the margins is attractive but not necessarily at the expense
of other factors. A new approach to classifier ensemble de-
sign named combined fusion selection was proposed in which
each classifier was substituted with mini-ensemble of a pair of
sub-classifiers with a random linear form [14]. Till today all
the ensemble learning methods benefited from this approach.
A new local boosting algorithm for dealing with classification
was proposed, based on boosting via resampling version of Ad-
aboost [15]. The research results of this study were more accu-
rate and robust than independent Adaboost approach.
The performance of four SVM ensemble constructing tech-
niques namely Bagging, Adaboost, Arc-x4 and stacking was
evaluated [13] studied. The results of this study demonstrated
that bagging is considered to be an effective technique for vari-
ous problems because of its better performance and higher gen-
erality. A new ensemble method was proposed based on manip-
ulating the class labels [16]. This method generated different
new class labels with the help of Cartesian product of the class
attribute and built a component classifier. Extensive experi-
ments and bias variance results in this showed that their method
significantly reduce the bias of base learner, which is consid-
ered important factor in constructing ensemble based systems.
Least Square SVM (LS-SVM) and Proximal SVM (PSVM)
was deployed for multiclass classification [17]. LS-SVM and
PSVM were used for binary classification applications and can-
not be applied directly to regression or multiclass applications.
The authors unified and simplified the framework of LSVM and
PSVM into extreme learning machine. Active Support vector
machines are very popular in the field of relevance feedback
[18]. They perform better when the size of training data is
small, but it results in some unsatisfactory relevance results
quite frequently. To overcome this problem, bagging algo-
rithm was used to construct ensemble and outputs of classi-
fiers were combined via majority of voting. The results of this
study showed, that bagging algorithm is more effective method
in constructing ensemble than the state of the art approaches.
Ensembles are well known methods and are applied across
various research disciplines, which are obtained by combin-
ing highly accurate classifiers with less ones [19]. However,
questions like, what is the best way of constructing ensemble?
And issues like how best to understand the decisions made by
ensembles? Are still unanswered [19]. When a new learning
2
problem appears, first instance the question arises, what is the
best approach that needs to be applied for construction of an
ensemble of classifiers? [20, 19]. In reality, there is no best en-
semble method [20]. Similarly, there is not even a single best
learning algorithm. However, some methods work principally
better than others and some methods might do well than others
in certain circumstances.
3 Evaluation of Methods for Constructing Ensemble
based Decision Making
In this section four methods, i.e., bagging, boosting, stacked
generalization and mixture of experts will be evaluated against
six characteristics of ensemble learning for decision making, to
help practitioners selecting the most suitable ensemble method
for their specific research needs.
3.1 Predictive Performance - Accuracy
Predictive performance to considered to be main feature for
selecting the algorithm [21]. Moreover, predictive performance
measures accuracy, which can be used to benchmark algo-
rithms. In this regard, bagging method is considered to be high
in accuracy, because of its easy implementation and its func-
tionality on limited data size. Boosting method has low accu-
racy, because of its suffering from over-fitting problems and
its failure to understand complex composite classifier. Stacked
generalization method has low accuracy as combining lower
level models to higher level models is a complex task. Mix-
ture of experts results in low accuracy considering the fact that
assigning weights to the classifiers from the output of Tier1
classifier to Tier2 classifier is a complex task too.
3.2 Scalability
Scalability refers to the method ability to function on large
datasets [22]. Bagging method has low scalability as it operates
on limited data size. Boosting method operates on unlimited
data size, hence having high scalability. Stacked generalization
method operates on medium size of training data resulting in
medium scalability. Whereas mixture of expert method func-
tions on low data size, hence having low scalability.
3.3 Computational Cost
It is important to know about the efficiency of method,i.e.,
does it produce results in reasonable amount of time [23]. In
terms of computational cost, bagging and booting methods are
considered to highly efficient. Both methods obtain ensem-
ble of classifiers efficiently through robust training of data, re-
sulting in low computational cost. In stacked generalization
method training of data requires reasonable amount of time and
rectifying improper training by Tier2 is also time consuming,
hence resulting in low efficiency and high computational cost.
Mixture of experts method requires reasonable time for training
data for classifiers, hence resulting in high computational cost
too.
3.4 Usability
Machine learning is considered to be iterative process. To
improve the performance of an ensemble system practitioners
change parameters to generate better classifiers. Bagging and
boosting methods are considered to be highly usable. Parame-
ters of both these algorithms are flexible for generating better
classifiers. Stacked generalization method has low usability,
as once the weights to Tier1 classifier are assigned they are
not flexible, resulting in low usability. Parameters of assigning
weights to classifier in mixture of expert method are partially
flexible to generate better classifiers, hence resulting in medium
usability.
3.5 Compactness
Compactness can be measured by ensemble size and com-
plexity of classifiers in ensemble methods [22]. In this regard,
bagging method results are highly compact because it only
works on limited training data size and results are easy to un-
derstand. Boosting method on the other side has low compact-
ness, due to its functionality on unlimited data size, whereas
boosting of decision trees could result in thousands (or mil-
lions) of nodes, hence difficult to visualize them. Both stacked
generalization and mixture of expert methods has medium
compactness, as they operate on low to medium size of training
data.
3.6 Speed of Classification
Speed of classification indicates the ability of method to per-
form the classification in a certain time frame [24]. Bagging
method results in robust classification because it operates on
limited data size. Speed of classification for boosting method
is moderate compare to bagging, because it operates on unlim-
ited data size and fails to resolve over-fitting issue. Stacked
generalization and mixture of expert methods are slow in clas-
sification because in these methods each classifier is trained on
3
separate training data and at the end output of these classifiers
are ensemble to make decision. Table 1 provides the compari-
son of learning algorithms methods.
Attributes Bagging Boosting Stacked Generalization Mixture of Experts
Accuracy High Low Low Low
Scalability Low High Medium Low
Computational Cost Low Low High High
Usability High High Low Medium
Compactness High Medium Low Low
Speed of Classification High Medium Low Low
Table 1: Comparison of Methods
3.7 Importance of Diversity Measures in a Decision
Making
Diversity is considered to be cornerstone of ensemble sys-
tems. Diversity plays important role in creating an ensemble,
where each classifier is as different as possible and still con-
sidered to be consistent with the training set considered to be
important feature for obtaining better ensemble performance.
In this chapter we will briefly discuss diversity and various
approaches towards its creation and measures. If a classifier
makes a perfect generalization performance then there would
not be a need to deploy ensemble techniques. Over lapping of
data, noise and outliers makes it impossible for a classifier to
propose [25]. The success of an ensemble system relies on its
ability to correct the errors of its classifiers. The strategy in
ensemble system is to create various classifiers and combining
their outputs to improve the performance of a single classifier.
If all the classifiers result in same output, then correcting the
error will not be possible. Therefore, individual classifiers are
required in ensemble system to make different errors on differ-
ent instances [26]. The intuition is that if each classifier makes
different errors, then combining these errors strategically will
reduce total error. Therefore, the overall strategy in ensemble
system is to make classifier as unique as possible. Classifiers
are created whose decision boundaries are different from oth-
ers, such classifiers are said to be diverse.
There are several quantitative measures for diversity assess-
ment. The most common one is pair wise measures, addressed
between two classifiers. For example, an ensemble of having n
classifiers, then its total pairwise diversity measure can be cal-
culated as, the mean pairwise measure of overall n.(n − 1)/2
pairs of classifiers is represented from (1)[27].
FTotal =
2
n(n− 1)
∑
∀i ̸=j
fi,j (1)
Where fi,j is diversity or similarity measure of two classifiers
outputs i and j. The following two pairwise measures are con-
sidered to be useful in diversity.
The disagreement is the probability that the two classifiers
will disagree, whereas, double fault measure is considered to
be the probability that both classifiers are not correct. Increase
in the value of disagreement and double fault value increases
diversity results. This rule makes the assumption that diversity
is considered to be highest, when half of the classifiers are cor-
rect and half of them are incorrect. Based on this assumption
entropy measure can be represented from (2)[28].
E =
1
N
N∑
i=1
1
T − [T/2]
min{ζi, (T − ζi)} (2)
Where ξi is the number of classifier out of T , and N is the
dataset cardinality [28]. It varies between 0 and 1, where 0
indicates all classifiers are same, and 1 represents weight diver-
sity.
3.8 Correlation
Diversity is measured as a correlation between the output of
two classifiers and can be represented from (3)[13].
ρi,j =
ad− bc√
(a+ b)(c+ d)(a+ c)(b+ d)
, 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 (3)
when P = 0, maximum diversity is achieved, stating classifiers
are uncorrelated.
Q-Statistic can be represented from (4) [29].
Qi,j = (ad− bc)/(ad+ bc) (4)
If the same instances are correctly classified by both classi-
fiers, then Q assumes positive values, otherwise negative val-
ues. Maximum diversity is obtained when Q = 0. However,
measuring diversity is not straightforward because there is no
formal definition of diversity and research in 2002 raised some
doubts about the measures of diversity usefulness in creating
ensemble of classifiers [13].
There are various approaches to achieve diversity. The most
popular approach to achieve diversity is by using different
datasets to train individual classifiers [30]. The datasets are
usually obtained through resampling techniques, such as bag-
ging or boosting. In these techniques data subsets are selected
randomly from the whole training data. Three classifiers are
trained on random and resampling data subsets, resulting in
formation of three different decision boundaries. At the end
these boundaries are ensemble to obtain accurate classification.
4
Another comprehensive approach to achieve diversity is by de-
ploying different classifiers [31]. The instability of classifiers
can be controlled by changing such parameters, hence result-
ing in diversity. Similarly, changing the parameters allow the
classifiers to be suitable candidates in ensemble setting.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
Ensemble learning is a procedure that is employed to train
numerous learning machines and combining their outputs to
obtain a better composite global model with more accurate and
reliable decisions than can be accomplished through a single
model. The ensemble methodology has been used across var-
ious disciplines to improve the predictive performance of sin-
gle models such as: bioinformatics, medicine, finance, manu-
facturing, information security, information retrieval and image
retrieval etc.
As explained in previous sections, though ensemble meth-
ods are popular and applied across various disciplines, ques-
tions like, what is the best method for constructing problem
based ensemble? Is still unanswered. With the above analy-
sis it may be concluded that a single method cannot be used
to achieve all the characteristics which are required for optimal
performance of ensemble learning for reducing the chances of
making a poor decision. It can also be concluded that bag-
ging algorithm achieved high accuracy compare to other meth-
ods because of its easy implementation and its functionality on
limited data size. Bagging was considered to be highly accu-
rate, usable, compact and robust for constructing ensembles.
Boosting algorithm has high usability. In terms of computa-
tional cost stacked generalization and mixture of experts meth-
ods were considered highly expensive to run and to manage
their data. However, the success of ensemble methods depend
on other factors as well such as the choice of a base classifier,
the procedure in which training set is modified, the selection of
combination method and the ability of selected base classifier
to solve the problem.
Similarly, questions like how to understand the decisions
made by ensembles? Is still unanswered. In our paper we
reviewed various methods for combining outputs of ensemble
classifiers. After reviewing those methods, it can be concluded
that these methods lack comprehensibility, i.e., the knowledge
learned by ensemble method is not understandable to the user.
Moreover, these combination methods have flexible parameters
for training and non-trainable data, therefore, their results were
not agreed upon in vast research community. Diversity creation
in ensemble learning is very important as accurate results can
be obtained only when the classifiers are more diverse. Lack of
formal definition to diversity in ensemble learning posed one of
the limitations to its functionality. The relation between ensem-
ble diversity and ensemble performance is designed for regres-
sion problems; however, it is not yet formalized for classifica-
tion problem. From our review for methods combining outputs
of ensemble based classifiers, we can conclude that there is not
even a single best method for creating an ensemble, even not
for combining classifiers’ outputs. Some methods work mainly
better than others and few methods might do better than other
in certain circumstances.
Further research is required to develop an ideal method for
construction ensemble based should achieve accuracy, scala-
bility, usability, flexibility and should be able to handle large
huge image size and long term historical data particularly of
spatial and temporal data of environmental analysis. Similarly,
a method for combining outputs of classifiers should be devel-
oped as well, where the focus of that method should not only to
achieve optimal performance but should also focus on provid-
ing more information of its insight in decision making.
References
[1] K. Li, Z. Liu, and Y. Han, “Study of selective ensem-
ble learning methods based on support vector machine,”
Physics Procedia, vol. 33, no. 0, pp. 1518 – 1525, 2012.
[2] E. Stamatatos and G. Widmer, “Automatic identification
of music performers with learning ensembles,” Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 165, no. 1, pp. 37 – 56, 2005.
[3] I. G. Webb and Z. Zheng, “Multistrategy ensemble learn-
ing: reducing error by combining ensemble learning tech-
niques,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data En-
gineering,, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 980 – 991, 2004.
[4] F. Bellal, H. Elghazel, and A. Aussem, “A semi-
supervised feature ranking method with ensemble learn-
ing,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 33, no. 10, 2012.
[5] G. Brown, “Ensemble learning,” 2009.
[6] Y.-Z. Zhang, C.-M. Liu, L.-K. Zhu, and Q.-L. Hu,
“Constructing multiple support vector machines ensemble
based on fuzzy integral and rough reducts,” in Industrial
Electronics and Applications, 2007, pp. 1256 –1259.
[7] R. E. Schapire, “The strength of weak learnability,” Ma-
chine Learning, vol. 5, pp. 197–227, 1990.
[8] E. M. Kleinberg, “Stochastic discrimination,” Annals of
Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 1, 1990.
5
[9] D. H. Wolpert, “Stacked generalization,” Neural Net-
works, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 241 – 259, 1992.
[10] S.-B. Cho and J. Kim, “Multiple network fusion using
fuzzy logic,” Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 497 –501, 1995.
[11] R. Maclin and D. W. Opitz, “Popular ensemble methods:
An empirical study,” CoRR, vol. abs/1106.0257, 2011.
[12] D. Miller and L. Yan, “Critic-driven ensemble classifica-
tion,” Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 47,
no. 10, pp. 2833 –2844, 1999.
[13] C. A. Shipp and L. I. Kuncheva, “Relationships between
combination methods and measures of diversity in com-
bining classifiers,” Information Fusion, vol. 3, no. 2, pp.
135 – 148, 2002.
[14] L. Kuncheva and J. Rodriguez, “Classifier ensembles with
a random linear oracle,” Knowledge and Data Engineer-
ing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 500–, 2007.
[15] C. X. Zhang and J. S. Zhang, “A local boosting algo-
rithm for solving classification problems,” Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1928–
1941, 2008.
[16] Q. Wang and L. Zhang, “Ensemble learning based on
multi-task class labels,” in Advances in Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, M. Zaki, J. Yu, B. Ravindran, and V. Pudi, Eds.,
2010, vol. 6119, pp. 464–475.
[17] G.-B. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Ding, and R. Zhang, “Extreme
learning machine for regression and multiclass classifica-
tion,” Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernet-
ics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 42, no. 2, 2012.
[18] X.-Y. Wang, B.-B. Zhang, and H.-Y. Yang, “Active svm-
based relevance feedback using multiple classifiers en-
semble and features reweighting,” Engineering Applica-
tions of Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
[19] G. Wang, J. Hao, J. Ma, and H. Jiang, “A comparative as-
sessment of ensemble learning for credit scoring,” Expert
Systems with Applications, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 223 – 230,
2011.
[20] M. W. Craven and S. J. W, “Extracting tree-structured rep-
resentations from trained networks,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing, vol. 8, 1996.
[21] A. Statnikov, C. F. Aliferis, I. Tsamardinos, D. Hardin,
and S. Levy, “A comprehensive evaluation of multicate-
gory classification methods for microarray gene expres-
sion cancer diagnosis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 5, pp.
631–643, 2005.
[22] L. Rokach, “Ensemble-based classifiers,” Artificial Intel-
ligence Review, vol. 33, pp. 1–39, 2010.
[23] P. Granitto, P. Verdes, and H. Ceccatto, “Neural network
ensembles: evaluation of aggregation algorithms,” Artifi-
cial Intelligence, vol. 163, no. 2, pp. 139 – 162, 2005.
[24] B. Pfahringer, G. Holmes, and R. Kirkby, “Optimizing
the induction of alternating decision trees,” in Advances
in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 2001, vol. 2035.
[25] G. Brown, J. Wyatt, R. Harris, and X. Yao, “Diversity cre-
ation methods: a survey and categorisation,” Information
Fusion, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 5–20, 2005.
[26] P. Melville and R. J. Mooney, “Creating diversity in en-
sembles using artificial data,” Information Fusion, vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 99 – 111, 2005.
[27] R. Polikar, “Ensemble based systems in decision making,”
Circuits and Systems Magazine, IEEE, vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
21–45, 2006.
[28] P. Melville and R. J. Mooney, “Diverse ensembles for ac-
tive learning,” in Proceedings of the twenty-first interna-
tional conference on Machine learning, ser. ICML ’04.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 74–.
[29] R. E. Banfield, L. O. Hall, K. W. Bowyer, and
W. Kegelmeyer, “Ensemble diversity measures and their
application to thinning,” Information Fusion, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 49 – 62, 2005.
[30] Z.-H. Zhou, “When semi-supervised learning meets en-
semble learning,” Frontiers of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering in China, vol. 6, pp. 6–16, 2011.
[31] K. Sirlantzis, S. Hoque, and M. Fairhurst, “Diversity
in multiple classifier ensembles based on binary feature
quantisation with application to face recognition,” Ap-
plied Soft Computing, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 437–445, 2008.
6
