 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4, 758–799; doi:10.3390/socsci4030758 
 
social sciences 
ISSN 2076-0760 
www.mdpi.com/journal/socsci 
Article 
Hierarchical and Non-Hierarchical Linear and Non-Linear 
Clustering Methods to “Shakespeare Authorship Question” 
Refat Aljumily 
School of English Literature, Language and Linguistics, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, Tyne and Wear NE1 7RU, UK; E-Mail: refat.aljumily@ncl.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-191-208-6233 
Academic Editor: Martin J. Bull 
Received: 1 July 2015 / Accepted: 6 September 2015 / Published: 17 September 2015 
 
Abstract: A few literary scholars have long claimed that Shakespeare did not write some of 
his best plays (history plays and tragedies) and proposed at one time or another various 
suspect authorship candidates. Most modern-day scholars of Shakespeare have rejected this 
claim, arguing that strong evidence that Shakespeare wrote the plays and poems being his 
name appears on them as the author. This has caused and led to an ongoing scholarly 
academic debate for quite some long time. Stylometry is a fast-growing field often used to 
attribute authorship to anonymous or disputed texts. Stylometric attempts to resolve this 
literary puzzle have raised interesting questions over the past few years. The following paper 
contributes to “the Shakespeare authorship question” by using a mathematically-based 
methodology to examine the hypothesis that Shakespeare wrote all the disputed plays 
traditionally attributed to him. More specifically, the mathematically based methodology 
used here is based on Mean Proximity, as a linear hierarchical clustering method, and on 
Principal Components Analysis, as a non-hierarchical linear clustering method. It is also 
based, for the first time in the domain, on Self-Organizing Map U-Matrix and Voronoi Map, 
as non-linear clustering methods to cover the possibility that our data contains significant 
non-linearities. Vector Space Model (VSM) is used to convert texts into vectors in a high 
dimensional space. The aim of which is to compare the degrees of similarity within and 
between limited samples of text (the disputed plays). The various works and plays assumed 
to have been written by Shakespeare and possible authors notably, Sir Francis Bacon, 
Christopher Marlowe, John Fletcher, and Thomas Kyd, where “similarity” is defined in 
terms of correlation/distance coefficient measure based on the frequency of usage profiles 
of function words, word bi-grams, and character triple-grams. The claim that Shakespeare 
authored all the disputed plays traditionally attributed to him is falsified in favor of the 
alternative authors according to the stylistic criteria and analytic methodology used. The result 
OPEN ACCESS
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 759 
 
 
of this validated analysis is empirically-based, objective, and involves replicable evidence 
which can be used in conjunction with existing arguments to resolve the question of whether 
or not Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon wrote all the disputed plays traditionally 
attributed to him. 
Keywords: stylometry; text-length normalization; dimensionality-reduction; dendrogram; 
word bi-grams; character triple-grams; correlation matrix; centroid analysis; clustering 
tendency test; vector space 
 
1. Introduction 
The question of identifying the real author of the Shakespearean works is known as “Shakespeare 
authorship question”. Some literary scholars, traditionally known as anti-Stratfordians, questioned 
Shakespeare’s authorship of specific plays, arguing that someone else other than Shakespeare either 
actually wrote these plays or collaborated with him in writing them. Some even went so far in their 
claims as to suggest that these plays were written by a group of playwrights [1–5]. Most, Shakespearean 
scholars, including modern-day ones, traditionally known as Stratfordians, strongly believe that 
Shakespeare actually wrote all of the works traditionally attributed to him. The literature shows that there 
is no historical record or agreement among scholars as to the exact date of scholarly doubt concerning 
Shakespeare’s authorship, but, as early as 1628, Thomas Vicars listed many authors by name, with only 
one exception: “that author who takes his name from shaking and spear”. This circumlocution is curious, 
and is consistent with Vicars knowing Shake-speare (as the writer’s name was often spelled) was a pen 
name. Hyphenated names in the Elizabethan era (other than Fitz-Gerald, etc) were typically assumed 
names. Also, according to some other resources [6–9], Shakespeare’s authorship was not questioned 
until the middle of the nineteenth century and probably before that, when around 1845, Shakespeare was 
promoted to the status of the best dramatist of all time. Since then, debate has raged over these claims. 
The current state of the debate remains unresolved and literary scholars’ reactions towards Shakespeare’s 
authorship question are sharply divided on whether or not the works traditionally attributed to Shakespeare 
are actually the writings of a man called William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon. 
The literature on the Shakespeare authorship question is so extensive and is often contentious.  
Several scholarly studies have been devoted to the topic. Among the most widely cited studies are,  
for example, [1,8,10–15]. The most recent dedicated studies are, for example, James Shapiro’s Contested 
Will [16] or the essays collected in Paul Edmondson and Stanley Wells, (eds.) Shakespeare Beyond 
Doubt [17]. However, in this literature, the different arguments against or for the attribution fall into 
seven or eight categories described by a mixture of internal and (circumstantial) external pieces of 
evidence, such as Shakespeare’s social position and personal life, education and literacy background, 
documentary record, last will and testament, and finally the spelling of the “Shakespeare”. In a number 
of different cases, the same pieces of evidence, interpreted differently by both sides of the debate, have 
been used in support of their opposing arguments. Also, in the literature, there is a body of evidence for 
and against each one of the authorship suspect candidates proposed, for example, see [8,18,19]. The 
present paper does not aim to provide an expanded account on every claim made by “anti-Stratfordians” 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 760 
 
 
and “Stratfordians” in this debate, but rather it presents a summary of the most commonly discussed 
reasons that are often taken against/for the case for Shakespeare. According to anti- Stratfordians, there 
are at least four reasons for Shakespeare not authoring the works attributed to him: 
(1) Shakespeare’s writing style differs from one work to another in terms of divergent vocabulary 
use and different sentence structures. The copresence of more unrelated writing styles in 
Shakespeare’s works gives each an enhanced force as indicators of different author or  
multiple authors. 
(2) If Shakespeare had written all the plays, poems, and sonnets traditionally attributed to him, he 
would never have had time to keep his career as a businessman and landowner. 
(3) A documentary record fails to show that Shakespeare attended grammar school or received 
knowledge in classical literature and rhetoric. Based on this, the works attributed to Shakespeare 
were in a literary style and this indicates that these works were written by a person capable of a 
high literary style not by a person of only moderate or lacked education. 
(4) A documentary record in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries also fails to show 
Shakespeare as a playwright or poet. Rather, that evidence shows only that his career is a 
businessman and real-estate landlord, and this means that there is no explicit evidence in 
Shakespeare’s life connecting him to any of the plays and sonnets attributed to him.  
The existence of such reasons suggested the possibility of alternative authors for the true authorship 
of Shakespeare’s works. Various possible authorship candidates have been proposed [20] notably: Sir 
Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, John Fletcher, Thomas Kyd, William Stanley, Edward de Vere, 
Earl of Oxford, Earl of Derby, Roger Manners, Mary Sidney Herbert, etc. Although, it is difficult to 
determine the exact number of those candidates, but, according to some sources [20], there are more than 
eighty suspect authors. The exact list of Shakespeare authorship candidates who may have written the 
works attributed to Shakespeare is available on “List of Shakespeare authorship candidates” from 
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. 
Seen from the eyes of Stratfordians, the claim that Shakespeare was not the true author of specific 
works is incorrect and literally far-fetched. The Stratfordians also have their own reasons to believe that 
Shakespeare’s hand in all the works attributed to him is beyond a reasonable doubt. Some of these are: 
(1) The historical record of Shakespeare attests to the fact that Shakespeare authored 38 plays, 154 
sonnets, and 5 poems. These works bear Shakespeare’s name which had explicit evidence and 
historical validity from Shakespeare’s own time. Much of this evidence comes either from 
“public sources, such as many title pages of plays and poems published in his lifetime, and 
references in works by other writers such as Francis Meres, who in 1598 named Shakespeare as 
the author of twelve plays, and John Weever, who wrote a poem addressed to Shakespeare” or 
from “manuscript sources, such as references in accounts of court performances, many entries in 
the Stationers’ Register (a volume in which publishers and printers were required to register the 
works they intended to publish), a note about Hamlet by the writer Gabriel Harvey, and William 
Drummond’s notes of his private conversations with Ben Jonson” [21].  
(2) There are no documents explicitly suggesting someone else wrote Shakespeare’s works. The only 
evidence on this question is that “the Shakespeare who wrote the plays was the man of  
Stratford-upon-Avon is provided by his monument in Holy Trinity Church, which compares the 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 761 
 
 
man of Stratford with great figures of antiquity, by Ben Jonson’s verses in the First Folio, which 
call him the, ‘sweet swan of Avon’, and, also in the Folio, by verses by Leonard Digges, which 
refer to his ‘Stratford monument’”. There is also much indirect evidence like the fact that 
“visitors to Stratford during the seventeenth century sought to learn more about its most famous 
former inhabitant” [21].  
(3) Interpreting the historical and biographical information about Shakespeare for evidence to reject 
his authorship to the advantage of another author(s) is a much contested one at the time. Mere 
evidence with a biographical interpretation of literature is not a marker to attribute authorship. 
In conclusion, as things stand, the evidence from both sides may be related to their claims but still be 
insufficient to prove them. Establishing the case for either side of the authorship debate using traditional 
or literary stylistic analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, and we leave this task to the literary scholars 
or critics to use their own methods to see whether or not Shakespeare actually wrote all the plays 
traditionally attributed to him. Instead, the aim here is to help resolve “Shakespeare authorship question” 
by bringing further and more empirical evidence based on a mathematically-based methodology, i.e., 
cluster analysis, to bear on it. 
The reminder of the discussion is organized into five sections. The first section looks at the authorship 
attribution problem, which is the topic of the present paper. It begins with a brief overview of authorship 
attribution and stylometry, then reviews existing attempts on the Shakespeare authorship question. The 
second outlines the methodology and the stylistic criteria used in this paper. In the third cluster analysis 
is applied to relevant digital texts using four clustering methods, and the results are presented and 
interpreted. The fourth and final section concludes the discussion. 
2. Authorship Attribution 
Authorship attribution has historically been part of the more general field of stylometry, whose aim 
is to augment the qualitative methods used in traditional philology and literary criticism for the study of 
text with theoretical tools and methodologies drawn on the one hand from linguistics and on the other 
from mathematics and statistics. As its name implies, the aim of the subdiscipline is to identify the 
authorship of text where this is disputed or unknown. In general, authorship attribution addresses  
a situation in which there is an anonymous or disputed text and a set of writers who are thought to be 
reasonable candidates for authorship of it. Sample texts from the candidate authors are studied to 
determine the characteristic style of each, and these characteristic styles are compared to that of the text 
of interest to determine which of the candidates is the most likely author. There are many types of 
authorship attribution problems and these are discussed in [22–24]. 
2.1. Stylometry 
The history of stylometry goes back to the work of Jewish scholars in antiquity, who attributed the 
Torah to Moses based on the analysis of the style and the structure of verses in the Torah and the 
subsequent books of Old Testament. At that ancient period, two early practices of stylometry are identified: 
(i) counting of the number of verses, words, and letters in addition to the number of occurrences of 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 762 
 
 
certain words in each book of the Old Testament to ensure accuracy in transcription; and  
(ii) looking for hidden meanings in letter patterns and for the numbers that could be derived from them. 
More recently, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Europe saw a growing interest in the problems of 
authorship attribution, notably for the purpose of identifying the authorship of older works such as the 
Iliad and the Odyssey, the different books of the Bible, and the works of Shakespeare. In 1713, for 
example, Richard Bentley considered the question of whether the Odyssey was written by the same poet 
as the Iliad, concluding on the basis of stylistic features that a single poet composed the Iliad for male 
listeners and the Odyssey for women. In 1795, Heinrich Wolf argued, again on the basis of stylistic 
features, that the Iliad and the Odyssey were created before the invention of writing, and that the poems 
they contained must be regarded as a collection of songs or short stories that had originally composed 
one by one. In 1787, the Shakespearean scholar Edmond Malone argued that the three parts of Henry VI 
were not really written by Shakespeare, to whom they were traditionally attributed. 
Perhaps the most influential contribution to the field of authorship attribution is that by the English 
mathematician Augustus de Morgan, who in 1851 gave new insights into how an authorship attribution 
problem of a given text can be solved. One of these insights, which related to the classical problem of 
the authorship of the biblical Epistle to the Hebrews, was to compare different-length words used in 
Greek text generally with those in the other Pauline epistles. To solve the problem of authorship, de 
Morgan suggested, in his own words, to “count a large number of words in Herodotus—say all the first 
book—and count all the letters; divide the second numbers by the first, giving the average number of 
letters to a word in that book…do the same with the second book. I should expect a very close 
approximation…” [25]. Attempts to develop his quantitative method and to find new methods had 
continued by de Morgan himself in 1880 and by other researchers to examine an author’s a literary style 
up until 1890, where Wincenty Lutoslawski [26], polish philosopher, set out the basics of stylometry in 
his “Principes de stylométrie”, published in 1890, introducing it for the first time as a method for 
“measuring stylistic affinities”. On the early attempts in this field see, for example, [18]. 
As for the recent developments, the appearance and widespread diffusion of information technology 
in the second half of the twentieth century rendered the digital representation of text together with the 
abstraction and analysis of data from digital text readily practicable, and as a result stylometry has 
developed rapidly. Developments in stylometric authorship attribution have focused on the one hand on 
identification of suitable textual criteria for attribution, and on the other on development of effective 
quantitative methods for the analysis of data based on such criteria. 
Stylometrists generally assume that one part of an author’s writing style is conscious, deliberate, and 
open to imitation or borrowing by others. The other is sub-conscious, that is, independent of an author’s 
direct control, and far less open to imitation or borrowing. Stylometry focuses on the unconscious part 
of an author’s writing style and assumes that at least some aspects of it are constant across his or her 
literary output. Stylometrists further argue that these constants can be identified and applied to areas like 
authorship attribution on the basis of quantitative criteria using computational methods [27]. 
The main foci in the development of stylometry have been (i) identification of unconscious characteristic 
stylistic features, called discriminators or variables, which can reliably be claimed to characterize the 
styles of individual authors and to distinguish them from the styles of others; and (ii) identification of 
specifically quantitative analytical methods which generate and use data derived on the basis of such 
variables in stylometric applications such as authorship attribution. The stylometric literature contains a 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 763 
 
 
large number of textual features suggested as discriminators of authorship, such as word and sentence 
length, number of characters and syllables, punctuation marks, vocabulary use, fragments of words 
(character n-grams), collocation of words (word n-grams), function word frequencies, content word 
frequencies, word frequencies, position of words within sentences, parts of speech and re-write rules [28,29]. 
Lexical features, in particular, have prevailed the majority of stylometric studies thus far this decade has 
seen the use of syntactic and semantic features as criteria for authorship due to the great improvements 
in recent years in the reliability of parsing and part-of-speech tagging technology, but there is still a 
significant error rate with this technology, particularly for non-standard and earlier forms of English and 
for other languages. The stylometric literature also contains a large number of quantitative methods for 
analysis of data based on such criteria in order to generate useful results [28,30–32]. Historically, 
attribution methods used in authorship attribution were statistical univariate methods measuring a single 
textual feature, for example word length, sentence length, frequencies of letter n-grams, and distribution of 
words of a given length in syllables. Common univariate methods are T-test, which compares the averages 
of two samples, and Z-score, which calculates the mean occurrence and the standard deviation of a 
particular feature and compares it within the normal distribution table. These univariate methods were 
used to analyze texts in terms of a single stylometric criterion or two and the results derived from them 
are therefore described as a simple form of statistical analysis. Today, univariate methods are far less 
popular in the domain of authorship attribution than they once were. More recently, therefore, 
multivariate data analytical methods have increasingly been used. These are essentially variations on a 
theme: cluster analysis. 
Cluster analysis aims to detect and graphically to reveal structures or patterns in the distribution of 
data items, variables, or texts, in n-dimensional space, where n is the number of variables used to describe 
an author’s style. There is a large number of cluster analysis methods and a large literature associated 
with each [33,34]. Apart from a few attempts using hierarchical cluster analysis methods and principal 
components analysis with authorship attribution [32,35–39], to the best of my knowledge, until recently, 
little work has been done using cluster analytical methods with authorship attribution problems. This is 
understandable, since the domain of stylometry is still at an early stage of development and we can 
expect expansion in the use of cluster analytical methods as multivariate tools in the resolution of 
different authorship problems. However, the results from these studies show that cluster analysis methods 
are proven to be the best performing methods in authorship attribution: works by the same author can be 
grouped according to their genre or writing styles and authors can be distinguished from one another: 
the work x of author A can be different from or similar to his/her work y or work z, and the work of 
author A can be distinguished from the work of author B or author C or disputed work(s) (D, E, F, etc.). 
As a final point, the domain of stylometry and authorship attribution indicates that: 
 Despite a very large number of proposed stylistic criteria, there is little agreement on which are 
valid, and 
 Similarly, there is little agreement on which quantitative analytical methods give the most useful 
and reliable results, and there is again very little work on formal assessment of their validity. 
  
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 764 
 
 
2.2. Previous Stylometric Works on the Shakespeare Authorship Question 
The Shakespeare authorship question has attracted so much attention and many non-traditional,  
or computer-assisted, authorship attribution attempts have been made towards the solution of this 
problem. The stylometric interest in this debate probably began in 1901 when Thomas Corwin 
Mendenhall, on the basis of his “quantitative analysis of writing style” [40], examined [41] the word 
length frequency distribution for all the works written by Shakespeare and Bacon and compared the 
results. The comparison results showed that each author had very different word length frequency 
distribution and the conclusion was that Bacon was not likely to have written Shakespeare’s works.  
In the same study, Mendenhall also measured the word length frequency distribution of Christopher 
Marlowe and compared it to that of Shakespeare’s. The results found that Marlowe’s word length 
frequency distribution was in a close agreement with that of Shakespeare, suggesting Marlowe as  
a putative co-author of the Shakespeare plays. Another early attempt was made in 1901 by Thorndike, 
who examined the relative frequency of contractions in the late plays written by Shakespeare and 
Fletcher. The results showed that Shakespeare and Fletcher used the same contractions (i.e., pronominal 
forms) at different frequencies in Henry VIIII, suggesting that these works have been written jointly by 
Shakespeare and Fletcher [28]. 
Slater [42] used a set of words and rare words, and examined them in a selection of works written by 
Shakespeare (including the questioned play Edward III) and by other alternative candidate authors. 
Slater found that Edward III was very likely written by Shakespeare [43]. 
A study by Merriam [39], who used principal components analysis to examine the use of function 
words and content words in a selection of works written by Shakespeare, Marlowe, and other authors of 
the time, found that eight Shakespeare plays were more closely similar to nine Marlowe works (seven 
plays and two translations from Latin) than to the other twenty eight Shakespeare plays. In another study,  
Matthews and Merriam [44], which used multi-layer perception neural networks to classify a selection 
of works written by Shakespeare and Fletcher, found that The Double Falsehood and The London 
Prodigal had the characteristics of Fletcher’s writing style, Henry VIII had Shakespeare’s writing style, 
and The Two Noble Kinsmen had the characteristics of both authors’ writing styles. The results suggested 
that Shakespeare collaborated with Marlowe and Fletcher to write these works. 
A study by Craig and Kinney [45] showed similar results to that of Merriam [39] and Matthews and 
Merriam [44] when examined a large number of works by Shakespeare and a few suspect authors using 
multivariate data analysis methods. The results from this study, as reported, indicated that only a few of 
the Shakespeare disputed works were closely similar to that of his remaining works. 
Yang et al. [20] used information categorization approach based on word rank order and the frequency 
of different words applying Phylogenetic analysis to examine “Shakespeare-Marlowe authorship 
problem”. They used forty five plays from Shakespeare’s and eight works from Marlowe’s writings.  
The results indicated that the majority of Shakespeare’s questioned works were not written by Marlowe 
and that Edward III was more likely to have been written by Marlowe than Shakespeare. 
A very recent stylometric study by Fox et al. [43] examined the use of function words and part 
ofspeech usage frequencies in a corpus made of a selection of works from the respective writings of 
Shakespeare, Marlowe, and other Shakespeare’s contemporaries. The results showed that there were 
significant similarities between Shakespeare’s and Marlowe’s works that were not reached by the other 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 765 
 
 
authors in the analysis and that Marlowe was likely to have helped Shakespeare or contributed to one or 
more of his plays, in particular Henry VI, Part I. 
In summary, many studies have used stylometric authorship attribution to examine the Shakespeare 
authorship question. To date, given the number of disputed plays examined and the possible suspect 
authors involved, the various studies have reached mixed conclusions: 
(1) Shakespeare was responsible for the writing of the early plays traditionally attributed to him.  
At the same time, the impact of Bacon and Marlowe on Shakespeare’s writings during this stage 
of his career as a playwright is very significant. 
(2) Sir Francis Bacon was not likely to have written Shakespeare’s plays. 
(3) Marlowe did have an enormous influence on Shakespeare’s works; while he is not the creator of 
the whole Shakespeare’s oeuvre, his contribution is seriously considered. In other words, Edward 
III, Henry VI trilogy, Richard II, and Richard III, or major part of them, are likely to have been 
written by Marlowe. 
(4) John Fletcher was likely to have written Henry VIII or even contributed to it. The possibility of 
Fletcher’s involvement in helping Shakespeare to write some other plays was not ruled out. 
3. Methodology 
3.1. Corpus 
Prior to outlining the overall corpus composition, the discussion will first focus on the respective 
collection of texts, addressing the issue of representing the authorial information contained in them. 
The most difficult part of the corpus compilation process was to select a collection of (digital or 
electronic) texts widely agreed upon among most literary scholars as belonging to the candidate authors 
involved in this study and to prepare them for inclusion in the corpus. The preparation process will be 
dealt with later in due course of this section. The problems with attributing controversial texts from the 
Elizabethan period literature are well known in quantitative authorship attribution studies [45] and easily 
explained. Most Elizabethan plays were published without the playwright’s name and some literary 
scholars believe that there are no texts that can be definitely attributed to Shakespeare or his contemporaries. 
Some (un)successfully contested texts are linked to a group of authors rather than a particular author. 
This may make it impossible to tell whether the distinctiveness of the proposed individual writing styles 
is about a single author or a group of authors. In many cases, a play has (been claimed to have) multiple 
authors. Here are a few examples advanced by some literary scholars: 
 Dido, Queen of Carthage, is at best a collaboration between Christopher Marlowe and Thomas 
Nashe, though scholars have typically sought to limit Nashe’s involvement. It is therefore, at the 
least, a contested play and cannot be used to generate Marlowe’s profile. 
 Doctor Faustus exists in two early versions (1604 and 1616), both printed long after Marlowe’s 
death and known to have been subjected to revision by other hands (Henslowe’s Diary records 
payments made for them). It is therefore not exclusively Marlowe’s, and cannot be included to 
generate his authorial profile. 
 The Jew of Malta was printed in 1633, long after Marlowe’s death, because it was revived for 
Caroline performance. The 1633 quarto includes two prologues and an epilogue added by 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 766 
 
 
Thomas Heywood, and unclear whether further revisions were made to Marlowe’s text. Even if 
the prologues and epilogue are removed, the authenticity of the text remains in doubt. 
 Thomas Kyd’s authorship of Arden of Faversham is far from conclusive. The general scholarly 
consensus is that Shakespeare is responsible for a sizeable amount, if not the entirety, of the play. 
Kyd and Marlowe are other likely candidates for collaborators. Kyd’s authorship of 1 Hieronimo 
is equally contentious. 
 Cymbeline was first printed in 1623 and setting information (such as “in the garden of Cymbeline’s 
palace”), not evident in the early texts, was typically added to the nineteenth century editions  
of Shakespeare. 
 Hamlet, King Lear, Richard III, and Titus Andronicus are not disputed. These are all Shakespeare’s 
canonical works. Titus is a collaboration with George Peele. 
However, serious challenges to Shakespeare’s authorship of these plays were made by other literary 
scholars [46,47]. 
Despite all this, the researcher followed most editors and used the electronic editions that refer to 
those authors as the actual authors. The researcher believes that they are still suitable or detectable for 
generating authorial profiles, but not to the extent one wishes. 
Having addressed the issue of representativeness in our corpus design, the discussion shall now turn 
to the actual texts that made up the corpus in this study. The corpus consisted of forty two digital 
electronic copies of the texts: nine works belong to Sir Francis Bacon, six works to William Shakespeare 
(five history plays and one tragedy), seven works to John Fletcher (tragic-comedies), seven works to 
Christopher Marlowe (five tragic-histories and two tragedies), four works to Thomas Kyd (tragedies), 
and nine disputed works (six history plays and three tragedies). These works were saved in an ASCII 
(txt.doc) format and assembled into the corpus. These works are shown in Table 1.  
Table 1. Forty-two digital electronic works. 
No. Author & Work Title Code 
1 Translations of the philosophical works  BaconTr1 
2 Translations of the philosophical works BaconTr2 
3 Translations of the philosophical works BaconTr3 
4 Translations of the philosophical works BaconTr4 
5 Translations of the philosophical works BaconTr5 
6 Translations of the philosophical works BaconTr6 
7 F. Bacon from the tower of London pleads for mercy with King James BaconLet 
8 The history of the reign of King Henry the seventh Bacon Henry1 
9 The history of the reign of King Henry the seventh Bacon Henry2 
10 John Fletcher-Rule a wife  Fletwife 
11 John Fletcher—The Faithful Shepherdess  FletFaithful 
12 John Fletcher—The Humorous Lieutenant  FletLieutenant 
13 John Fletcher—The Tragedy of Bonduca FletBonduca 
14 John Fletcher—The Wild Goose Chase FletChase 
15 John Fletcher—The Woman’s Prize FletPrize 
16 John Fletcher—Wit Without Money FletMoney 
17 Christopher Marlowe—Dido, Queen of Carthage MarDido 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 767 
 
 
Table 1. Cont. 
No. Author & Work Title Code 
18 Christopher Marlowe—Edward II MarEdward 
19 Christopher Marlowe—The tragedy of Dr. Faustus MarFaust 
20 Christopher Marlowe—The Jew of Malta MarMalta 
21 Christopher Marlowe—Massacre at Paris MarMassacre 
22 Christopher Marlowe—Tamburlaine, Part 1 MarTamb1 
23 Christopher Marlowe—Tamburlaine, Part 2 MarTamb2 
24 William Shakespeare—Cymbeline, King of Britain ShaCymbeline 
25 William Shakespeare—History of Henry IV, Part I ShaHenry1 
26 William Shakespeare—History of Henry IV, Part II ShaHenryII 
27 William Shakespeare—History of Henry V ShaHenryIII 
28 William Shakespeare—History of King John ShaKing 
29 William Shakespeare—History of Richard II ShaRichard 
30 Thomas Kyd—Arden of Feversham ThoArden 
31 Thomas Kyd—Ieronimo ThoIeronimo 
32 Thomas Kyd—The tragedy of Soliman and Perseda  ThoPerseda 
33 Thomas Kyd—The Spanish Tragedie ThoSpanish 
34 Disputed—King Edward DisEdward 
35 Disputed—The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark DisHamlet 
36 Disputed—History of Henry VI, Part I DisHenryI 
37 Disputed—History of Henry VI, Part II DisHenry2 
38 Disputed—History of Henry VI, Part III DisHenryIII 
39 Disputed—History of Henry VIII DisHenry8 
40 Disputed—The Tragedy of King Lear DisLear 
41 Disputed—Richard III DisRichard 
42 Disputed—Titus Andronicus DisTitus 
Another practical difficulty that arises at this stage consisted in finding respective electronic works 
for the suspect authorship candidates, particularly Bacon, working to some degree within the same genre 
and around the same time period to that of Shakespeare’s (disputed) works. This is the reason why other 
principal suspect authors (e.g., Edward de Vere) were not involved in this study (i.e., de Vere works are 
not plays). The most the researcher could do however is to use any Bacon’s work in history available in 
an electronic form to see, if it happens to work, which profile text will turn out to reveal unpredicted 
links or similarities to any of the disputed profile text(s). More specifically, the researcher used Bacon’s 
five books of his translations of the philosophical works, the history of the Reign of King Henry the 
seventh, and Bacon’s letter from the tower of London from pleads for mercy with King James. Because 
there were significant variations in the lengths of Bacon’s works, the researcher divided them into nine 
sub-texts in an attempt to make them equal in length to the other texts in the corpus. The researcher also 
used Fletcher’s Wit Without Money though it is a generally accepted collaboration with Francis 
Beaumont to add additional work into his corpus texts. For the purpose of the attribution analysis, the 
researcher classified the nine works (HenryVI-1, HenryVI-2, HenryVI-3, Henry III, Richard III, Edward 
III, Hamlet, King Lear, and Titus Andronicus), which are traditionally attributed to Shakespeare, as 
disputed texts or as if we did not know anything about their (contested) authorship. The researcher also 
excluded Shakespeare’s Pericles, prince of Tyre because it is a generally accepted collaboration with 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 768 
 
 
George Wilkins. Finally, the dates for these publicly available online digital electronic works cannot be 
exact because of the nature of the historical record for this time period, but they were collected from 
University of Virginia Library and The Project Gutenberg E-Book library. 
Nevertheless, before relying on these electronic texts, the researcher proof-read them by comparing 
them to their publically-available printed editions [48–52] to make sure that the information or content 
provided by these texts free from any corrupted samples (authorial, editorial, and experimental) or any 
transmission errors occurred by copying or scanning them. However, the comparison showed that the 
actual lexical content of the online digital electronic editions didn’t change much from edition to edition, 
and lexical content was all the researcher was interested in. These texts were also stripped of textual 
inclusions not original to each candidate author such as editorial comments and footnotes, line numbers, 
and so on. This was done computationally and the results were subsequently proofread to correct any 
remaining errors or omissions. 
3.2. Stylistic Criteria: Function Words, Word N-Grams, and Character N-Grams 
Two pressing questions confronted the researcher in this study: 
(1) Which stylistic criteria should be selected to describe the texts? 
(2) Which analytical method(s) should be used to analyze these texts on the basis of the selected 
stylistic criteria? The second question will be dealt with in Section 3.3.3. 
Due to the complexity of the textual and bibliographical issues contained in the corpus texts as 
acknowledged above, the researcher came to the conclusion that function words, word n-grams, and 
character n-grams are by far the most suitable for generating authorial profiles in the current application, 
assuming that these don’t change much from edition to edition, and this was all the researcher interested 
in. Also, these criteria are considered more reliable authorial stylistic descriptors in comparison to other 
lexical or word-level descriptors [22,29,53]. 
For this 3-stage- analysis, 135 function words, 100 word bi-grams, and 24930 letter tri-grams were 
examined and their frequency of occurrences in the disputed works compared with the corresponding 
values obtained from the works by each candidate author in the corpus. 
3.3. Data Representation and Vector Space Model 
Vector Space Model (VSM) was used to represent our data mathematically. The reason for using  
this model is that it is simple to understand and adequate to compute proximity between vectors in  
vector space. The forty two texts were converted into 42 vectors in a high dimensional space, and the 
135 function words, 100 word bi-grams, and 24930 letter tri-grams counted in the corpus were stored in 
these vectors. A 42 × 135 DFW, 42 × 100 Dbigram, and 42 × 24930 Dtrigram data matrices were 
computationally generated. Each of the 42 rows of DFW represents a function word frequency profile for 
a corresponding text and each of the 135 columns represents a different function word, and the value at 
any DFW ij (for i = 1..42, j = 1..135) is the number of times that function word j occurs in text. Each of 
the 42 rows of Dbigram represents a word bi-gram frequency profile for a corresponding text and each of 
the 100 columns represents a different word bi-gram, and the value at any Dbigram column is the number 
of times that word bi-gram j occurs in text i. Similarly, each of the 42 rows of Dtrigram represents  
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 769 
 
 
a character triple-gram frequency profile for a corresponding text and each of the 24930 columns 
represents a different character tri-gram, and the value at any Dtrigram column is the number of times that 
character tri-gram j occurs in text i. 
DFW (function data matrix), Dbigram, (word bigrams data matrix) and Dtrigram (character trigrams data 
matrix) were transformed in two ways: dimensionality reduction and length normalization prior to cluster 
analyzing them. 
3.3.1. Dimensionality Reduction 
High dimensionality of data is a potential problem for any cluster analysis and this had a particular 
relevance in the current application. Given the aim was to generate DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram in which 
the row vectors are the texts and the column variables are function words, word bi-grams, and character 
triple grams, there were 135 variables in DFW, 100 variables in Dbigram, and 24930 in Dtrigram. 
The frequencies of these variables were calculated, sorted into descending order of magnitude, and 
plotted. The result is shown in Figure 1a,b, where the vertical axis represents frequency and the 
horizontal one the column frequencies: 
(a) (b) 
Figure 1. (a) The distribution of function word frequency matrix DFW; (b) distribution of 
word bi-grams frequency matrix Dbigram. 
Figure 1a,b shows that there are a few relatively high-frequency function words and word bi-grams, 
a moderate number of medium-frequency ones, and a large number of low-frequency ones. There is 
considerable scope for dimensionality reduction here; a conservative reduction would be to keep the  
60 highest-frequency columns in DFW and the 30 highest-frequency columns in Dbigram, discarding the 
rest. The same was done for Dtrigram, and it does not need to be repeated. More specifically, given the 
aim was to cluster analyze the 42 texts on the basis of the differences among them, the criterion for doing 
so was to measure the variance of the 135 variables in DFW, the 100 variables in Dbigram, and the  
24930 variables in Dtrigram to identify the most significant ones. The variance of a set of variable values 
is the average deviation of those values from their mean and is expressed by the function: 
v = (∑ ( − μ)… )/n (1)
30 50 80 100 120 130
0
500
1000
1500
2000
010230450670
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
10             20            30              40              50            60             70             80            90         100
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 770 
 
 
The application of variance/standard deviation to dimensionality reduction was straightforward:  
from the calculated, sorted, and plotted variance of the 135 columns in DFW, the 100 in Dbigram, and the 
24930 columns in Dtrigram, we removed all variables with low variance on the grounds that they 
contributed little to differentiation of the texts, and decided on a threshold selection. 
The effect of a variable-selection process was a 42 × 60 for DFW, a 42 × 30 for Dbigram, and a 42 × 40 
for Dtrigram. The selected features from each data matrix are shown in Tables 2–4 respectively. 
Table 2. 60 function words selected from a 42 × 135 DFW. 
Function words 
the of i you and my he in me a to which was your that thou her thy thee ye it or as  
which so this be not in on why thus yet only soon still both us who how such all  
with him be by for have will she our shall do what had o but not then now 
Table 3. 30 word bi-grams selected from a 42 × 100 Dbigram. 
Words bi-grams 
and now- and with- and so- of that- of thy- with thy- on thee- in he-to my-and that- 
and a- ye to- of the- from he- but to- a- in our- of it- yet i- with us-me and- not to- 
in all- me and-as it- to he-but that-it to-that by- and as 
Table 4. 40 character tri-grams selected from a 42 × 100 Dtrigram. 
Character tri-grams 
sti- uch- our- thr- men- tin- upo- ate- are- may- all- wel- ful- low-ity- uth-any-you-but-  
ady- day-now-nor-new-ton-can- tre-ndi- tur- ide- ond- nto- sen-giv-red-ery-ord-not-fou
The stylometric criteria selected were now ready to define a 42-dimensional frequency profile vector 
for each text in the corpus. Each profile vector was a point in 42-dimensional vector space, and cluster 
analytic methods were used to determine the distribution of profile vectors in the space. 
3.3.2. Text Length Normalization 
The forty two texts varied considerably in length, ranging from 59 Kb to 690 Kb. The disparity of 
length, if uncorrected in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram, severely skews any clustering results of data matrix. 
For example, Figure 2 shows a linear hierarchical cluster analysis of a 42 × 60 DFW. 
The number to the right of each of the text names is the size of words in the text; there is a clear and 
very strong tendency to cluster by length. The essence of the problem now is that we need a clustering 
structure that reveals the proximities among the vectors in terms of, in this example, the function word 
frequency profiles, not length. To adjust DFW, and avoid the skew in the clustering results, in each row 
vector of DFW, the count for a given variable was multiplied by the mean document length, then divided 
by the total number of frequency counts occurring in that row vector. This normalization was relative to 
mean text length across a collection using the mathematical function: =	 ( μℎ( )) (2)
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 771 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A linear hierarchical cluster analysis of a 42 × 60 DFW using Squared Euclidean 
distance and an increase in sum of squares prior to text length normalization. 
The effect of this is that the frequencies in the vectors that represent long texts were decreased while 
the frequencies of the vectors that represent short ones were increased. For texts that were near or at the 
mean, little or no change occurred at all in the corresponding vectors. A linear hierarchical cluster 
analysis is applied on a 42 × 60 DFW that is dimensionality-reduced and length-normalized. The result 
of this is shown in Figure 3, where clustering by text length is removed. 
 
Figure 3. A linear hierarchical cluster analysis of a 42 × 60 dimensionality-reduced and 
length-normalized DFW using Squared Euclidean distance and an increase in sum of squares. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 772 
 
 
3.3.3. Cluster Analysis Methods 
Hierarchical and non-hierarchical linear and non-linear clustering methods were used in the present 
analysis. There are two main reasons for this: 
(1) In the current application, the function that generated DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram may not be known, 
and the strong suspicion must be that the generating function was nonlinear, but this is not certain. 
Even if the generating function is nonlinear, however, there is no guarantee that every data set it 
generates will contain non-linearities. In general, data that contains significant non-linearity must 
be analyzed using a nonlinear clustering method; use of a linear method in such a case misrepresents 
the structure of the data to greater or lesser degrees, depending on the nature of the non-linearity. 
In a linear method, the distance between two points in a space is taken to be the length of the 
straight line joining the points, or some approximation to it, whereas in a non-linear method, the 
distance between the two points is the length of the shortest line joining them along the surface 
of the curved-surface and where this line can but need not be straight. Depending on the amount 
of curvature, the difference between the two measures can be significant, and can therefore 
significantly affect analysis based on it. Given the difficulty of determining the presence of  
non-linearity in high-dimensional data and given also the implications of non-linearity for the 
present analysis cannot be ignored, and because hierarchical methods are linear, the additional 
method or methods used must be non-linear to take account of non-linearity and accommodate 
the possibility that the DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram contain significant non-linearities [33]. 
(2) It is recognized that a single class of methods cannot safely be relied on [34,54], and that at least 
one additional method or class of methods must be used to corroborate the results from 
hierarchical analysis. Given that we selected a hierarchical method, the additional method or 
methods used must be non-hierarchical. Each clustering method provides a different mathematical 
view of what constitutes a cluster and how clusters can be identified, and interprets such agreement 
as was found among them as an indication of the intrinsic or “true” structure of the data. Specifically, 
we attempted to establish the validity of cluster results by applying a variety of different clustering 
methods to the same data and to compare the results: a clear convergence on one particular cluster 
structure was held to support the validity of that structure with respect to the data. 
Hierarchical Cluster Analysis 
Hierarchical cluster analysis constructs clusters in terms of measures of spatial distance among  
data vectors in the space as the basis for clustering. It provides more information than non-hierarchical 
ones in that it not only identifies the main clusters, but also identifies their constituency relations relative 
to one another as well as their internal structures. The hierarchical analysis was in a three-stage 
procedure. The first step was the construction of a one-dimensional symmetric matrix of proximity. The 
generic term “proximity” is used to cover both similarity and dissimilarity between and within pairs of 
vectors. Proximity between vectors can be measured in terms of their correlation, of angle between them, 
or distance in Euclidean space [33,34]. These are closely related, and if all the variables are measured 
on the same scale or have been standardized, there is no particular reason to prefer one over another. The 
Correlation coefficient (Product-moment correlation) is conveniently applied to cluster analysis by any 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 773 
 
 
one of a variety of methods of hierarchical cluster analysis to measure the proximity between all pairs 
of vector profiles in Euclidean space, with the profiles formed across the variables [55,56], and so is 
used here. The proximity between two vector profiles was calculated as the correlation between the two 
profiles taken on by the two vectors. Two vectors are perfectly similar when they have the same profiles 
regardless of overall magnitude. This is expressed by the function: 
, = 	 ( , 	− 	 C )( , 	− C )	 (Ck,i - C i)2 (Ck,j	-		 C j)2NK	-1NK	-1  (3)
The second was the examination of the proximity matrix. This was an “assessment of clustering 
tendency” test [57,58] to determine whether or not a non-random structure actually exists in DFW, Dbigram, 
and Dtrigram. 
The third step was the generation of clusters based on the proximity matrix. Since there is no “best” 
single method or a group of hierarchical methods (i.e., each one of the methods that been used was found 
to be optimal for some application) [34,54], we selected the clustering method that gave the most 
intuitively clearest results about the constituency structure of the forty two text matrix row vectors.  
In the current case, this was Mean Proximity: the averages of the within-cluster correlations/distances 
were maximized for all cluster comparisons. 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
PCA is a non-hierarchical linear method based on preservation of data variance. Specifically, given 
DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram of 42 texts, where DFW described by 60 variables, Dbigram by 30, and Dtrigram by 
40 variables, principal component analysis re-described the 42 texts in terms of a number of variables, 
such that most of the variability in the original variables was retained. This allowed us to plot the 42 texts 
in two-dimensional space and to directly perceive the resulting clusters. The principal components 
analysis was in a four-stage procedure. The first step was the construction of a symmetric proximity 
matrix for distances among vectors. The second was the construction of an orthogonal basis for the 
covariance matrix in such a way that each axis was the least-squares best fit to one of the n directions of 
maximum of variation in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram. The third was the selection of dimensions in which 
we removed the axes that had relatively little variation and kept an m-dimensional basis for DFW, Dbigram, 
and Dtrigram where m < n. The fourth step was the projection into m-dimensional space, which yielded 
data set DFW’, Dbigram’, and Dtrigram’ that is dimensionality-reduced but still had the property of maximum 
variation in D, that is the total combined variance of all vectors. 
Self-Organizing Map (SOM) U-Matrix 
The unified distance matrix or U-matrix is a representation of SOM that calculates the nonlinear 
distances between data vectors and is presented with different colorings. It is based on preservation of 
data topology. SOM U-matrix generates graphical representations in two-dimensional space such that, 
given a suitable measure of proximity, vectors which are spatially or topologically relatively close to 
one another in high-dimensional space are spatially or topologically close to one another in their two 
dimensional representation, and vectors which are relatively far from one another in high-dimensional 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 774 
 
 
space are clearly separated, either by relative spatial distance or by some other graphical means, 
resulting—in the case of nonrandom data—in a configuration of well-defined clusters [59]. The analysis 
was a two-stage process. The first was the training of SOM by loading all the vectors comprising DFW, 
Dbigram, and Dtrigram into the input space. The second was the generation of the two-dimensional 
representation of the DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram on the map. For each vector, the values in the input space 
were propagated through all the connections to the units in the lattice. Because of the variation in 
connection strength, a given vector activated one unit more strongly than any of the others, thereby 
associating each vector with a specific unit in the lattice. When all the vectors had been projected in this 
way, the result was a pattern of activation across the lattice. The U-matrix representation of SOM output 
used the relative distance between connection vectors to find cluster boundaries. Specifically, given  
42 × 60 output map DFW, 42 × 30 output map Dbigram, and 42 × 40 output map Dtrigram, the Euclidean 
distances between the connection vector associated with each map unit and the connection vectors of the 
immediately adjacent units were calculated and summed, and the result for each was stored in a new 
matrix UDFW, UDbigram, and UDtrigram, having the same dimensions as DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram. U was 
plotted using a color coding scheme to represent the relative magnitudes of the values in UDFW, UDbigram, 
and U Dtrigram in which a dark coloring between the vectors corresponds to a large distance and, thus, 
represents a gap between the values in the input space. A light coloring is the boundaries between clusters 
or the vectors, indicating that the vectors are close to each other in the input space. Light areas represent 
clusters and dark areas cluster separators. Any significant cluster boundaries will be visible. 
Voronoi Map 
Given a set of vectors, a Voronoi map partitions a manifold surface, say a plane, into regions based 
on the distances between a set of vectors in a specified subset of the manifold surface. These regions are 
called cells, which surround each vector. The partition of a manifold surface into areas surrounding 
vectors is a tessellation. Each cell contains all vectors that are closer to its defining vector than to any 
other vector in the set. Subsequently, the boundaries between the cells are equidistant between the 
defining vectors of adjacent cells. That is, the neighborhood of a given vector in a Voronoi tessellation 
is defined as the set of vectors closer to its defining vector than to any other vector in the set. The set of 
neighborhoods defined by the Voronoi tessellation is known as the manifold’s topology [59]. The 
analysis was in a three-stage process. The first step was the construction of a 2-dimensional Voronoi 
plot for a set of vectors in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram. The second was the construction of Delaunay 
Triangulation (Voronoi map) on the same 2-dimensional plot. The third step was the computation of the 
Voronoi map to obtain a 2-dimensional topology of the Voronoi map for the set of vectors in DFW, 
Dbigram, and Dtrigram. 
4. The Attributional Analyses 
4.1. Analysis of the Frequencies of Usage of Shakespeare’s Function Words, Word Bi-Grams, and 
Character Triple-Grams 
The result of the assessment of clustering tendency test indicates the presence of eleven  
well-separated clusters in DFW, as shown in Figure 4 below: 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 775 
 
 
 
Figure 4. An assessment of clustering tendency test for Shakespeare DFW. 
And the result of the hierarchical analysis shows that the fifteen texts are grouped into eleven clusters 
according to the similarities of frequency vector profiles, as shown in Figure 5 below:  
 
Figure 5. The hierarchical cluster analysis of Shakespeare DFW using Product-Moment 
correlation and Mean Proximity. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 776 
 
 
Reading it from the top, DisEdward and ShaKing constitutes the first cluster. DisHenry1 and 
DisHenry2 constitute the second cluster. This cluster is combined the remaining four clusters comprising, 
respectively, ShaRichard, DisHenry3, DisRichard, and DisLear. DisHamlet constitutes the seventh 
cluster, and is combined the remaining clusters comprising, respectively, DisHenry8 and ShaCymbeline, 
ShaHenry1 and ShaHenry2, ShaHenry3, and DisTitus. 
Based on this clustering, it is clear that the disputed plays (DisHamlet, DisLear, and DisTitus) are 
well separated from the other Shakespeare’s works and that DisHenry1, DisHenry2, and DisHenry3 are 
not clustered with Shakespeare’s works in and only one (sub)cluster. Before applying the other methods 
on the Shakespeare DFW, in order to analyze it and validate this result as well. One step was necessary 
at this stage of the analysis. Because issues of genre and genre impact on attribution are crucial in the 
field of authorship attribution (e.g., genre-dominated clustering), we added two plays of a similar genre 
and the same time period into the corpus. The first was The False One; a history play by Francis Beaumont 
and Philip Massinger, though formerly placed in the Beaumont and Fletcher canon. The other was The 
White Devil; a tragedy by John Webster. These share or use the same conventions and themes in 
Shakespeare’s plays including gain and loss of power, divine right, betrayal, love, revenge, lust, etc. Then 
we re-cluster analyzed the whole to see where they fit among the disputed and Shakespearean dramas. 
A close examination of the result from this analysis shows that the clusterings displayed in Figure 5 
are indistinguishable from those in Figure 6, except that Beaumont and Massinger’s drama and 
Webster’s drama can both be distinguished as somewhat separate from the other three clusters—of 
course, because they are written by different authors. The same result is also obtained from the 
hierarchical analyses of Dbigram and Dtrigram and from the other methods, but we displayed here only the 
hierarchical analysis for the clarity of displaying the resulting clusters, and only for the hierarchical DFW 
because we did not want to confuse the readers with too many analyses. The indication therefore is that 
the clustering seems to be correlated with authorship style.  
Proceeding with the attributional analysis, the next step is the application of PCA, SOM (U-matrix), 
and Voronoi map to Shakespeare’s DFW:  
The light pink-vintage areas shown in the SOM map are the regions where the texts are topologically 
close, that is where they cluster, and the dark pink-vintage are where they topologically far apart. 
All the clustering methods in Figures 5 and 7–9 applied to the fifteen texts (6 plays by Shakespeare 
and 9 nine disputed plays) in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram give similar results. Shakespeare’s plays are not 
close to six of the disputed texts, particularly DisHenry3, DisHenry1, DisHenry2, DisRichard, DisLear, 
and DisTitus. The remaining three disputed texts (DisEdward, DisHenry8, and DisHamlet) are clustered 
with the Shakespeare plays (history and tragedy plays) within the same clusters. They were either close 
to each other in the same sub-cluster or close by in an immediately joining sub-cluster. The general 
indication therefore suggests that Shakespeare is not the author of all the works traditionally attributed 
to him. This experimental result is suggestively significant, but not enough to draw firm conclusions for 
the problem in question. Additional suspect authors is required. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 777 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The hierarchical cluster analysis of Shakespeare DFW using Product-Moment 
correlation and Mean Proximity. 
 
Figure 7. PCA of Shakespeare DFW. 
-400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 400 500 600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
ShaCymbeline
DisHenry3
DisHenry8
ShaRichard
DisHenry2
ShaKing
ShaHenry2
DisHenry1
ShaHenry1
ShaHenry3
DisEdward
DisHamlet
DisLear
DisRichard
DisTitus
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 778 
 
 
 
Figure 8. SOM U-matrix of Shakespeare DFW. 
 
Figure 9. Voronoi map of Shakespeare DFW.  
  
U-matrix
 
 
DisHamlet
ShaHenry1
ShaHenry3
DisEdward
ShaHenry2
DisTitus
ShaKing
DisHenry1
DisHenry8
ShaRichard
DisHenry2
ShaCymbeline DisLear
DisRichard
DisHenry3
6.01e-
5.72
11.4
6.01e-
5.72
11.4
6.01e-
5.72
11.4
6.01e-
5.72
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
DisHamlet
ShaCymbeline
ShaHenry2
DisEdward
ShaHenry3
DisHenry1
ShaHenry1
DisHenry3 DisHenry2
DisTitus
DisHenry8
DisRichard
ShaKing
ShaRichardDisLear
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 779 
 
 
4.2. Analysis of the Frequencies of Usage of Shakespeare and Other Authors’ Function Words 
The result of the assessment of clustering tendency test indicates the presence of five well separated 
clusters in DFW, as shown in Figure 10 below. 
 
Figure 10. An assessment of clustering tendency test for DFW. 
The clustering result that the various analytical methods assign to DFW text matrix rows is significant. 
Examination of all the diagrams in Figures 11–14 reveals a strong consistency in the way the forty two 
texts enlisted in Table 1 are grouped in terms of their relative proximity from one another. For example, 
all the texts attributed to Bacon, as expected, were clustered together in one or two main sub-clusters. 
Also, six of John Fletcher’s tragic-comedies (Wit without Money, The Woman’s Prize, The Humorous 
Lieutenant, The Wild Goose Chase, and Rule a Wife) were clustered together in one cluster. ThoSpanish, 
MarMassacre, MarEdward, and ThoIeronimo are clustered close to each other. More specifically, the 
good agreement found between the methods for DFW analyses shows a very close similarity between 
Shakespeare’s works and four of the disputed works: DisEdward and ShaKing; DisHenry8, DisLear, and 
ShaCymbeline; DisHenry1, DisHenry2, and ShaRichard. It also show a very close similarity, on the one 
hand, between Marlowe’s works and two of the disputed works, DisHenry3 and MarTamb1; MarTamb2, 
MarEdward, and MarMassacre; and between Fletcher’s FletFaithful and DisTitus on the other. The 
agreement further shows that DisHamlet and DisRichard are not placed nearer to any of Shakespeare’s 
works. Examination also reveals few inconsistencies in the way that the forty two texts are clustered by 
the hierarchical and non-hierarchical linear and non-linear analyses due to the type of data structure each 
method captures. For example, in PCA DisEdward and ShaKing are not grouped close together in the 
space and DisHenry8 and ShaCymbeline are placed close to each other but relatively not close to DisLear 
as with the other methods. Also, MarEdward and ThoSpanish are close to each other in the space but not 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 780 
 
 
close to ThoIeronimo and MarMassacre as with the other methods. In SOM, DisTitus and FletFaithful 
are not placed close together in the space. In Vornoi map, MarEdward, ThoSpanish, and ThoIeronimo 
are close to each other in the space but not close to MarMassacre. In the hierarchical analysis and 
Voronoi, DisHenry3 is closer to MarTamb1 and MarTamb2, in PCA to MarMassacre and MarEdward, 
and in SOM to MarTamb2 and MarEdward. In the hierarchical analysis DisRichard is sub-clustered on 
its own, but is close to MarTamb1 while in PCA DisRichard is placed close to MarDido, in SOM to 
MarEdward and MarMassacre, and in Voronoi DisRichard is placed on its own. 
 
Figure 11. The hierarchical cluster analysis of DFW using Product-Moment correlation and 
Mean Proximity. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 781 
 
 
 
Figure 12. PCA of DFW. 
 
Figure 13. SOM U-matrix of DFW. 
-1500 -1000 -500 0 500 1000 1500 2000
-800
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
DisRichard
DisHenry1
DisHenry3
DisHenry2 MarTamb2
MarTamb1
ShaHenry3
ThoPerseda ShaKing
MarDido
MaMassacre
FletBonduca
FletCase
ThoArden 
FletLieutenant
BaconLetters
BaconHenry1
BaconHenry2
BaconTr1, BaconTr2, BaconTr3,
BaconTr4, BaconTr5, BaconTr6
FletPrize
FletMoney
FletWife
DisEdward 
ShaRichard
MarEdward
ThoSpanish
DisTitus, DisLear, DisHenry8,
DisHamlet, MarFaust, ShaHenry1,
FletFaithful
ThoJeronimo
MarMalta
ShaHenry2, ShaCymbeline
 
 
BaconTr4
FletMoney
FletPrize
DisHamlet
FletWife
FletChase
BaconTr5
BaconTr3
ThoArden
FletLieutenant
MarMalta
DisHenry8
BaconTr6
MarFaust
BaconTr1
ThoPerseda
ShaCymbeline
FletBonduca
BaconTr2
ShaHenry2
DisLear
ThoJeronimo
FletFaithful
ShaKing
ShaHenry1
ShaHenry3
ThoSpanish
MarTamb2
DisEdward
BaconLet
DisTitus
MarDido
BaconHenry1
DisHenry3
MarEdward
ShaRichard
BaconHenry2
MarTamb1
DisRichard
text30MarMassacre
DisHenry1
DisHenry2
U-matrix
1.1e-15
7.62   
15.2   
1.1e-15
7.62   
15.2   
1.1e-15
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 782 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Voronoi map of DFW. 
The overall indication for DFW analyses is that Shakespeare’s plays are not clustered with the nine disputed 
ones, in particular DisHenry3 and DisTitus, but with another author or a collaborator (in particular 
Marlowe and Fletcher). 
4.3. Analysis of the Frequencies of Usage of Shakespeare and Other Authors’ Word Bi-Grams 
The result of the assessment of clustering tendency test indicates the presence of eight well separated 
clusters in Dbigram, as shown in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 15. An assessment of clustering tendency test for Dbigram. 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
P
DisRichard
MarMassacre
MarTamb2
MarTamb1
BaconTr1, BaconTr2, BaconTr3, BaconTr4, BaconTr5, BaconTr6,
BaconHenry1, BaconHenry2
FletBonduca, FletChase, FletLieutenant, FletMoney,
FletPrize, FletWife
DisTitus, MarDido, MarMalta, ThoJeronimo,
ThoPerseda
FletFaithful
DisHenry1
ShaKing
ShaRichard, DisLear, DisHenry3,DisHenry2,
ShaHenry1, ShaHenry2
ShaHenry3
BaconLet
ThoArden, ShaCybeline, ThoSpanish,MarFaust, MarEdward,
DisHamlet, DisEdward, DisHenry8
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 783 
 
 
For Dbigram analysis, the hierarchical and non-hierarchical linear and nonlinear analyses shown in 
Figures 16–19 are in partial agreement and do not give identical results regarding the clustering of the 
forty two texts in the foregoing diagrams.  
 
Figure 16. The hierarchical cluster analysis of Dbigram using Product-Moment correlation and 
Mean Proximity. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 784 
 
 
 
Figure 17. PCA of Dbigram. 
 
Figure 18. SOM U-matrix of Dbigram. 
-2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
FletLieutenant
FletWife
ThoArden
MarDido
ShaHenry1
ShaHenry3
MarFaust
MarEdward
ThoPerseda
MarMassacre
FletFaithful BaconTr4
BaconLet
BaconTr2BaconHenry2
BaconHenry1
DisHemlet
DisEdward
BaconTr1
ShaCymbeline
BaconTr3 BaconTr5 BaconTr6
MarTamb1 MarTamb2
ThoSpanish
ThoIeronimo
DisLear
MarMalta
FletBonduca
FletChase
FletPrize ShaKing
FletMoney
DisRichard
ShaRichard DisHenry8 DisHenry1
DisHenry3 DisHenry2 DisTitus
ShaHenry2
 
FletLieutenant
FletMoney
FletFaithful
BaconTr2
BaconLet
BaconTr3
BaconHenry1
FletWife
FletPrize
BaconTr4
ShaHenry1
BaconHenry2
ThoArden
MarDido
FletChase
ShaRichard
ShaHenry3
BaconTr6
BaconTr5
MarMassacre
ShaHenry2
ShaKing
ThoPerseda
BaconTr1
MarEdward
DisEdward
DisLear
DisHenry8
DisHenry1
DisTitus
MarMalta
MarTamb2
DisHamlet
ShaCymbeline
DisHenry3
DisHenry2
MarTamb2
MarFaust
FletBonduca
DisRichard
ThoSpanish
ThoIeronimo
U-matrix 0
2.65
5.31
0
2.65
5.31
0
2.65
5.31
0
2.65
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 785 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Voronoi map of Dbigram. 
For example, the Bacon texts are clustered either together in one cluster or in two adjoining regions 
in the space. In the hierarchical analysis and PCA, MarEdward, MarMassacre, ThoSpanish, ThoArden, 
and ThoIeronimo, and FletWife, MarMalta, FletMoney, and ShaHenry2 are placed close together in the 
space. More specifically, the agreement found between the hierarchical analysis, SOM, and Voronoi 
shows that DisEdward is closer to MarMalta and MarEdward, and sometimes to MarMalta, MarEdward, 
and MarMassacre than to Shakespeare’s works. The agreement between the hierarchical analysis and 
PCA shows that DisHenry1, DisHenry2, DisTitus, and DisRichard are close to ShaRichard, and 
DisHamlet is close to FletChase and FletPrize. The agreement between the hierarchical analysis and 
Voronoi map shows that DisHenry3 and DisHenry8 are not close to any of Shakespeare works. The 
agreement between the hierarchical analysis, PCA, and Voronoi shows that DisLear and FletLieutenant 
are close to each other in the space. The hierarchical and non-hierarchical linear and non-linear analyses 
also disagree in clustering the forty two texts in Dbigram. For example, in SOM MarMassacre, MarEdward, 
and ThoArden are clustered together, but not with ThoIeronimo and ThoSpanish, and in Voronoi only 
MarEdward and ThoArden are placed close to each other in the space. Also, in SOM and Voronoi, 
FletWife and MarMalta and FletMoney and ShaHenry2 are not placed close together in the space. In 
PCA, DisEdward is closer to FletWife and MarMalta than to ShaCymbeline, in SOM to MarMalta, 
MarEdward, and MarMassacre, and in the Voronoi map, DisEdward is closer to MarMalta and 
MarEdward. In SOM, DisHenry2 and DisTitus are close to each other but not to DisHenry1 and 
DisRichard as with the other methods, and DisLear and FletLieutenant and DisHamlet, FletChase, and 
FletPrize are not in the same adjacent neighborhood of texts. Finally, in the PCA DisHenry3 and 
-3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
BaconTr1
BaconTr2
BaconTr3
BaconTr5
BaconTr6
BaconHenry1
BaconHenry2
BaconLet
DisEdward DisHamlet
DisHenry1
DisHenry2
DisHenry3
DisHenry8
DisLear
DisRichard
FletChase
FletFaithful
FletLieutenant
FletMoney
FletPrize
MarEdward 
MarFaust
MarMalta
MarMassacre
MarTamb1
MarTamb2
ShaCymbeline
ShaHenry1
ShaHenry2
ShaHenry3
ShaKing
ThoArden
ThoIeronimo
ThoPerseda
ThoSpanish
MarDido
ShaRichard
BaconTr4
FletWife
DisTitus
FletBonduca
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 786 
 
 
DisHenry8 are close to ShaRichard and ShaHenry2, and in SOM, DisHenry3 is close to MarMalta and 
DisHenry8 is close to ShaKing. 
For Dbigram analyses, the different methods were unable to show a good degree of correspondence in 
clustering the disputed works and the works by Shakespeare and the other authors’ works, apart from 
the clustering of DisLear with Fletcher’s works. Given the lack of congruence, the only possible result 
to suggest is, therefore, that DisLear is not excluded from the possibility of having another author’s or  
a collaborator’s style. 
4.4. Analysis of the Frequencies of Usage of Shakespeare and Other Authors’ Character Triple-Grams 
The result of the assessment of clustering tendency test indicates the presence of four well separated 
clusters in Dtrigram, as shown in Figure 20 below.  
 
Figure 20. An assessment of clustering tendency test for Dtrigram. 
The different analyses presented in Figures 21–24 below are nearly identical and the clustering of the 
disputed texts with the works by Shakespeare and the other authors are nearly always identical.  
For example; all four methods agree on the clustering of the majority of Bacon’s texts into two separate 
sub-clusters or one single region of adjacent texts. All four methods also agree on the clustering of 
DisEdward and FletPrize in one cluster or placing them close to each other in the space; while clustering 
DisHamlet in a separate cluster. In the hierarchical analysis; PCA; and SOM; the clustering of FletChase 
appears in a single cluster; and so does the clustering of FletBonduca; but both are in an adjacent 
neighborhood. In the hierarchical analysis; PCA; and Voronoi DisHenry8 and DisTitus are not close 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 787 
 
 
enough to Shakespeare’s works. In the hierarchical analysis; SOM; and the Voronoi DisHenry3, 
DisRichard, and DisLear are not close enough to Shakespeare works and DisHenry1 and DisHenry2 are 
grouped in one sub-cluster close to DisHenry3 and DisLear. Minor differences are also noticed in the 
different analyses presented in Figures 21–24; for example: in SOM DisHenry8 is close to DisHenry1, 
DisHenry2, ShaCymbeline, and DisHenry3; and DisTitus appears in an adjacent neighborhood with 
ThoSpanish, MarFaust, and FletFaithful. In PCA DisHenry3 is close to Marlowe’s works (particularly 
MarMassacre, MarTamb1, and MarTamb2); DisRichard is close to MarEdward; and DisLear is close to 
MarFaust. In Voronoi DisRichard is close to MarFaust, ShaHenry1, and ShaHenry2. In the hierarchical 
analysis and SOM, the clustering of FletWife, MarEdward, MarFaust, ThoIeronimo, and MarMalta 
appears in two sub-clusters. In the hierarchical analysis and Voronoi the clustering of MarMassacre and 
ThoSpanish appears in one sub-cluster or close to each other in the space. 
In general, the clustering analyses for Dtrigram gives similar results to those just presented in the 
analysis of DFW above: some of the disputed texts are not close enough to Shakespeare’s works, but are 
close to the works by the other authors, in particular Marlowe and Fletcher. 
 
Figure 21. The hierarchical cluster analysis of Dtrigram using Product-Moment correlation 
and Mean Proximity. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 788 
 
 
 
Figure 22. PCA of Dtrigram. 
 
Figure 23. SOM U-matrix of Dtrigram. 
-1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
FletMoney
ShaHenry3
BaconTr4
DisHenry2
DisRichard
ShaRichard
MarMassacre
MarTamb2
ShaKing
DisHenry3MarTamb1
MarEdward
BaconTr3
MarFaust
MarMalta
DisLear
ShaCymbeline DisHenry8
BaconLet
MarDidoFletBonduca
BaconTr1
BaconHenry1
ThoIeronimo
FletLieutenant
ThoPerseda
DisHamlet
BaconTr5
BaconHenry2
DisTitus
BaconTr6
FletFaithful
BaconTr2
ThoSpanish ThoArden
DisEdward
FletPrize
FletWife
FletChase 
ShaHenry2 ShaHenry1 
DisHenry1
 
 
ShaHenry3
BaconTr2
BaconTr3
BaconHenry2
ThoSpanish
DisTitus
MarMassacre
ShaRichard
BaconTr1
BaconHenry1
BaconTr6
MarFaust
MarEdward
FletFaithful
MarTamb2
BaconTr5
ShaHenry3
FletChase
ThoIeronimo
DisEdward
ShaHenry2
MarTamb1
BaconLet
FletPrize
ShaKing
ThoArden
FletMoney
MarDido
DisHenry1
BaconTr4
FletWife
FletBonduca
DisHenry8
DisHenry2
DisHenry3
DisHamlet
FletLieutenant
ShaCymbeline
MarMalta
ThoPerseda
DisLear
DisRichard
U-matrix
0   
2.82
5.64
0   
2.82
5.64
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 789 
 
 
 
Figure 24. Voronoi map of Dtrigram. 
4.5. Interpretation 
The results generated from the various analyses show that DisEdward, DisHenry1, and DisHenry8 
are close to Shakespeare’s works while DisHenry3, DisHenry2, and DisRichard are not. These are close 
to Marlowe’s and Fletcher’s works; there’s some variation in degree of closeness to these two, but the 
overall picture is clear. DisLear, DisTitus, and DisHamlet stand even further apart from all the rest of 
the Shakespeare works. These are also close to Marlowe and Fletcher. More dramatic works won’t help: 
Marlowe and Fletcher will always be closer than Shakespeare to DisHenry3 and DisHenry2, and 
DisRichard, DisHamlet, DisLear, and DisTitus will always be relatively further apart from Shakespeare’s 
works no matter how many other plays are added to the corpus. This can be explained in terms of cluster 
analysis which places texts into clusters not defined, a priori, such that texts in a given cluster tend to 
be similar to each other and texts in different clusters tend to be dissimilar on the basis of the relative 
distance between them. The texts in each cluster (in the boundary region of the cluster or nearby in an 
immediately adjacent cluster) have something in common that makes them similar. This seems to be due 
to the individual preferences in the use of function words, sequence of two words, and sequence of triple 
characters. When examining the works of several authors of the same period, there will be stylistic 
features common to all authors, as well as distinctive features (such as preferred individual words, 
syntactic constructions, number of commas, question marks, contractions, word or sentence lengths, etc.) 
used particularly by one author but not the others. A given stylistic feature can differentiate between the 
writing styles of authors when it is used more frequently by one author in comparison to other or when 
it is most distinctive in the writings of a given author [30,32]. The present study assumes that even so 
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
BaconHenry1
BaconHenry2
BaconLet
BaconTr3
MarTamb2
FletFaithful
FletMoney
FletLieutenant
FletChase
FletBonduca
FletPrize
ShaHenry2
DisRichard
ShaHenry1 MarEdward
DisHamlet
DisHenry1
ShaKing
DisEdward
MarMalta
MarFaust
BaconTr6
DisLear
BaconTr2
BaconTr4
BaconTr1
ThoIeronimo
ThoSpanish
ThoPerseda
ThoArden
MarMassacre
DisHenry8
FletWife
ShaHenry3
DisHenry3
ShaRichard
DisHenry2
ShaCymbeline
DisTitus
MarTamb1
MarDido
BaconTr5
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 790 
 
 
many aspects of the individual style of an author are conscious and deliberate when writing in different 
literary genres, there always exists the possibility that some of them are subconscious and are associated 
with the individual style of that author. 
Given that the texts were clustered on the basis of the function word frequency vectors, bi-gram 
frequency vectors, and character tri-gram frequency vectors, this implies that each cluster or cluster 
neighborhood has a characteristic frequency profile which distinguishes it from the others. By comparing 
the frequency profiles of the resulting clusters for DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram, it must be possible to 
determine the function words, word bi-grams, and character tri-grams in which they differ most, and, on 
the basis of the frequencies of usage of these features, to infer stylistic characteristics of the respective 
clusters or clusters membership. The frequencies of usage of function words, word bi-grams, and 
character tri-grams for all the authors tested were taken from the most distinctive columns of the relevant 
data matrix. These were compared to the frequencies of usage in the disputed texts. The method for 
doing so was centroid-based analysis: for a given data matrix, calculate each one of the columns by 
taking the centroid of variable values for the row vectors in each data matrix, and bar plot the results. 
The centroids for all authors tested in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram were first calculated and the results are 
shown in Figures 25–27 respectively. 
 
Figure 25. Function words centroid-based bar plot for all the authors tested. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 791 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Words bi-gram centroid-based bar plot for all the authors tested. 
 
Figure 27. Characters tri-gram centroid-based bar plot for all the authors tested. 
The centroids for the cluster texts of interest in DFW, Dbigram, and Dtrigram were calculated and the 
results are shown in Figures 28–30 respectively. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 792 
 
 
 
Figure 28. Function words centroid-based bar plot for Shakespeare, Marlowe, Fletcher, and 
the disputed texts. 
 
Figure 29. Words bi-gram centroid-based bar plot for Shakespeare, Marlowe, Fletcher, and 
the disputed texts. 
ye as that and with now yet to by of
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Marlowe
Disputed
Shakespeare
Fletcher
Function words (Variables)
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of
 u
sa
ge
and now and with from he for a not to me and it to but that that by of it
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Marlowe
Disputed
Shakespeare
Fletcher
Word bi-grams (Variables)
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of
 u
sa
ge
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 793 
 
 
 
Figure 30. Characters tri-gram centroid-based bar plot for Shakespeare, Marlowe, Fletcher, 
and the disputed texts. 
Based on the amount of variation in each variable-centroid, the indication is: 
(1) Function words “and” and “to” are most important in determining the dis/similarity relations in 
the foregoing cluster analyses of DFW. 
(2) Word bi-grams “but that” and “that by” are most important in determining the dis/similarity 
relations in the foregoing cluster analyses of Dbi-gram. 
(3) Character tri-grams “tur” and “nev” are most important in determining the dis/similarity relations 
in the foregoing cluster analyses of Dti-gram. 
From Figures 25–27, anyone can observe and make a comparison between the usages of these features 
in the disputed texts and works by Shakespeare and the other authors. The disputed text profiles fit the 
profiles of Marlowe and Fletcher, but not those of Shakespeare, Bacon, and Kyd. The centroid analysis 
reveals a very different pattern in function words, words bi-gram, and characters tri-gram usage from 
that of the profiles by the other authors. For example, the overall usage of “as” is lower in Bacon and 
Kyd and greater in Shakespeare, the overall usage of “from he” is greater in Shakespeare and Bacon and 
lower in Kyd, the overall usage of “giv” is greater in Bacon and Kyd and lower in Shakespeare, and by 
looking at the usage of “as”, “from he”, and “giv” in the other authors, it can be seen that this is due to 
the assumption that the frequent usages rate of some stylistic features tends to be stable within  
an author’s own work and between works by the same author but tends to vary greatly within works 
written by different authors and within different genres. For example, for DFW centroid analysis, 
Marlowe shows a higher usage of function words “and” and “to” than in Shakespeare, Fletcher, or the 
thr nto sur tha tur ity iou nev ery giv
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Marlowe
Disputed
Shakespeare
Fletcher
Character tri-grams (Variables)
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of
 u
sa
ge
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 794 
 
 
disputed text profiles. Shakespeare shows a higher usage of function word “of” than in Marlowe, 
Fletcher, or in the disputed texts. 
From Figures 28–30, it can be seen very clearly that the usage of function words, word bi-grams, and 
character tri-grams in the disputed text profiles differ from Shakespeare’s profiles and agree with 
Marlowe’s and Fletcher’s profiles. For example, the usage of “with” is markedly identical in Marlowe’s 
and the disputed text profiles. The usage of “of” is nearly similar or close in Fletcher’s and the disputed 
text profiles. For Dbi-gram centroid analysis, the usage of “and with” is markedly identical in Marlowe’s 
and the disputed text profiles and is markedly high in Shakespeare and low in Fletcher’s profiles. The 
usage of “of it” is relatively identical in Marlowe’s and the disputed texts. The usage of “for a” in the 
disputed text profiles is relatively closer to Shakespeare’s profiles than to the profiles by the other 
authors. Shakespeare shows a higher usage of “me and”, Fletcher shows a higher usage of “but that’, 
and the disputed text profiles show a higher usage of “not to”. For Dtri-gram centroid analysis, the usage 
of “sur” and “iou” is very close in the disputed text profiles and Marlowe’s profiles and “tha” in the 
disputed text profiles is relatively closer to Marlowe’s profiles than to the other authors. The usage of 
“thr” and “nto” is marked with relatively consistent or frequent usages among all the authors and 
therefore do not distinguish between them. Marlowe shows a lower usage of the triple character “tur” 
and Fletcher shows a higher usage of “nev”. The usage of “ery” in the disputed text profiles is relatively 
closer to Shakespeare’s works than to the other authors.  
These patterns of similarities and differences with respect to the most important function words, word 
bi-grams, and character tri-grams among the profiles of Shakespeare, Marlowe, Fletcher, Bacon, the 
disputed texts, and Kyd are empirically discriminative stylistic criteria. They clearly identified which 
function word, sequence of two words, and sequence of triple characters were common for Shakespeare 
and which were rare for all the others.  
5. Conclusions and Further Research 
The research question formulated at the outset of this paper was to see whether Shakespeare wrote 
some of the disputed works traditionally attributed to him. The question was approached by using 
different cluster analysis methods based on the frequencies of usage of function words, word bi-grams, 
and character tri-grams. According to the empirical evidence generated from a validated and fully 
objective and replicable mathematically-based methodology, the answer to this question was “No”. This 
means that the hypothesis that Shakespeare is the author of the disputed plays traditionally attributed to 
him is falsified in favor of alternative author(s), and this is by no means what nearly all Shakespearean 
scholars would expect or share. 
The researcher makes no claims in identifying who wrote the disputed plays or collaborated  
with Shakespeare to write them. Unfortunately, these questions cannot be easily answered for at least 
five main reasons: 
(1) The current attributional attempt is by nature exploratory. Cluster analysis is an exploratory tool 
used to detect and represent graphically non-random structures in the distribution of vectors in 
an n-dimensional space. The obtained clustering can serve as a basis for hypothesis generation 
without any attempt to determine whether or not such hypotheses are valid. The hypothesis that 
can be drawn from this study is thus rather suggestive. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 795 
 
 
(2) In researching Elizabethan-period literature, the researcher found that Shakespeare is not the only 
Elizabethan author whose authorship of specific works is controversial. Most Elizabethan plays 
were published without the playwrights’ names. And this may bring doubt upon the usefulness 
of the stylistic criteria used here. The implication is that the ongoing dispute over the individual 
authorship of most Elizabethan plays provides what Craig and Kinney [45] consider “particular 
difficulties with these plays arise…” and “it may well be more difficult to detect the distinctiveness 
of individual styles in history plays of this period than elsewhere because the genre itself was just 
getting established the early 1590s, writers were learning rapidly from each other, and strong 
influences like Kyd’s, Marlowe’s, and Shakespeare, were felt everywhere”. 
(3) Marlowe and Fletcher may have collaborated or helped Shakespeare to write all or some of the 
disputed plays, but one knows to draw the boundaries between Shakespeare’s style and the styles 
of his contemporaries or near contemporaries that would greatly influence his dramatic writings 
during different stages of his career. 
(4) Apart from Shakespeare, the study included only four of the authors who have been proposed as 
alternative authors of the entire Shakespeare canon (Bacon, Marlowe, Fletcher, and Kyd). Yet, 
the alternative candidate, Edward de Vere, who currently has the most support by Oxfordian 
scholars, is not among those tested. 
(5) The result from this attribution attempt is a plausible result, but it is by far not the only 
interpretation. It is important not to over interpret this result since it is only based on three textual 
features, i.e., function words, word-bigrams, and character tri-grams; other stylistic features 
might give a different result. 
On the whole, the final conclusion is that the disputed plays traditionally attributed to Shakespeare 
are not mathematically similar to any other of his works and, thus, that Shakespeare did not write them: 
cluster analysis shows that. Function words “and” and “to”, word bi-grams “but that” and “that by”, and 
character tri-grams “tur” and “nev” most important authorship style discriminators that distinguish 
between Shakespeare and the others and determine the dis/similarity relations among the texts examined 
in the foregoing cluster analyses. 
The researcher proposes that the result presented here provides additional stylometric suggestive clues 
that the disputed plays are written by someone other than William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon. 
The agreement between the four different clustering methods applied to the corpus of forty two texts 
enhances the confidence that the results are valid and are not artefacts of the clustering methods. The 
clustering results of this mathematically-based methodology are replicable and objective. The researcher 
is generally cooperative in providing needed information for later researchers and stylometricists 
planning replication using the same methodology to re-examine the current results independently and 
see if they originally achieved due to some error or perhaps just chance. 
Many details remain to be understood and more research into “Shakespeare authorship question” is 
necessary in order to arrive at firm conclusions. The researcher strongly believes that if the debate on 
this question is to be moved forward, a better understanding of the following two questions needs to 
developed. The first is that although mainstream Shakespeare studies accept that collaboration was the 
norm and not the exception in the early modern English theatre, further research needs to be conducted 
to examine the precise shares of Marlowe and Fletcher in Shakespeare’s plays using their preferred 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 796 
 
 
syntactic constructions, when syntactically annotated electronic corpora or more advanced NLP (Natural 
Language Processing Tools) become available while also applying also the current methodology. This 
can be served as evidence to support or refute the claim that Marlowe and/or Fletcher helped or 
collaborated with Shakespeare on his own plays (i.e., plays that are not from Shakespeare’s acknowledged 
canon and accepted by scholars as collaborations). The second is related to what Oxfordian scholars 
consider the more likely hypothesis of Edward de Vere’s authorship of the plays attributed to 
Shakespeare. The possibility of the Oxfordian theory of the authorship of Shakespeare’s works must not 
be ruled out. There are nearly 80 letters and some 16 poems available in the public domain that are 
widely agreed to be written by him. These can be examined in conjunction with various poems and 
sonnets claimed to have been written by Shakespeare using function words, word n-grams, and character 
n-grams or syntactic constructions when syntactically annotated corpora become available using the 
current methods. This can be served as evidence to question or confirm the Oxfordian hypothesis of de 
Vere authorship of Shakespeare works. 
Acknowledgments 
The author wishes to thank all those who dedicated their time answering my queries and providing 
me with valuable comments during the preparation of this study.  
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. Harold Bloom. Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human. London: Riverhead Books, 1998. 
2. Margirie Garber. Shakespeare’s Ghost Writers: Literature as Uncanny Causality. New York and 
London: Methuen, 1987. 
3. Lukas Erne. “Shakespeare’s Edward III: An early play restored to the canon.” Archiv fur das 
Studium der Neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 236 (1999): 425–27. 
4. Richard Proudfoot. The Reign of King Edward the Third (1596) and Shakespeare. Charlottesville: 
University of Virginia Press, 1986.  
5. Karl Wentersdorf. “The Date of Edward III.” Shakespeare Quarterly 16 (1965): 227–31. 
6. Scott McCrea. The Case for Shakespeare: The End of the Authorship Question. Santa Barbara: 
Praeger, 2005. 
7. David Kathman. “The Question of Authorship.” In Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide. Edited by 
Stanley Wells and Lena Cowen Orlin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003, pp. 620–32. 
8. Jonathan Bate. The Genius of Shakespeare. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. 
9. Gary Taylor. Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History, from the Restoration to the Present. 
New York: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1989. 
10. Warren Hope, and Holston Kim. The Shakespeare Controversy: An Analysis of Authorship 
Theories, 2nd ed. Jefferson: McFarland & Co., Inc., 2009. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 797 
 
 
11. Alan Nelson. “Stratford Si! Essex No!” Tennessee Law Review (Tennessee Law Review 
Association) 72 (2004): 149–69. 
12. Diana Price. Shakespeare’s Unorthodox Biography: New Evidence of an Authorship Problem. 
Santa Barbara: Greenwood Press, 2001. 
13. Tom Bethell. “The Case for Oxford (and Reply).” Atlantic Monthly 268 (1991): 74–78. 
14. George L. McMichael, and Edgar M. Glenn. Shakespeare and His Rivals: A Casebook on the 
Authorship Controversy. Lewis Center: Odyssey Press, 1962. 
15. Gilbert Standen. Shakespeare Authorship: A Summary of Evidence, 1st ed. London: Cecil  
Palmer, 1930. 
16. James Shapiro. Contested Will. Who Wrote Shakespeare? New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010. 
17. Paul Edmondson, and Stanley Wells. Shakespeare beyond Doubt, 1st ed. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2013. 
18. Harold Love. Authorship Attribution: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University  
Press, 2002. 
19. Marie Hamilton Law. The English Familiar Essay in the Early Nineteenth Century. New York: 
Russell & Russell, 1965. 
20. Albert Yang, Chung-Kang Peng, and Ary L. Goldberger. “The Marlowe-Shakespeare Authorship 
Debate: Approaching an Old Problem with New Methods.” Available online: 
http://www.psynetresearch.org/uploads/7/5/8/1/7581337/hoffman_essay.pdf (accessed on 22  
June 2015). 
21. Stanley Wells. “Authorship Debate.” The Shakespeare Authorship Coalition, 2015. Available 
online: https://doubtaboutwill.org/letters_to_sbt_and_rsc/3 (accessed on 10 June 2015). 
22. Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Shlomo Argamon. “Computational methods in authorship 
attribution.” Journal of American Society for Information and Technology 60 (2009): 9–26. 
23. Efstathios Stamatatos. “Author identification: Using text sampling to handle the class imbalance 
problem.” Information Processing and Management 44 (2008): 790–99. 
24. Patrick Juola. “Authorship attribution.” Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 1 (2006): 
233–334. 
25. Brandeis Library & Technology Services. “Digital Humanities: From 1851?” Available online: 
https://blogs.brandeis.edu/lts/2013/05/17/digital-humanities-from-1851/ (accessed on 10 June 2015). 
26. Wincenty Lutosławski. Principes de stylométrie. Paris: Ernets Leroux, 1890. 
27. David Holmes. “Authorship attribution.” Computers and the Humanities 28 (1994): 87–106. 
28. Jack Grieve. “Quantitative authorship attribution: A history and an evaluation of techniques.” 
Master’ Thesis, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada, 2005. 
29. Jack Grieve. “Quantitative authorship attribution: An evaluation of techniques.” Literary and 
linguistic Computing 22 (2007): 251–70. 
30. Tony McEnery, and Michael Oakes. “Authorship identification and computational Stylometry.”  
In Handbook of Natural Language Processing. Edited by Robert Dale, Harold Somers and Hermann 
Moisl. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2000. 
31. David Holmes. “The Evolution of Stylometry in humanities scholarship.” Literary and Linguistic 
Computing 13 (1998): 111–17. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 798 
 
 
32. David Holmes. “A stylometric analysis of Mormon scripture and related texts.” Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society Series A (Statistics in Society) 155 (1992): 91–120. 
33. Hermann Moisl. Cluster Analysis for Corpus Linguistics. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2015. 
34. Brain Everitt, Sabine Landau, and Morven Leese. Cluster Analysis, 4th ed. London: Taylor & 
Francis, 2001. 
35. David Holmes. “Vocabulary richness and the prophetic voice.” Literary and Linguistic Computing  
6 (1991): 259–68. 
36. John Burrows. “Computers and the Study of Literature.” In Computers and Written Text. Edited by 
Christopher Butler. Oxford: Blackwell, 1992, pp. 167–204. 
37. David Holmes, and Robert Forsyth. “The Federalist Revisited: New directions in Authorship 
Attribution.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 10 (1995): 111–27. 
38. Harald Baayen, Hans Van Halteren, and Fiona Tweedie. “Outside the cave of shadows: Using 
syntactic annotation to enhance authorship attribution.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 11 
(1996): 121–32.  
39. Thomas Merriam. “Marlowe’s hand in Edward III.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 8 (1996): 
59–72. 
40. Thomas Corwin Mendenhall. “The characteristic curves of composition.” Science 11 (1887): 237–49. 
41. Thomas Corwin Mendenhall. “A mechanical solution to a literary problem.” Popular Science 9 
(1901): 97–110. 
42. Eilot Slater. The Problem of the Reign of King Edward III: A Statistical Approach. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
43. Neal Fox. “Statistical Stylometrics and the Marlowe-Shakespeare Authorship Debate.” 2012. 
Available online: http://cs.brown.edu/research/pubs/theses/masters/2012/ehmoda.pdf (accessed on 
12 June 2015) 
44. Robert Matthews, and Thomas Merriam. “Neural computation in stylometry: An application to the 
works of Shakespeare and Fletcher.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 8 (1993): 203–9. 
45. Hugh Craig, and Arthur Kinney. Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of Authorship. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
46. The Shakespeare Authorship Page. Available online: http://shakespeareauthorship.com/whyn-ot.html 
(accessed on 10 June 2015). 
47. Louise McConnell. Dictionary of Shakespeare. Teddington: Peter Collin Publishing Ltd., 2000. 
48. John Jowett, William MontGomery, Gary Taylor, and Stanley Wells. The Oxford Shakespeare:  
The Complete Works, 2nd ed. Edited by Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005. 
49. Frank Romany, and Robert Lindsey. Christopher Marlowe: The Complete Plays. Belfast: Penguin 
Books Ltd., 2003. 
50. David Bevington, and Eric Rasmussen. Doctor Faustus and Other Plays Tamburlaine, Parts I and 
II; Doctor Faustus, A- and B-Texts; The Jew of Malta; Edward II. Christopher Marlowe. Oxford: 
Oxford World Classics, 2008. 
51. Arthur Henry Bullen. The Works of Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Vols. II & III. Edited by 
George Bell and Arthur Henry Bullen. Charleston: Forgotten Books, 1908. 
52. Frederick Boas. The Works of Thomas Kyd. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 799 
 
 
53. Maciej Eder. “Style-Markers in Authorship Attribution A Cross-Language Study of the Authorial 
Fingerprint.” Studies in Polish Linguistics 6 (2011): 99–114. 
54. Michael Anderberg. Cluster Analysis for Applications. London: Academic Press, 1973. 
55. Ragharendra Gadagkar. “Division of Labor and Organization of Work in the Primitively Eusocial 
Wasp Ropalidia Marginata.” Proceedings of the Indian National Science Academy-Part B: 
Biological Sciences 67 (2001): 397–42. 
56. Vaughan J. DeGhett. “Hierarchical cluster analysis.” In Quantitative Ethology. New York: John 
Wiley and Sons, 1978, pp. 115–44. 
57. Oscar Miguel Rivera-Borroto, Mónica Rabassa-Gutiérrez, Ricardo del Corazón Grau-Ábalo, 
Yovani Marrero-Ponce, and José Manuel García-de la Vega. “Dunn’s index for cluster tendency 
assessment of pharmacological data sets.” Canadian Journal Physiology Pharmacology 90 (2012): 
425–33. 
58. Anil K. Jain, and Richard C. Dubes. Algorithms for Clustering Data. Englewood Cliffs:  
Prentice-Hall, 1988. 
59. Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps, 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer, 2001. 
© 2015 by the author; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
