Stylometric Linkability of Tweets
Mishari Almishari
King Saud University
mialmishari@ksu.edu.sa
Mohamed Ali Kaafar
NICTA
dali.kaafar@nicta.com.au
Ekin Oguz Gene Tsudik
University of California, Irvine
{eoguz,gene.tsudik}@uci.edu
ABSTRACT
Microblogging is a very popular Internet activity that in-
forms and entertains a large number of people via terse mes-
sages; e.g., tweets on Twitter. Even though microblogging
does not emphasize privacy, authors can easily hide behind
pseudonyms and multiple accounts on the same, or across
multiple, site(s). In this paper, we explore stylometric link-
ability of tweets. Our results clearly demonstrate that mul-
tiple sets of tweets by the same author are easily linkable
even when the number of possible authors is large. This is
also confirmed by showing that linkability holds for a set
of actual Twitter users who admittedly tweet via multiple
accounts.
Note: a full version of this paper is available in [8].
Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.1 [Public Policy Issues]: Privacy
Keywords
Linkability, Microblogging, Author Attribution
1. INTRODUCTION
Microblogging offers fast and highly scalable information
sharing, allowing multitudes of users to disseminate pithy
messages to news-hungry and attention-challenged follow-
ers or subscribers. For social or professional purposes, users
share their thoughts, interests and sometimes express highly
sensitive or controversial opinions. Twitter, the most promi-
nent microblogging site, has grown to a truly global service
with a very large number of users; both tweeters and follow-
ers.
As its popularity grew, microblogging has become a rich
source of information about individuals. Although it is hard
to argue that the existence of public messages violates pri-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
WPES’14, November 03 2014, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ACM 978-1-4503-3148-7/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2665943.2665966 .
vacy of their authors – since they are the one who makes
their utterances public in the first place – the potential to
de-anonymize multiple user accounts and to link messages
(or sets thereof) produced by the same author is a threat to
privacy. This is primarily because multiple accounts own-
ers often expect each set of messages to remain within the
boundaries of the originating account.
On the other hand, microblogging site operators and law-
enforcement agencies might benefit from techniques that
link accounts within a site or across multiple sites. Legiti-
mate reasons might include: (1) identifying spammers and
phishers who hide behind multiple accounts to evade de-
tection, (2) tracking or correlating messages pertaining to
illegal activities, such as terrorism incitement, pedophilia or
human/drug trafficking.
The goal of this work is to assess linkability of tweets by
exploring stylometric similarities between multiple sets of
tweets by the same author. We analyze two large datasets,
each containing over 8, 000 Twitter accounts. Using simple
probabilistic models (Näıve Bayes) and simple textual fea-
tures, we show that tweets are highly linkable even if the
overall number of tweeters is very large; e.g., > 8, 000. By
analyzing simple letter frequencies, we can – in some scenar-
ios – link sets of tweets with> 90% accuracy. We also extend
this analysis to demonstrate linkability of sets of tweets of
actual users who admittedly operate multiple Twitter ac-
counts. A complete full-length version of this paper can be
found in [8].
2. BACKGROUND: NB MODEL
Näıve Bayes (NB) [7] is a probabilistic model based
on the so-called Näıve Bayes assumption, which states
that all features/tokens are conditionally independent,
given some category. In our case, the category is
a tweeter (user). Given a document with a set of
tokens/features: token1, token2, . . . , tokenn, NB model
computes the corresponding user model as: User =
argmaxUP (U |token1, . . . , tokenn) where U varies over all
distinct users in a dataset, in order to maximize the prob-
ability P (U |token1, . . . , tokenn) of categorizing a document
as belonging to a specific user.
Using the Bayes Rule[9], Näıve Bayes and the as-
sumption that P (U) is the same for all users, find-
ing a matching User for token1, token2, . . . , tokenn for
1
a given tweeter profile boils down to: User =
argmaxUP (token1|U) · · ·P (tokenn|U)
To avoid the under-flow problem, we consider log
of the products, which results in 1: User =
argmaxU
∑
i logP (tokeni|U)
3. DATASET AND SETTINGS
Dataset. We use a portion of the very large dataset
crawled by Yang et al. [13], that spans an approximately
six-month period from June to December, 2009 2. It con-
tains > 4 ∗ 108 tweets, authored by > 15 ∗ 106 million users,
of whom 73% authored ≤ 10 tweets each. We extracted the
two following subsets:
1. Prol – all tweets (28, 625, 352) of all users (8, 262) who
authored ≥ 2, 000 tweets. We refer to them as highly-
prolific tweeters.
2. Low – all tweets (3, 449, 635) authored by 10, 000 users,
randomly chosen among all users (73, 004) who au-
thored [300, 400] tweets. Since the original dataset is
from 2009, given ever-increasing popularity of Twit-
ter, we speculate that Low is a sample of very large
demographic.
We extracted two subsets in order to assess linkability of
tweets for users at different prolificacy scales. Note that re-
tweets have not been filtered out, as they are considered part
of users contributions. In addition, URLs and user-mentions
were removed from tweets.
Setting: We adopt linkability-related definitions and ab-
breviations from [2]. For each author U in both Prol and
Low, we randomly split U ’s tweets into two sets: Identified
Record (IR), and Anonymous Record (AR). The set of all
IRs is used for training our matching model and the set of all
ARs is used to assess linkability – accuracy of linking an AR
to its corresponding IR. For each U , we use the matching
model to link U ’s AR to a corresponding IR by returning a
list of candidate IRs, sorted in decreasing order of likelihood
of being the correct match.
A given AR is considered to have Top-x linkability if the
actual corresponding IR is among the top x candidate IR
records that the model returns. Performance is measured in
terms of linkability ratio (LR), the percentage of ARs that
have been correctly classified within the top x candidates.
Three x values were considered in the experiments: 1, 5, and
10.
Each U ’s tweets were partitioned into IR and AR as fol-
lows: First, all U ’s tweets are randomly shuffled. Then, all,
except the last 100, tweets are assigned to IR. For the last
100 tweets, first y are assigned to AR. The value of y varies
among: 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100.
4. LINKABILITY ANALYSIS
1We estimate all probabilities of the form P (tokeni|U) using
the Maximum Likelihood estimator [4] with Laplace smooth-
ing [9].
2Excluding October due to some technical difficulties in ex-
tracting data.
(a) (b)
Figure 1: Top-1, Top-5, and Top-10 LRs of unigram NB model
for Prol (a) and Low (b)
(a) (b)
Figure 2: Top-1, Top-5, and Top-10 LRs of bigram NB model
for Prol (a) and Low (b)
We use the NB model to link tweets based on two simple
lexical token types: (1) unigrams: all letters in the English
alphabet – 26 total, and (2) bigrams: all possible two-letter
combinations – 676 total. We perform separate analyses on
Prol and Low, and compare respective results.
4.1 Unigrams and Bigrams
Unigrams. Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show Top-1, Top-5 and
Top-10 LRs for variable AR sizes in Prol and Low, respec-
tively. First, we observe that all curves exhibit a clear up-
ward trend, showing that the bigger the AR, the higher LR
is obtained. For AR of 100, Top-10 LR is as high as 92% for
Prol and 74% for Low. Relatively high LRs are observed for
Top-1(Top-5) – 74% (88%) of ARs are linked in Prol for AR
of 100.
Bigrams. Similarly, Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show Top-1,
Top-5 and Top-10 LRs, for the case of bigrams. Substi-
tuting unigrams with bigrams substantially increases LRs,
even with a rather small AR. For instance, Top-1 LR is 95%
and 87% for Prol and Low, respectively, for AR of 100. Even
for small AR sizes, high LRs are achieved; e.g., for AR size
of 5(10), Top-10 LR exceeds 67(84)% in Prol.
4.2 Varying the Number of Users
Thus far, we considered the full set of users: 8, 262 in Prol
and 10, 000 in Low. We now reduce the number of users in
both sets and explore effect on linkability. We use bigrams
since they outperform unigrams. The number of users in Prol
2
and Low is varied between 1, 000 and full set size, i.e., 8, 262
and 10, 000, respectively. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show LRs
for varying set sizes with AR of 100. Interestingly, LR does
not decrease much as the set size increases. For example,
looking at the entire range, Top-1 LR does not decrease
over 4% and 7% in Prol and Low, respectively. This shows
that the bigram-based NB model is very resilient against
increasing the number of users. We believe that this should
be worrisome to tweeters who use multiple accounts.
(a) (b)
Figure 3: LRs of bigram NB model, varying # users in Prol (a)
and Low (b)
4.3 Improving Unigram Model
We already established that relying only on bigrams yields
very high LRs. However, bigrams require more resources
than unigrams: 676 vs 26 tokens. Thus, bigram-based mod-
els are less scalable. To this end, we consider improving LRs
using only unigrams, by combining them with the unigrams
of hashtags. Hashtags are peculiar, yet popular, feature of
Twitter. Not surprisingly, many tweets in our dataset con-
tain one or more hashtags. We first filter out from Prol and
Low all tweets that do not include any hashtags. We then
discard all users with fewer than 300 hashtag-containing
tweets; this is in order to populate their corresponding AR
sets with 100 tweets. This leaves us with 3, 179 and 160
users in Prol and Low, respectively. Since the resultant size
of Low (in terms of users) is small, we confine our analysis
to Prol. The number of tweets in filtered Prol is 4, 274, 188.
We use unigram tokens within hashtags, which include 11
non-alphabetical characters (i.e., 0− 9 and “ ”), thus ending
up with 37 tokens.
We then try to improve LRs by combining unigrams of
tweets without hashtags (26 tokens) with hashtags-based un-
igrams (37 tokens). This yields a total of 63 tokens, which
is still much less than 676 with bigrams.
As discussed in Section 2, we use
∑
i logP (ti|U) Log −
Sum to sort the matching users from a set of tokens. Now,
we use a weighted average to combine the Log − Sum of
tweet-text-based and hashtag-based tokens as follows:
(β)×
∑
ttweeti
logP (ttweeti |U)+(1−β)×
∑
t
hashtag
i
logP (thashtagi |U)
However, there is no clear way to assign a value to β. We
experimented with several choices. Specifically, we tried all
β values ranging in [0−1] in 0.1 increments and observed the
highest LR with β = 0.6 in Top-1, Top-5 and Top-10 LRs.
Thus, 0.6 was selected for the combined model3. Figure 4
shows Top-1 LR for combining unigrams of tweet-texts and
hashtags for the filtered Prol. This combination boosts LRs
by 8− 13%.
Figure 4: Top-1, Top-5 and Top-10 LRs with different β values
4.4 Dual-Account Tweeters
So far, we analyzed sets of tweets, each authored by a
distinct user corresponding to a Twitter account. After ar-
tificially splitting each such set into Identification Record
(IR) and Anonymous Record (AR), we discovered that they
are highly linkable. In practice, our technique aims to link
distinct users, i.e., multiple bodies of tweets emanating
from different Twitter accounts.
Clearly, we can not assemble a comprehensive collection
of all multi-account sets of tweets, even for a fixed period
of time. Instead, as ground truth, we use a fairly small
number of account-pairs that are known to be operated by
the same author/user. In order to collect tweets from dual-
account authors, we manually and extensively searched the
web for public information pertaining to individuals who op-
erate multiple accounts. For example, we used search varia-
tions of keywords, such as “multiple twitter accounts”, and
found several blog posts where Twitter users publicly re-
veal tweeting via multiple accounts and list these accounts.
We assembled a set of 28 accounts belonging to 14 distinct
users, each with 2 accounts. We refer to the set of tweets
from these accounts as Dual dataset.
We again use bigram NB as the linking model for the
Dual dataset. As a sanity check, we first assessed NB’s per-
formance with Dual without mixing in tweets from any ex-
ternal datasets. For each dual-account user, we randomly
selected one of the two accounts (i.e, all tweets therein) as
IR, and the other – as AR. AR size was varied between 5
and 50, by randomly selecting tweets4. Top-1 LR is 100%
for AR ≥ 20. Also, Top-1 LR exceeds 85% for AR < 10 5.
As the next step, we verify that the model is scalable for
dual-account owners, i.e., performs well if tweets from Dual
3Note that β selection process (training) is restricted to
the set of IRs (ARs are excluded). That is, β is learned
using IRs, by further splitting them into identified and
anonymized sets, and computing the corresponding LR val-
ues in the filtered version of Prol.
4Maximum AR size was 50, instead of earlier 100, since some
accounts had < 100 tweets.
5Due to space limitations, we omit the corresponding figure;
see [8].
3
(a) (b)
Figure 5: Top-1, Top-5 and Top-10 LRs in Dual when merging
accounts with Prol – (a) and Low – (b)
are merged with Prol and Low datasets, respectively. We
merge IRs from Dual with Prol / Low. Likewise, we augment
ARs of Dual with ARs of Prol / Low. Figures 5(a) and 5(b)
show LRs of 14 dual-account owners in Dual augmented by
Prol and Low, respectively. Once again, Top-1, Top-5 and
Top-10 are at 100% when AR size exceeds 20. This clearly
confirms efficacy of the NB bigram model.
5. RELATED WORK
Author Attribution in Twitter: Some prior results fo-
cused on authorship identification and stylometric analysis
of microblogging. [11] considered re-identifying authorship
of tweets from a set of three authors, while using over 5, 000
dimensions as input for a Support Vector Machine (SVM)
classifier. Similarly, [6] investigated pseudonymity for a set
of 50 Twitter users. [5] studied the use of n-grams with NB
as the linkability model. In particular, 2- to 6-grams are
evaluated and a 98% linkability is achieved in the setting of
50 authors. An identification technique based on extract-
ing a set of lexical and syntactical features along with SVM
is proposed in [3]. It achieves 91% accuracy for a set of
15 authors. There are four main differences between our
results work and aforementioned studies. First, we assess
linkability on a large scale, i.e., the number of tweeters is
much larger than in prior work. Second, we use unigrams,
which drastically reduces the number of tokens. Third, we
include hashtags and show their efficacy in linkability when
used alone or in combination with other unigrams. Finally,
we successfully re-produce and confirm linkability results for
a small set of actual dual-account tweeters.
General Author Attribution. One of the best-known
results is [1], which uses an extensive set of features, called
Writeprints, and a technique that is based on Karhunen-
Loeve-transforms. This approach attains identification ac-
curacy of 91%. Other author attribution studies for user-
review sites and blogs are [2] and [10]. A survey of this
topic can be found in [12]. Also, a more extensive overview
of related work appears in the full version of this paper [8].
6. SUMMARY & ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper reports on a large-scale linkability analysis of
tweets, based on two datasets, each consisting of > 8, 000
tweeters. As shown, tweets are highly linkable, even using
simple unigram and/or bigram distributions. This is con-
firmed by linkability analysis of a set of tweets that includes
actual dual-account users. These are worrisome results for
privacy-conscious tweeters.
G. Tsudik and E. Oguz were supported by NSF CSR
Award 1213140. M. Almishari’s research was supported in
part by King Saud University. NICTA is funded by the
Australian Government as represented by the Department
of Broad-band, Communications and the Digital Economy
and the Australian Research Council through the ICT Cen-
tre of Excellence program.
7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Abbasi and H. Chen. Writeprints: A Stylometric
Approach to Identity-Level Identification and
Similarity Detection in Cyberspace. In ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 2008.
[2] M. Almishari and G. Tsudik. Exploring linkability in
user reviews. In European Symposium on Research in
Computer Security, 2012.
[3] M. Bhargava, P. Mehndiratta, and K. Asawa.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution on
Twitter. In Big Data Analytics, 2013.
[4] C. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer, 2006.
[5] S. R. Boutwell. Authorship Attribution of Short
Messages Using Multimodal Features. In Master
Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2011.
[6] R. Layton, P. Watters, and R. Dazeley. Authorship
Attribution for Twitter in 140 Characters or Less. In
Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop
(CTC), 2010.
[7] D. Lewis. Naive(bayes) at forty:the independence
assumption in information retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 10th European Conference on Machine Learning,
1998.
[8] M. A. Mishari, D. Kaafar, G. Tsudik, and E. Oguz.
Are 140 characters enough? A large-scale linkability
study of tweets. CoRR, abs/1406.2746, 2014.
[9] T. Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill, 1997.
[10] A. Narayanan, H. Paskov, N. Gong, J. Bethencourt,
E. Stefanov, E. Shin, and D. Song. On the Feasibility
of Internet-Scale Author Identification. In IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2012.
[11] R. Silva and G. Laboreiro and L. Sarmento and T.
Grant and E. Oliveira and B. Maia. Automatic
Authorship Analysis of Micro-Blogging Messages. In
NLDB, 2011.
[12] E. Stamatatos. A Survey of Modern Authorship
Attribution Methods. In Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 2009.
[13] J. Yang and J. Leskovec. Patterns of temporal
variation in online media. In WSDM, 2011.
4
