ÁAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAÁAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARTÍCULO
Some issues on complex networks for
author characterization
Lucas Antiqueira1,3, Thiago Alexandre Salgueiro Pardo1,3,
Maria das Graças Volpe Nunes1,3 and Osvaldo N. Oliveira Jr.2,3
1Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação (ICMC),
Universidade de São Paulo (USP) – São Carlos, SP, Brasil
2Instituto de F́ısica de São Carlos (IFSC),
Universidade de São Paulo (USP) – São Carlos, SP, Brasil
3Núcleo Interinstitucional de Lingǘıstica Computacional (NILC),
www.nilc.icmc.usp.br
lantiq@gmail.com, taspardo@icmc.usp.br, gracan@icmc.usp.br, chu@ifsc.usp.br
Abstract
This paper presents a modeling technique of texts as complex networks and the investigation of the correlation
between the properties of such networks and author characteristics. In an experiment with several books
from eight authors, we show that the networks produced for each author tend to have specific features,
which indicates that complex networks can capture author characteristics and, therefore, could be used for
the traditional task of authorship identification.
Keywords: Authorship Attribution, Complex Networks.
1 Introduction
Recent trends in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) have indicated that graphs are a powerful
modeling and problem-solving technique. Graph
theory, a branch of mathematics, has been stud-
ied for a long time, providing elegant and sim-
ple solutions to several problems. Recently, the
field of complex networks, an intersection be-
tween graph theory and statistical mechanics, has
motivated renewed interest in modeling systems
as graphs. As evidence, graphs have been used
in various applications, including text summa-
rization [10, 14], information retrieval and related
tasks [19, 13, 18], and sentiment analysis in texts
[20].
We focus in this work on graph representation
of texts, using measures usually employed in the
studies of complex networks. Differently from
regular networks, the dynamics and topology of a
complex network follow non-trivial organization
principles [17, 5]. Complex networks concepts
have been applied to a number of world phe-
nomena, e.g., internet, social networks and flight
routes, which includes NLP and linguistics prob-
lems - as we briefly introduce in the next section.
We tackled the problem of authorship characteri-
zation using a network of words and a set of net-
work measures. As known, authors present dif-
ferent styles of writing, resulting in diverse infor-
mation flows and text structures. We therefore
Inteligencia Artificial, Revista Iberoamericana de Inteligencia Artificial. Vol. 11, No 36 (2007), pp. 51-58.
ISSN: 1137-3601. c©AEPIA (http://www.aepia.org/revista)
52 Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007
look for correlations between the texts of a same
author and the measures extracted from the cor-
responding networks. In this paper we show an
experiment made with several books of 8 authors
from diverse text genres, including fiction, science
and poetry. We show that different measures
vary considerably between some authors, which
encourages the use of complex networks in the
task of authorship identification.
In the next section we introduce complex net-
works, its main concepts and the measures used
in this work. The methodology we follow and the
obtained results are presented in Section 3 and 4,
respectively. Some conclusions are presented in
Section 5.
2 Complex Networks and
Language
Complex networks have received enormous atten-
tion recently, but their origins can be traced back
to the first study on graph theory, i.e., the Leon-
hard Euler solution to the Königsberg bridges
problem in 1736 [3]. The concept of nodes linked
by edges (used by Euler) provides a general math-
ematical way to describe discrete elements and
their inter-relationships. Erdös and Rényi, two
centuries later, created a way to explain the for-
mation of real networks, which is called random
graph theory. They published a series of eight
papers, started in 1959 [9], that established for
decades a random view of our world, an egalitar-
ian world in which almost all nodes have a similar
number of connections.
Alternatives to the random graph theory were
later developed, which motivated a whole new
interest in the study of networks, showing that
many real networks are not random. Small-world
networks were introduced more recently (e.g.,
Milgram [15] and Watts and Strogatz [24]), which
differs from random networks in the sense that in
such networks it is possible to reach every node
through a relatively small number of other nodes.
In other words, a small-world network has a small
mean shortest path length (it also increases slowly
- logarithmically - as the network grows). More-
over, these networks have a high clustering coef-
ficient (defined later in this section), which is a
tendency to form local groups of interconnected
nodes. Barabási and Albert [4], introduced an-
other special class of networks, named scale-free
networks. These networks are also markedly dif-
ferent from the random networks, because their
distributions of connections are not uniform; in-
stead, a scale-free network has few nodes with a
high number of connections (called hubs), which
coexist with a much higher number of nodes
that have a small number of connections. Scale-
free networks are explained by two related con-
cepts, (i) growth, which determines that a net-
work is continually incorporating new nodes, and
(ii) preferential attachment, which defines that
new nodes prefer to establish connections with
already well connected nodes.
Erdös and Rényi’s random graph theory is a
good example of an early study on complex net-
works, but such networks only started to receive
an enormous attention from the scientific com-
munity in the recent years, after the publication
of the Watts-Strogatz and Barabási-Albert pa-
pers. The modern reserch on complex networks
typically incorporates concepts from mechanical
statistics, and aims to characterize networks in
terms of their structure and dynamics. A series
of network models and measurements have been
applied or created in recent network research [8],
forming a profusion of tools available to almost
every network study. In our present paper, we use
a set of complex network measures (introduced in
the next paragraphs) in order to face the problem
of authorship characterization.
The tendency of the network nodes to form local
interconnected groups is quantified by a measure
referred to as clustering coefficient. For comput-
ing this coefficient for a node i in a directed net-
work, consider S as the set of nodes that have an
input edge from i, |S| as the number of nodes in
S, and B the number of edges among the nodes
in S. Equation (1) computes the clustering coef-
ficient of a node i:
Clustering Coefficient (i) =
B
|S|(|S| − 1)
. (1)
If |S| = 0 or |S| = 1, the coefficient is set to
0. The clustering coefficient of a network is the
average coefficient of its complete set of nodes.
We have created another measure, based on the
dynamical connectivity of the network growth.
This type of measure is typical in complex net-
work studies, since it considers the evolution of a
network. It is given by the number of connected
components as edges are progressively incorpo-
rated or have their associated weights increased
Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007 53
in the network1,2. The obtained dynamics is then
compared to a hypothetical uniform variation of
the number of components (Figure 1), and the
extent to which the real dynamics departs from
the hypothetical one is quantified by a measure
called components dynamics deviation. This de-
viation is obtained for a network as follows:
Deviation =
∑E
k=1 |f(k) − g(k)|
NE
, (2)
where f(k) is the function that determines the
number of components for k considered edge
modifications (insertions or weight changes) and
g(k) is the function that determines the linear
variation of components (see Figure 1). N is the
number of different words in the text and E is the
total number of edges modifications.
Figure 1. Component variation (vertical axis)
in a network with weighted edges. The hy-
pothetical uniform variation of the number of
components is indicated by a dotted line (g(k)),
which starts and ends, respectively, at the ini-
tial and final points of the real curve (f(k)).
The horizontal axis indicates the number of
edges inserted or modified (in respect of its
weight).
As for traditional graphs, the input degree of a
node is the number of edges that it receives from
other nodes; similarly, the output degree is the
number of edges that leave from it to other nodes.
The (in/out) degree of a network is the average
(in/out) degree of its set of nodes. Finally, the de-
gree correlation, another typical complex network
measure, is the Pearson correlation coefficient3 [6]
of a bidimensional data set that associates the
degrees present at both ends of each edge. In
other words, since each edge associates two nodes
n1 and n2, it is possible to create a set of bidi-
mensional points that represents the edges. Each
edge is then denoted by the coordinates (degree
of n1, degree of n2)4. The degree correlation is
the Pearson correlation coefficient applied to this
set of points.
Complex networks have been applied to several
NLP and linguistics tasks. Sigman and Cec-
chi [23] modeled WordNet semantic relations be-
tween words into a network of word meanings,
where the presence of highly polysemic words led
to a small-world network. Another semantic net-
work, which was derived from a thesaurus, was
analysed by Motter et al. [16]. This network
was found to be scale-free. In fact, this model
is very common in linguistic networks, since it
also conforms to (i) the word co-occurrence net-
work, which models the sequence of words in a
text [11], (ii) the word association network, where
related concepts are linked [7], and (iii) the syn-
tactic dependency network, which models syntac-
tic relationships between words [12]. Antiqueira
et al. [1, 2] studied the correlation among text
quality and network properties, considering the
words as network nodes, with edges being estab-
lished between adjacent words in the text (word
co-occurence model). Further details of how this
modeling is processed appear in the next sec-
tion. In an experiment with essays written by
high school students, the authors demonstrated
that text quality - as assessed by human evalu-
ators - correlated with the clustering coefficient,
the network degree (i.e., the mean degree) and
the dynamics of network growth. Finally, follow-
ing the same methodology, Pardo et al. [21, 22]
showed the possibility of evaluating the quality
of human and automatic summaries by means of
network properties.
3 Representing Texts as
Complex Networks
For representing texts as complex networks, we
follow the proposal of Antiqueira et al. [1, 2]. Be-
fore building a network for a text, the text must
1A connected component is a subgraph that has no isolated nodes. Moreover, it is not possible to reach one node from a
node that belongs to a different component.
2If an already existing edge is inserted in a network, it is possible to increase the number of times the edge was inserted and
associate this number (the weight) to the edge.
3The Pearson correlation coefficient r quantifies the strength of the linear relationship between two variables (0 ≤ |r| ≤ 1).
The sign of the coefficient gives the slope of the relation.
4For directed networks: (indegree of n1, indegree of n2), (indegree of n1, outdegree of n2) and so on.
54 Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007
be pre-processed. As traditionally done in NLP
systems, the stopwords are removed, since they
are very common and typically irrelevant, and
the remaining words are lemmatized. Then, each
word in the pre-processed text is represented as
a node in the network and directed edges are es-
tablished between nodes that represent adjacent
words, with the node for the first word point-
ing to the node associated to the following word.
We do not take into account sentence and para-
graph boundaries for determining the adjacent
words, i.e., the last word of a sentence/paragraph
is considered adjacent to the first word of the next
sentence/paragraph. Additionally, the edges are
weighted by the number of times that the corre-
sponding adjacent words appear in the text.
It is worth noting that the degree correlation
(defined in Section 2) should take into account
the edges directions, since the word co-occurrence
network has outdegrees and indegrees. Since for
every node the outdegree is equal to the inde-
gree, the edges direction becomes irrelevant for
the computation of the degree correlation. In
fact, the only exceptions are the first and last
words, which do not have a predecessor word and
a successor word, respectively. We then consider,
only for the computation of the degree correla-
tion, a link between the last and the first word
of a given text. Moreover, in the case of the
components dynamics deviation, the dynamics is
obtained as new word associations are inserted
in the network in the order they appear in the
text. Antiqueira et al. claim that the compo-
nents dynamics deviation possibly captures the
flow of new concepts introduced in texts. This is
why it is also used here.
Our study is related to complex networks in two
main ways. First, similar networks were proven
to be scale-free and small-world by Ferrer i Can-
cho and Solé [11]. Although their networks are
not the same as ours (e.g., the authors used the
British National Corpus), we have a strong indi-
cation that the networks here employed are com-
plex networks. Second, and more important, we
apply a set of measurements frequently adopted
by recent researches in complex networks (see
Section 2).
4 Experiment
In order to test the possibility of using complex
network properties to characterize authors, we
selected books from 8 authors from varied gen-
res, namely, fiction, science and poetry. The
choice of authors depended solely on the num-
ber of books available, which were collected from
the Project Gutenberg website5 that freely dis-
tribute e-books. Concerning the reproducibility
of our experiment, Table 1 shows the selected au-
thors, the books collected for each one and the
genre they belong to. The different number of
books per author reflects their current availabil-
ity. For the measures we report here, this is not
an important factor, since each book is processed
separately.
We measured (i) the network outdegree (i.e., the
average outdegree, which is equal to the average
indegree), (ii) the clustering coefficient, (iii) the
degree correlation, and (iv) the components dy-
namics deviation for each text considered. We
show the average results and the standard de-
viation for each author in Table 2. By these
numbers, one can see that, in most cases, the
authors present very different average measures.
For instance, while Charles Darwin has an aver-
age outdegree value of 13.091, Lewis Carroll has
4.871. Although we did not evaluate the statis-
tical significance of these differences between av-
erage measures, we have a clue that some of the
network measures presented here can be used to
separate texts regarding their authorship.
While any of the measures could be used to char-
acterize authors, it is unlikely that a single mea-
sure would suffice in distinguishing all of them.
Therefore, it is also interesting to investigate cor-
relations between each pair of measures, and this
is performed in the scatter plots shown in Fig-
ures 2 and 3 (it is possible to build 6 scatter plots,
but we show only the 2 most significant ones).
To analyse these plots, we recall that authors
whose data appear in a more limited region of the
scatter plot would tend to have a more consistent
writing style - obviously assuming that the com-
plex networks features are representative of such
style. Taken all the plots together (not shown),
Wordsworth, Darwin and Hardy appear to be the
authors with a larger overall consistency. In the
comparison with all other authors, Wordsworth
is particularly consistent in style, probably be-
cause it was the only one for poetry. In contrast,
Dickens, Carroll and Woolf appear as the least
consistent.
5http://www.gutenberg.org
Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007 55
Table 1. Data for the experiment
Author Genre Books
Charles Science Coral Reefs
Darwin The Effects of Cross and Self-Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom
On the Origin of Species
The Descent of Man
The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species
The Voyage of the Beagle
Charles Fiction A Tale of Two Cities
Dickens American Notes
David Copperfield
Great Expectations
Hard Times
Master Humphrey’s Clock
Oliver Twist
The Old Curiosity Shop
The Seven Poor Travelers
Ernest Fiction The Garden of Eden
Hemingway Green Hills of Africa
Lewis Fiction Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
Carroll Phantasmagoria and Other Poems
Sylvie and Bruno
The Hunting of the Snark
Through the Looking-Glass
Pelham G. Fiction My Man Jeeves
Wodehouse Tales of St. Austin’s
The Adventures of Sally
The Clicking of Cuthbert
The Gem Collector
The Man with Two Left Feet
The Pothunters
The Swoop
The White Feather
Thomas Fiction A Changed Man and Other Tales
Hardy A Group of Noble Dames
Desperate Remedies
Far from the Madding Crowd
The Dynasts
The Hand of Ethelberta
Virginia Fiction Jacob’s Room
Woolf Night and Day
The Voyage Out
William Poetry Lyrical Ballads, with a Few Other Poems
Wordsworth Lyrical Ballads, with Other Poems - Vol. 1&2
Poems, in Two Volumes - Vol. 1&2
The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth - Vol. 1,2&3
The correlation between style and the network
measures is also variable. For instance, Darwin
style is more consistent with regard to cluster-
ing coefficient vs. degree correlation (Figure 3)
than in component dynamics deviation vs. degree
correlation (not shown), especially because of the
dynamics. In addition, some of the measures are
more correlated to each other, as in the case of
outdegree vs. clustering coefficient (Figure 2). In
this case, it is possible to note that these two mea-
sures are linearly correlated, as the Pearson coef-
ficient shows (it is equal to 0.88, in a range from 0
to 1). One notes that the clustering coefficient vs.
degree correlation (Figure 3) and dynamics vs.
degree correlation (not shown) are the best and
worst, respectively, in terms of distinguishing the
authors. It should be stressed that superimposi-
tion of points in the scatter plot reflects similar-
ity in writing style. If we now concentrate on the
clustering coefficient vs. degree correlation scat-
ter plot (Figure 3, the one with best distinguish-
ing ability), we note that the largest difference in
style appears between Darwin and Wordsworth.
This is not surprising since the texts refer to sci-
entific writing and poetry, respectively. On the
other hand, the authors with the most similar
styles are Wodehouse, Hardy and Woolf.
Such results suggest that complex networks are
not only useful for capturing author characteris-
tics, but that they also could be applied in the
task of authorship identification. This is one of
our future plans, as stated in the next section.
56 Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007
Table 2. Average results and standard deviation for the network measures
Author Outdegree Clust. Coeff. Deg. Correl. Comp. Dynamics
Charles Darwin 13.091 ± 2.978 0.068 ± 0.018 0.070 ± 0.008 0.165 ± 0.023
Charles Dickens 7.946 ± 3.447 0.044 ± 0.025 0.052 ± 0.027 0.151 ± 0.028
Ernest Hemingway 8.342 ± 1.145 0.067 ± 0.016 0.062 ± 0.015 0.143 ± 0.011
Lewis Carroll 4.871 ± 2.348 0.041 ± 0.031 0.058 ± 0.032 0.107 ± 0.039
Pelham G. Wodehouse 5.193 ± 1.022 0.033 ± 0.011 0.050 ± 0.021 0.123 ± 0.016
Thomas Hardy 6.719 ± 0.988 0.035 ± 0.010 0.048 ± 0.010 0.144 ± 0.016
Virginia Woolf 7.923 ± 2.641 0.046 ± 0.017 0.056 ± 0.018 0.164 ± 0.042
William Wordsworth 4.824 ± 1.748 0.020 ± 0.008 0.053 ± 0.009 0.119 ± 0.017
Figure 2. Scatter plot for outdegree (horizontal axis) and clustering coefficient (vertical axis)
Figure 3. Scatter plot for clustering coefficient (horizontal axis) and degree correlation (vertical axis)
5 Conclusions
We showed in this paper how to model texts as
networks and also introduced some network mea-
sures to be used in authorship characterization.
The evaluation shows that it is possible to cluster
some authors (Wordsworth, Darwin and Hardy)
using combinations of three measures (ie. ploting
clustering coefficient vs. outdegree or clustering
coefficient vs. degree correlation). However, it
is also necessary to carry out comprehensive and
statistically significant tests in order to conclude
with higher accuracy the usefulness of the mea-
sures. We intend to apply multivariate techniques
such as Principal Components Analysis (PCA),
Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007 57
compare our results to other similar studies, and
also apply more complex networks measures.
As in other NLP and linguistics tasks, concepts
created in the field of complex networks show to
be a valuable tool. Given the results presented in
this paper, we believe it is possible to use complex
networks for automatic authorship identification,
as we plan to do in the future. Other possibilities
include text categorization in general, but more
investigation must be carried out first.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to FAPESP and CNPq
(Brazil) for financial support.
References
[1] L. Antiqueira, M. G. V. Nunes, O. N.
Oliveira Jr., and L. F. Costa. Modelling
texts as complex networks (in Portuguese).
In Anais do XXV Congresso da Sociedade
Brasileira de Computação (III Workshop em
Tecnologia da Informação e da Linguagem
Humana - TIL), 2089–2098, São Leopoldo-
RS, Brasil, 2005.
[2] L. Antiqueira, M. G. V. Nunes, O. N.
Oliveira Jr., and L. F. Costa. Strong cor-
relations between text quality and complex
networks features. Physica A, 373:811–820,
2007. physics/0504033.v2.
[3] A. L. Barabási. Linked: How Everything is
Connected to Everything Else and What it
Means for Business, Science and Everyday
Life. Plume, 2003.
[4] A. L. Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence
of scaling in random networks. Science,
286:509–512, 1999.
[5] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno,
M. Chavez, and D.-U. Hwang. Complex net-
works: Structure and dynamics. Physics Re-
ports, 424(4-5):175–308, 2006.
[6] G. Casella and R. L. Berger. Statistical In-
ference. Duxbury Press, 1990.
[7] L. F. Costa. What’s in a name? Int. J. Mod.
Phys. C, 15:371–379, 2004.
[8] L. F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso,
and P. R. Villas Boas. Characterization of
complex networks: A survey of measure-
ments. Advances in Physics, 56(1):167–242,
2007.
[9] P. Erdös and A. Rényi. On random graphs
I. Publ. Math. Debrecen, 6:290–297, 1959.
[10] G. Erkan and D. R. Radev. LexRank:
Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in
text summarization. Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research, 22:457–479, 2004.
[11] R. Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Solé. The small
world of human language. P. Roy. Soc. Lond.
B Bio., 268:2261, 2001.
[12] R. Ferrer i Cancho, R. V. Solé, and
R. Köhler. Patterns in syntactic dependency
networks. Phys. Rev. E, 69:051915, 2004.
[13] Oren Kurland and Lillian Lee. PageRank
without hyperlinks: Structural re-ranking
using links induced by language models. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, 306–
313, 2005.
[14] R. Mihalcea. Language independent ex-
tractive summarization. In Proceedings of
the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstra-
tion Sessions, pages 49–52, Ann Arbor-MI,
United States, June 2005. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[15] Stanley Milgram. The small world problem.
Psychology Today, 2:60–67, 1967.
[16] A. E. Motter, A. P. S. Moura, Y. C. Lai,
and P. Dasgupta. Topology of the concep-
tual network of language. Phys. Rev. E,
65:065102, 2002.
[17] M. E. J. Newman. The structure and func-
tion of complex networks. SIAM Rev.,
45:167–256, 2003.
[18] J. Otterbacher, G. Erkan, and D. R. Radev.
Using random walks for question-focused
sentence retrieval. In Proceedings of the Hu-
man Language Technology Conference and
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), 915–
922, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
October 2005. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
58 Inteligencia Artificial Vol. 11, No 36, 2007
[19] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Wino-
grad. The PageRank citation ranking:
Bringing order to the Web. Technical re-
port, Stanford Digital Library Technologies
Project, 1998. 17 p.
[20] Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. A sentimental edu-
cation: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity
summarization based on minimum cuts. In
Proceedings of the ACL, 271–278, 2004.
[21] T. A. S. Pardo, L. Antiqueira, M. G. V.
Nunes, O. N. Oliveira Jr., and L. F. Costa.
Modeling and evaluating summaries using
complex networks. In Proceedings of the 7th
Workshop on Computational Processing of
Written and Spoken Portuguese (PROPOR),
volume 3960 of LNAI, 1–10. Springer-Verlag,
May 2006.
[22] T. A. S. Pardo, L. Antiqueira, M. G. V.
Nunes, O. N. Oliveira Jr., and L. F. Costa.
Using complex networks for language pro-
cessing: The case of summary evaluation. In
Proceedings of the International Conference
on Communications, Circuits and Systems
(ICCCAS’06) - Special Session on Complex
Networks, 2678–2682, Gui Lin, China, June
2006. UESTC Press.
[23] M. Sigman and G. A. Cecchi. Global or-
ganization of the WordNet lexicon. PNAS,
99(3):1742–1747, 2002.
[24] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. Collective
dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature,
393:440–442, 1998.
