Automatically Classifying Documents by Ideological 
and Organizational Affiliation
Moshe Koppel
Dept. of Computer Science.
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
moishk@gmail.com
Navot Akiva
Dept. of Computer Science.
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
navot.akiva@gmail.com
Eli Alshech
Middle East Media Research 
Institute
Jerusalem, Israel
eli_a@memri-tv.org
Kfir Bar
Intuview Corp.
Herzliya, Israel
kfir@intuview.com
Abstract—We show how an  Arabic  language  religious-political 
document  can  be  automatically  classified  according  to  the 
ideological  stream  and  organizational  affiliation  that  it 
represents.  Tests  show  that  our  methods  achieve  near-perfect 
accuracy. 
Keywords-  Text  Categorization,  Author  Profiling,  Islamic  
Organizations
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In  this  paper  we  will  present  an  automated  system  for 
classifying  an  Arabic  language  document  according  to 
ideological and organizational affiliation.
The  term  “ideological  affiliation”  refers  to  the  doctrine 
underlying  the  documents.  In  particular,  we  consider  four 
ideological  streams:  Salafi-Jihadi,  Mainstream  Islam 
(apolitical), Muslim Brotherhood, and Wahhabi. We selected 
these four because each is well known and has a significant 
following within contemporary Muslim societies and because 
each differs from the others in important doctrinal aspects. 
The  term  “organizational  affiliation”  refers  here  to  the 
religious group from which a particular document stems (e.g., 
the website of the Hamas). The organizations we consider are 
Hamas, Hizballah, Al Qaeda and Muslim Brotherhood. While 
organizational  affiliation  is  often  closely  correlated  with 
ideological affiliation, there is no strict mapping between the 
two. Thus, for example, the Muslim Brotherhood is a coherent 
socio-religious  movement  with  defined  religio-political 
institutions  in  Egypt  and  other  countries.  At  the same time, 
however,  it  represents  an ideology that  is  today adopted by 
many  Islamic  groups  outside  the  Muslim  Brotherhood 
Movement.  In  any  case,  we  treat  the  two  problems 
independently.
For  security  analysts  and  law  enforcement  agents,  the 
ability  to  categorize  documents  by ideology or  organization 
accurately  and  efficiently  is  of  utmost  importance.  For 
example,  it  could  help  police  ascertain  a  suspect's 
organizational affiliation based on documents found in his or 
her possession. In addition, such categorization allows officials 
to monitor and curb the proliferation in cyberspace of texts that 
are  regarded  as  illegal  or  dangerous.  While  it  is  true  that 
experts  can  categorize  documents  manually  with  little 
difficulty, applications such as these require the processing of 
thousands of documents in real time, a task that can only be 
accomplished using automated tools such as we propose here. 
The outline of  this  paper  is  as  follows. In  the following 
section,  we  outline  the  central  issues  in  automated  text 
categorization,  highlighting  the  differences  between  content-
based  and  style-based  text  categorization  as  well  as  certain 
special  considerations  that  arise  with  regard  to  Arabic 
documents.  In  Section  3,  we  describe  our  experimental 
framework  and  in  Section  4,  we  provide  results,  focusing 
especially on the features that prove to be most useful for our 
tasks.
II. TEXT CATEGORIZATION
In  a text categorization [9] problem we are given two or 
more classes of documents and we need to find some classifier 
that automatically assigns a new document to the correct class, 
presumably based on statistical differences between documents 
in the respective classes. Thus, for example, we might wish to 
classify a document as being about one of a number of possible 
topics, as having been written by a certain type of author, as 
being spam or non-spam, as  expressing positive or  negative 
sentiment with regard to some issue, and so on.
Regardless  of  the  particular  dimension  along  which  we 
wish  to  categorize  documents,  the  first  step,  document 
representation, involves defining a set of text features  which 
might  potentially  be  useful  for  categorizing  texts  along  that 
dimension and then representing each text as a vector in which 
entries  represent  (some  non-decreasing  function  of)  the 
frequency of each feature  in the text.  Once  documents have 
been represented as vectors,  some learning algorithm can be 
used  to  construct  models  that  distinguish  between  vectors 
representing documents in the respective classes.  
The  two  central  questions  that  need  to  be  addressed  in 
designing  a  text  categorization  system  are  the  choice  of 
features  to  use  and  the  choice  of  learning  algorithm.  With 
regard to the choice of features,  it  is  perhaps useful  to first 
consider the distinction between topic-based text categorization 
and style-based text categorization. When we wish to classify 
documents  according  to  topic,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the 
features that are most likely to be helpful are simply content-
bearing words.  For example,  documents about sports can be 
distinguished from documents about politics by checking the 
frequencies  of  sports-related  or  politics-related  words.  In 
contrast,  for  categorizing  according  to  writing  style,  for 
example for purpose of authorship attribution, one needs to use 
precisely  those  linguistic  feature  types  that  are  content-
independent.  Such  features  might  include  function  words 
(content-free words like and, the and if), parts of speech, and a 
variety of other feature types [6]. What is interesting for our 
purposes  now  is  that  there  are  many  text  categorization 
problems  –  prominent  examples  include  spam  filtering  and 
sentiment analysis – that are not obviously topic-based or style-
based, but rather straddle both. As we shall see, the problems 
we  consider  in  this  paper,  ideology  and  organizational 
affiliation, are also tied to both content and style.
Arabic texts present  special  problems in terms of feature 
selection for  text  categorization [1][2][3][8][10].  First  of all, 
the same word roots can appear in myriad forms and it is non-
trivial to cluster all these forms together. Moreover,  function 
words tend to be conflated into word affixes in Arabic,  thus 
decreasing the number of function words,  but increasing the 
amount of morphological  features that can be exploited. The 
richness  of  Arabic  morphology  also  renders  part-of-speech 
tagging a more difficult task in Arabic than in other languages, 
such  as  English,  in  which  each  part-of-speech  is  typically 
represented as a separate word. 
We  note  that  many  of  these  issues  are  discussed  in 
considerable detail in the important paper of Abbasi and Chen 
[1], the work most similar to ours. Abbasi and Chen sought to 
identify  specific  individual  authors  of  documents  posted  on 
extremist  sites.  By contrast,  our  objective  is  to  identify  the 
organizations and ideologies to which these authors subscribe.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
In  this  section  we  discuss  the  corpora  used  for  our 
experiments,  the feature  sets  and learning  methods used  for 
finding  classifiers,  and  the  testing  methodology  used  to 
evaluate results.
A. The Corpora
Our first corpus consists of a set of 552 documents each of 
which is manually labeled according to the organization that 
produced  it:  Hamas  (150  documents),  Al  Qaeda  (150 
documents),  Muslim  Brotherhood  (150  documents),  and 
Hizballah (102 documents). 
Our second corpus consists of 1485 documents manually 
labeled according to the ideological  stream from which they 
originate: Salafi-jihadi (400 documents), Muslim Brotherhood 
(400  documents),  Mainstream  Islam  (400  documents)  and 
Wahhabi  (285  documents).  (Two  clarifications  are  in  order 
here.  First,  as  mentioned  above,  Muslim  Brotherhood  is  a 
defined socio-religious movement; at the same time, however, 
it represents an ideology adopted by many Islamic groups not 
affiliated  with  this  movement.  Second,  Mainstream  Islam 
represents an apolitical Islamic ideology.)      
The  documents  in  each  corpus  were  taken  from a  wide 
variety  of  public  sources  to  ensure  representativeness.  The 
documents range in length from 106 to 10,331 words with an 
average  of  1253.  Each  document  was cleansed  of  html  and 
other non-text material,  as well as tags and other identifying 
marks. Diacritics and kasheeda marks were also removed.
B. Extracting Features
Each document is represented as a numerical vector each 
entry of which is the frequency of some linguistic feature in the 
document. In our experiment, we simply chose as features the 
1000 most common words in the entire corpus. We did not use 
stemming since this process is time-consuming and preliminary 
tests  indicated  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  achieving  good 
results. Note that the total number of unique words appearing 
in the corpus is in the tens of thousands; we chose only the 
most  frequently  occurring  1000  words  since  it  is  well 
established [4]  that  filtering in  this way increases  efficiency 
without degrading accuracy. The 1000 words we chose include 
both function words and content words.
C. Learning Method
Given labeled vectors, we use some learning algorithm to 
build  classifiers.  In  this  study,  we  use  Bayesian  multi-class 
regression (BMR) [5], which has been shown to be extremely 
effective for text categorization [5][6]. One advantage of BMR 
is that  it  is  a linear  method so that  each  feature is  assigned 
some weight in the classifier. This allows us to easily ascertain 
the most important features for each category.
D. Testing methodology
In  order  to  test  the  accuracy  of  our  methods  on  out-of-
sample  documents,  we  use  ten-fold  cross-validation:  we 
randomly divide the corpus into ten sets, learn a classifier on 
nine sets and test on the held out set. We repeat this procedure 
ten times, each time holding out a different set.
IV. RESULTS
A. Organizations
Using  ten-fold  cross-validation  on  the  organization 
experiment with a feature set consisting of 1000 words, we find 
that every one of the 552 test documents is correctly classified.
Since we use a linear classifier, each feature is assigned a 
weight  by  the  classifier  for  each  category.  This  weight 
indicates  the  significance  of  that  feature  for  identifying  a 
document as being in that category. In Table I, we show the ten 
highest  weighted  words  in  each  category.  We  find,  for 
example, that the word group (عة  is a marker of Muslim (الجما
Brotherhood because the movement commonly refers to itself 
in texts as 'the group'. The word Palestine (فلسطين) is a marker 
of Hamas because it operates inside the Palestinian territories 
and  its  declared  agenda  is  the  conquest  of  Palestine.  The 
prominence of the word Unity (التوحيد) in the documents of Al-
Qaeda reflects the preoccupation with the doctrine of "Unity of 
God" in Al-Qaeda’s writings. The word Israel is a marker for 
Hizballah since the other groups tend not to refer to Israel by 
name.
Less expectedly, we find a number of function words that 
serve  as  markers,  such  as  only (إل )  in  Al-Qaeda  texts  and 
there (هنعاك) in Hizballah texts. The phenomenon of function 
words such as these being useful for identifying distinct styles 
of  writing  is  well  attested  [6][7],  including  specifically  for 
Arabic  documents  [1].  Thus,  in  order  to  test  the  extent  to 
which such style-based features are themselves adequate for 
distinguishing organizations,  we ran the experiment  using a 
feature set consisting only of 82 Arabic function words. Even 
for  this  small  and  apparently  weak  feature  set,  we  obtain 
accuracy of 80%. 
TABLE I. TEN HIGHEST WEIGHTED WORDS PER ORGANIZATION
Organization
Al Qaeda Hamas Hizballah Muslim Brothers
 المجاهدين
(Mujahideen)
اوكان
(And Was)
لبنان
(Lebanon)
عز
(Ezz)
 التوحيد
(Unification)
وقد
(and Already)
المام
(Imam)
بيان
(Communiqué)
قد
(Already)
شعبنا
(Our People)
حزب
(Party)
له
(To it)
إل
(Only)
الناصر
(Nasser)
الى
(To)
السلمي
(Islamic)
أمريكا
(America)
صلح
(Salah)
التي
(Which)
مطلوب
(Required)
الجهاد
(Jihad)
الفلسطيني
(Palestinian)
السيد
(Mister)
المسلمين
(Muslims)
القول
(Statement)
العمليات
(Operations)
بلدة
(Town)
العمل
(Work)
السلح
(Weapon)
فلسطين
(Palestine)
هناك
(There)
الجتماعي
(Social)
فإن
(and if)
ألوية
(Bridgades)
إسرائيل
(Israel)
الجماعة
(Group)
العدد
(Number )
او
(or)
اللبنانية
(Lebanese)
فهو
(It is)
B. Ideology 
Using ten-fold cross-validation on the ideology experiment 
with a feature set consisting of 1000 words, we find that all but  
2  of  1485  test  document  are  correctly  classified.  The  two 
exceptions are Wahhabi documents that were misclassified as 
Salafi-jihadi. Examination of the documents indicates that their 
content could easily have been assigned to either ideology.
In  Table II,  we show the ten highest  weighted  words in 
each category. We find, for example, that the word resistance (
(المقاومععة  is  a  marker  of  Muslim  Brotherhood  documents 
referring  to  activities  against  foreign  military  presence  in 
Muslim countries.  By contrast,  jihad (الجهعاد)  is  a  marker  of 
Salafi-jihadi ideology since strict adherents to the Salafi-jihadi 
ideology prefer this word to  resistance, which might suggest 
that  waging  war  against  the  West  is  justified  only to  resist 
Western occupation rather than mandatory at all times for the 
purpose  of  subjecting  the  West  to  Islamic  law.  The  word 
Mecca (مكعة) is a marker of Wahhabi documents because the 
Wahhabi doctrine is the official creed of Saudi Arabia. 
Here,  too,  we find a number  of  function words that  are 
useful.  For  example,  the  word  was (كععان)  is  a  marker  of 
Mainstream  Islam  documents  and  to (الععى)  is  a  marker  of 
Muslim Brotherhood ideology. In fact, even when using only 
function words as features, we obtain accuracy of 73%.
TABLE II. TEN HIGHEST WEIGHTED WORDS PER IDEOLOGY
Ideology
Wahhabi Muslim Brothers Mainstream Salafi - Jihadi
الحق
(Truth)
الى
(To)
سؤال
(Question)
تال
(Following)
قلت
(I Said)
الحركة
(Movement)
الجواب
(Answer)
والجهاد
(and Jihad)
الزمان
(Time)
المقاومة
(Resistance)
وبعد
(After)
الجهاد
(Jihad)
فيما
(While)
حول
(About)
الموضوع
(Subject)
إذ
(Then)
الخرة
(Hereafter)
العام
(General)
السؤال
(Question)
أفغانستان
(Afghanistan)
الشيعة
(Shiite)
Profess)الستاذ
(or)
ل
(God)
أبي
(Father of)
العقيدة
(Docrine)
العمل
(Work)
كان
(Was)
العمليات
(Operations)
رجل
(Man)
العربية
(Arabic)
انتهى
(Concluded)
العدو
(Enemy)
مكة
(Mecca)
النسان
(Human 
Being)
أعلم
(I know)
القتال
(Fighting)
السماء
(The sky)
الدعوة
(Mission)
امرأة
(Woman)
التوحيد
(Unification)
C. Conclusions and Future Work 
We have found that,  using stylistic  and content  features, 
documents can be automatically identified as belonging to an 
array of Islamic organizations and ideologies with near-perfect 
accuracy.  The  robustness  of  the  results  suggests  that  this 
methodology can be  reliably employed  for  law enforcement 
purposes.
REFERENCES
[1] Abbasi,  A.,  and Chen, H.,  Applying authorship analysis  to extremist-
group web forum messages, IEEE Intelligent Systems 20(5), pp. 67-75, 
2005
[2] Duwairi, R.M. , Machine learning for Arabic text categorization, Journal 
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(8), 
pp.1005-1010, 2006.
[3] Elkourdi, M., Bensaid, A. and Rachidi, T. , Automatic Arabic document 
categorization based on the Naïve Bayes Algorithm, Proc. of COLING 
20th Workshop  on Computational  Approaches to Arabic Script-based 
Languages, pp. 51-58,  2004.
[4] Forman, G. , An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics 
for  text  classification.   Journal  of  Machine  Learning  Research  3(1), 
pages 1289-1305, 2003.
[5] Genkin, A., Lewis, D. and Madigan, D. , Large-scale Bayesian logistic 
regression for text categorization, Technometrics 49( 3), pp. 291–304, 
2007.
[6] Koppel,  M.,  Schler,  J.  and Argamon,  S.  ,  Computational  methods  in 
authorship attribution, JASIST 60(1), pp. 9-26, 2009.
[7] Mosteller, F., Wallace, D. L., Inference and Disputed Authorship: The 
Federalist. Reading, Mass. Addison Wesley, 1964.
[8] Sawaf, H., Zaplo, J. and Ney, H., Statistical classification methods for 
Arabic news articles, in Proc. of ACL Workshop on Arabic NLP, 2001. 
[9] Sebastiani, F. , Machine learning in automated text categorization, ACM 
Computing Surveys 34(1), pp. 1-47., 2002  
[10] Syiam, M., Fayed, Z. and Habib, M., An intelligent system for Arabic 
text categorization,  International  Journal of Intelligent  Computing and 
Information Sciences 6(1), pp. 1-19 , 2006. 

