Jointly published by Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest Scientometrics, Vol. 75, No. 2 (2008) 203–238 
and Springer, Dordrecht  DOI: 10.1007/s11192-007-1768-y
Received December 22, 2006 
Address for correspondence:
SHLOMO ARGAMON
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago, IL 60616, USA 
E-mail: argamon@iit.edu 
0138–9130/US $ 20.00 
Copyright © 2008 Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest 
All rights reserved 
Language use reflects scientific methodology: 
A corpus-based study of peer-reviewed journal articles 
SHLOMO ARGAMON,a JEFF DODICK,b PAUL CHASEa
a Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago (USA) 
b Department of Science Teaching, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram Campus 
Jerusalem (Israel) 
Recently, philosophers of science have argued that the epistemological requirements of 
different scientific fields lead necessarily to differences in scientific method. In this paper, we 
examine possible variation in how language is used in peer-reviewed journal articles from various 
fields to see if features of such variation may help to elucidate and support claims of 
methodological variation among the sciences. We hypothesize that significant methodological 
differences will be reflected in related differences in scientists’ language style.  
This paper reports a corpus-based study of peer-reviewed articles from twelve separate 
journals in six fields of experimental and historical sciences. Machine learning methods were 
applied to compare the discourse styles of articles in different fields, based on easily-extracted 
linguistic features of the text. Features included function word frequencies, as used often in 
computational stylistics, as well as lexical features based on systemic functional linguistics, which 
affords rich resources for comparative textual analysis. We found that indeed the style of writing in 
the historical sciences is readily distinguishable from that of the experimental sciences. 
Furthermore, the most significant linguistic features of these distinctive styles are directly related 
to the methodological differences posited by philosophers of science between historical and 
experimental sciences, lending empirical weight to their contentions. 
1. Introduction 
Social interaction and communication among scientists is a key component of 
scientific practice [DUNBAR, 2001; LATOUR &WOOLGAR, 1986]. Bibliometric citation 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
204 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
analysis of the scientific literature has been often used to explain large-scale factors of 
information flow between researchers, research topics, and disciplines [MYERS, 1990; 
WHITE & MCCAIN, 1989, 1998; CRONIN & OVERFELT, 1994; MACROBERTS &
MACROBERTS, 1996]. Studying aspects of how scientists communicate directly with 
one another has also helped elucidate specific features of scientific problem solving, as 
“in-laboratory” studies of working scientists have shown [DUNBAR, 2001; DUNBAR &
BLANCHETTE, 2001]. Through such analyses, scientists may be seen to use language to 
create a collaborative intellectual space [CRONIN, 2005], whose shared linguistic 
worldview makes possible communication about complex observations and hypotheses 
[GOODWIN, 1994], via various ‘explanatory activities’ [OKADA & SIMON, 1997]. 
Indeed, analyses of academic writing [SWALES, 1990; MYERS, 1990; BAZERMAN,
2004; BAZERMAN & PRIOR, 2005], have shown how consideration of large-scale 
patterns in textual organization (across many and varied scientific texts) can yield useful 
generalizations about the structure and function of scientific argumentation. A crucial 
finding has been the elucidation of the socially situated nature of scientific genres, in 
that their evolving structures reflect complex negotiations of claims and alliances 
among scientists [HYLAND, 2000]. Scientific fields may thus be profitably viewed as a 
sort of ‘discourse community’ each with its own way of using language to represent, 
evaluate, and decide competing knowledge claims (see, e.g., [SWALES, 1990; 
KILLINGSWORTH & GILBERTSON, 1992; HARRIS, 1989]).
Concurrent with these recent developments in our understanding of scientific 
communication and analysis of its genres, philosophers of science have been 
increasingly recognizing that the classical model of a single “Scientific Method” (based 
on experiment-based fields such as physics) improperly devalues sciences such as 
geology and paleontology, due to their use of non-experimental historical methods, 
despite the fact that their epistemological claims are also quite strong. Rather, some 
philosophers now argue that differences in method may stem directly from the types of 
phenomena under study [CLELAND, 2002]. In brief overview: Experimental sciences
(such as physics) attempt to formulate general predictive laws, and so rely heavily on 
repeatable series of controlled experiments which test hypotheses. Historical sciences,
on the other hand, deal with contingent phenomena, studying specific phenomena in the 
past in an attempt to find unifying explanations for effects caused by those phenomena 
[MAYR, 1976]. Because of this, reasoning in historical sciences consists largely of 
reconstructive reasoning (retrodiction), as compared to the predictive reasoning from 
causes to possible effects characteristic of experimental science [DIAMOND, 2002; 
GOULD, 1986; WHEWELL, 1837]. 
In this paper, we adduce the first quantitative empirical evidence for such 
methodological differences among different fields, by analyzing how scientists in 
different fields use language differently to construct scientific arguments in peer-
reviewed journal articles. Our main method is to define a topic-independent set of 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 205
language features which are used as input to a text classification learner which enables 
us to evaluate to what extent articles from one journal (in a given field) are similar to 
those in another journal (from the same or another field). We applied such 
discriminative analysis to articles in a number of journals in different experimental and 
historical sciences, seeking consistent constellations of linguistic/stylistic features that 
distinguish between these two types of science.  
More specifically, we analyze linguistic variation between peer-reviewed articles in 
journals representing three historical sciences (geology, paleontology, and evolutionary 
biology) and three experimental sciences (physics, organic chemistry, and physical 
chemistry).1 Our hypothesis is that linguistic/rhetorical differences between articles in 
different fields will be found which are connected to differences between the 
experimental and historical methodologies. Experimental results using standard 
methods of computational stylistics support this hypothesis. Furthermore, we find that 
classification using a set of linguistically-motivated features, based on systemic 
functional principles, enables a more nuanced examination of rhetorical differences 
between texts in different kinds of science, allowing us to connect these differences in 
language use with methodological differences previously posited by philosophers of 
science. To be clear, these results imply no cognitive claims about how scientists in 
different fields may reason differently, rather they indicate certain differences in how 
historical and experimental scientists collectively represent and negotiate their claims.  
2. Language in science 
We contend that gaining any kind of clear understanding of possible methodological 
differences among different scientific fields will require empirical investigation of how 
scientists actually do science in practice. A central component of any such investigation 
is to study how scientists communicate [MULKAY & GILBERT, 1983]. All aspects of 
how scientists reason, make discoveries, and persuade their colleagues of their 
conclusions are reflected to some extent in how they communicate with one another. 
Studying scientific communication in its natural context also avoids the bias inherent in 
introspective studies such as interviews or self-reports [DUNBAR, 2001]. 
The study of communication as a way to investigate scientific cognition has begun 
during the past decade, focusing on the experimental sciences. Dunbar and colleagues 
have studied research activities in molecular biology and immunology laboratories from 
a cognitive perspective [DUNBAR, 1995, 1999, 2001; DUNBAR & BLANCHETTE, 2001], 
which show subtle use of research heuristics and different kinds of analogy in 
laboratory discussions. An anthropological-sociological perspective was taken by 
                                                          
1 Fields were designated a priori as ‘experimental’ or ‘historical’ as classified by modern philosophers and 
historians of science [CLELAND, 2002; DIAMOND, 2002]. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
206 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
LATOUR & WOOLGAR [1986] in their important study “Laboratory Life”, which 
investigated scientists’ production of “facts...on an assembly line” by analyzing the 
written products of research activities as “inscriptions” from an anthropological 
perspective. Related approaches, focusing on communication, rhetoric, and cognition, 
have been used to study how scientists teach, construct theories, negotiate claims, and 
interpret observations in physics [OCHS & AL., 1994; OCHS & JACOBY, 1997], 
archaeology [GOODWIN, 1994], oceanography [GOODWIN, 1995], medicine [FUJIMURA,
1987], organic chemistry [BOND-ROBINSON & STUCKY, 2005], biology [MYERS, 1990], 
and biomedical engineering [NERSESSIAN, 2005]. 
The structure of scientific language has evolved to suit particular demands of 
scientific communication and practice, as shown, for example, in several studies by 
HALLIDAY & MARTIN [1993]. One study examines a key feature of modern scientific 
writing, the use of complicated nominal groups to express events and processes, which 
often makes scientific writing difficult or impenetrable for the non-initiate. Halliday 
traces the evolution of this style in English from Newton’s Treatise on Opticks (1704) 
which is one of the earliest texts to use complex nominalizations to compress complex 
processes (e.g., “a diverging...of the heterogeneous Rays from one another”). Such 
nominalizations enable complex configurations of processes to be neatly packaged and 
subsequently referred to by name or pronominal reference; furthermore, reifying 
processes in this way (effectively turning them into ‘things’) enables causal, logical, and 
rhetorical relations to be made more explicit in the text through the use of verbs 
expressing causality and epistemic events (e.g., causes, results [in], argues, proves, 
contradicts, and so forth). This development in scientific language (as well as others 
documented by Halliday and Martin) is thus a direct outgrowth from the need of 
scientists to communicate precisely about complex causal and logical structures. We 
thus conjecture that scientific fields that study phenomena with largely differing causal 
structures or evidential requirements will consequently differ in their preferred use of 
linguistic resources.  
Table 1. Types of communication between scientists and their audiences.  
This paper focuses on studying peer-reviewed, published articles 
Communication mode Communication with: 
 Collaborators Colleagues Students 
Speech Lab Meetings, Conference Talks Lectures 
 Field Research   
Writing Informal Research notes Correspondence Lecture notes 
Formal Lab reports Published articles Textbooks 
The growing body of ethnographic, cognitive, and linguistic analyses of scientific 
communication, however, includes virtually no comparative work on how scientific 
communication may vary among different disciplines. Indeed, with the few exceptions 
of Goodwin’s ethnographic study of oceanographers [GOODWIN, 1995] and 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 207
archaeologists [GOODWIN, 1994], ABRAMS & WANDERSEE’S [1995] study of life 
scientists (which had a small subset of historically based scientists), and KELLY &
BAZERMAN’S [2003] study of student writing in oceanography, we are unaware of any 
work specifically on how historical scientists conduct their research or communicate 
their findings. Moreover, there has been no research to date, as far as we know, on 
possible differences in communication modes in historical and experimental sciences. 
Our goal, therefore, is to show how the empirical study of such differences, via corpus-
based text analysis, can help illuminate aspects of the characteristic communication and 
reasoning modes of both the historical sciences and the experimental sciences, with 
reference to their different epistemological needs.  
2.1 Types of communication 
There are several different types of communication between scientists (in any field), 
which can be roughly classified by the mode of communication (speech or 
formal/informal writing) and by the target of the communication (research 
collaborators, other colleagues, and students), as laid out in Table 1. The study of 
speaking patterns in scientists will require videotaping and transcription, as a prelude to 
linguistic discourse analysis. This is expensive and time-consuming, though, and 
generally precludes working with very large data sets. Written material, when available 
in electronic form, is often easier to work with, however, since automated tools can 
more easily be brought to bear. This is particularly true for formal written texts, such as 
journal articles or textbooks.  
The question is then how analyzing the style of formal, edited texts can enable a 
better understanding of scientific methodology. The main idea is that many aspects of 
language style directly reflect how the author organizes ideas, argues for or against a 
position, or explains new concepts. Specifically, in scientific communication, we 
contend that different scientific methodologies should imply concomitant differences in 
how scientists organize their arguments, and that these differences in turn will be 
reflected in their use of language. Thus, by a detailed investigation of scientific 
speaking and writing we may obtain empirical evidence for and against different 
proposals for describing scientific methodology in different fields.  
3. Analyzing textual style 
This section describes our linguistic framework for analyzing variation in language 
style based on corpus analysis. Our principal theoretical tool is a collection of 
linguistically-motivated taxonomies of topic-independent keywords and phrases, which 
enables us to use machine learning methods to find meaningful features of stylistic 
variation between texts. The taxonomies we use are derived from Systemic Functional 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
208 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Linguistics (SFL), relevant notions of which are described immediately below. We then 
illustrate these concepts via hand-analysis of two representative scientific texts, the 
introductory sections of two journal articles in our corpus. 
3.1 Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) 
The linguistic framework we assume is that of systemic functional linguistics 
[HALLIDAY, 1994]. Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) construes language as a set of 
interlocking choices for expressing meanings: “either this, that, or the other”, with more 
general choices constraining the possible specific choices. As a simple intuitive 
example (cf. Figure 1): “A clause is either a command (imperative) or about some fact 
(indicative); if indicative, it may be declarative or interrogative; if interrogative, it may 
be a Wh-question (when, where, how, etc.) or a yes/no question,” and so on. A system,
then, is a set of options for meanings to be expressed, with entry conditions specifying 
when that choice is possible – for example, if a message is not about doing, then there is 
no possible choice between expressing standalone action or action on something. Each 
option has also a realization specification, which gives constraints (lexical, featural, or 
structural) on statements that express the given option. Options often serve as entry 
conditions for more detailed systems, which we will call subsystems in this paper. 
Figure 1. Example tree diagram showing a system and options for several message types 
By structuring language as a complex of choices between mutually exclusive 
options, the systemic approach is particularly appropriate for examining variation in 
language use. A systemic specification allows us to ask the question: In places where a 
meaning of general type A is to be expressed in a text (e.g, “a message about action”), 
what sorts of more specific meanings (e.g., “standalone action” or “action on a thing”) 
are most likely to be expressed by different types of people or in different contexts? 
While much of the meaning potential of language is determined by the sort of ideas 
being expressed, the specific form of an utterance is underdetermined by its purely 
representational meaning. Other layers of meaning in terms of interpersonal relations, 
attitude towards propositions, and intratextual logical or rhetorical connections 
(cohesion) are also present, as well as subtle choices of focus.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 209
As an example of a cohesive system in English, when expanding the meaning of one 
clause by another clause (also see Section 1 and Figure 4), one may choose between 
three possibilities: elaboration (deepening by restatement, comment, or exemplification: 
“He left, which was good”, commenting on the event), extension (adding new 
information: “He left, and I felt better”, adding on a related event), and enhancement 
(qualification by reference to circumstance, cause, manner, or result: “He left, so I 
rejoiced”, creating a short causal chain). Note that all three examples have similar 
representational meanings, though more subtle distinctions are drawn. A general 
preference for one or another option is thus largely a question of style or of attitude, in 
which individual and social/contextual factors come to bear. Such preferences can be 
measured by evaluating the relative probabilities of different options by tagging their 
realizations in a corpus of texts. By comparing how probabilities vary between 
individuals or situations with different characteristics, we may determine how those 
characteristics affect linguistic behavior.  
Previous work has investigated the relationship between choice probabilities and 
contextual factors. For example, PLUM & COWLING [1987] demonstrate a relation 
between speaker social class and choice of verb tense (past/present) in face-to-face 
interviews. Similarly, HASAN [1988] has shown, in mother-child interactions, that the 
sex of the child and the family’s social class together have a strong influence on several 
kinds of semantic choice in speech. These previous studies involved hand-coding a 
corpus for systemic-functional and contextual variables and then comparing how 
systemic choice probabilities vary with contextual factors via multivariate analysis. Our 
work primarily applies automated computational methods to analysis of choice 
probabilities (in addition to the manual analyses in Section 2 below), giving us a 
potentially broader (though somewhat shallower) view, by enabling effective analysis 
of larger numbers of documents than can be analyzed by hand. This enables more 
general conclusions than analysis of only a few hand-analyzed examples.  
3.2 Cohesion and modal assessment 
The stylistic features considered in the current study are drawn from 
MATTHIESSEN’S [1992] SFL grammar of English. We focus on two large-scale aspects 
of a text related to its rhetorical organization that enable it to realize complex 
conceptual structures:2
Cohesion refers to linguistic resources that enable language to connect to its larger 
context, both textual and extratextual [HALLIDAY & HASAN, 1976]. Such resources 
include a wide variety of referential modalities (pronominal reference, deictic 
expressions, ellipsis, and more), as well as lexical repetition and variation, and different 
                                                          
2 More detail on these systems and features as used in our work are given in Section 5.3. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
210 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
ways of linking clauses together [MANN & THOMPSON, 1988]. How an author uses 
these various cohesive resources is an indication of how the author organizes concepts 
and relates them to each other. Within cohesion, our computational work considers just 
conjunctions, for feasibility of automated extraction; in the illustrative hand analyses 
below we also consider the thematic organization of the text.  
Clausal conjunctions are organized via the system of EXPANSION, which describes 
features that serve to link clauses together causally or logically. The first of the three 
main types of EXPANSION is EXTENSION, which links clauses giving different 
information together, realized by words such as “and”, “but”, and “furthermore”. The 
second type is ENHANCEMENT, which qualifies information in one clause by another 
(e.g., “similarly...” or “therefore...”). The third is ELABORATION, which deepens a 
clause by clarification or exemplification (e.g., “in other words...” or “more precisely”).  
Another important system that contributes to cohesion is THEME, in which each clause 
in a text indicates what it is ‘about’; note the difference between “John ate an apple” 
(about John) and “An apple was eaten by John” (about an apple). The organization and 
flow of different themes in a text contributes to its overall cohesion and rhetorical 
structure. (Note that our computational study does not use THEME, since it cannot be 
reliably extracted automatically. We do consider it in the hand-analyzed examples 
below, however, to enhance the clarity of the exposition.)  
Assessment we define as qualification of events or assertions in the text according to 
their rhetorical or epistemic properties. One key system for assessment is MODALITY in 
which the likelihood, typicality, or necessity of an event are indicated, usually by a 
modal auxiliary verb or an adjunct adverbial group. There are two main types of 
modality: MODALIZATION, which quantifies levels of likelihood or frequency (e.g., 
“probably”, “might”, “usually”, “seldom”), and MODULATION, which quantifies ability 
or necessity of performance (e.g., “ought to...”, “should...”, “allows...”).  
A second important system for assessment is COMMENT, which is one of modal 
assessment, comprising a variety of types of “comment” on a clause’s function as a 
‘message’, assessing the writer’s attitude towards it, or its validity or evidentiality. 
Comments are generally realized as adjuncts in a clause (and may appear initially, 
medially, or finally).  
3.3 Example passages 
To better clarify the roles of the above systems in structuring scientific rhetoric, we 
consider now hand analyses of the introductory paragraphs of two articles (Figures 2 
and 3), one from Physics Letters A and the other from the Journal of Metamorphic 
Geology. Note that these passages are given for illustrative purposes only – we do not 
claim that any broad conclusions about scientific rhetoric and reasoning can be drawn 
from just two specific examples. However, these analyses do illustrate some of the 
features that the automated corpus analysis below examines on a larger scale.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 211
Figure 2. Example Passage A: Introductory paragraphs of Z.-L. CAO, M. YANG, G.-C. GUO, The scheme for 
realizing probabilistic teleportation of atomic states and purifying the quantum channel on cavity QED, 
Physics Letters A (2003) 349–354, marked up as indicated in the text with paragraph breaks indicated by ¶ 
For the analysis here, the texts were divided into their consituent clauses (embedded 
clauses are not segmented), and the above-described textual elements highlighted: 
themes3 are underlined, conjunctions (realizing EXPANSION) are in boldface,
realizations of MODALITY are in SMALL CAPS, and COMMENTs are in italics.
                                                          
3For simplicitly, we only consider topical themes, those that relate to the event or fact being described 
[HALLIDAY, 1994, CH. 6], in our illustrations here. The corpus-based study described below does not consider 
theme at all, for computational reasons.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
212 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Figure 3. Example Passage B: Introductory paragraphs from R. W. WHITE & R. POWELL, Melt loss and the 
preservation of granulite facies mineral assemblages, Journal of Metamorphic Geology, 2002, :621–632, 
marked up as in Figure 2 
Analysis of passage A 
Cohesion: To analyze how the above passage is structured as a cohesive whole, we 
first examine the development of ideas as realized in the themes of successive clauses, 
related by particular kinds of conjunction. These include phenomena: “quantum 
entanglement” (clauses 1, 3), “its unique properties” (2), and “quantum teleportation” 
(5, 11, 12); scientific positions: theoretical schemes denoted by their proponents’ names 
(6, 9, 10, 14, 15), experimental studies (8), general practical experience (7), and “this 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 213
Letter” (16); and periods of time: “recent years” (4) and “1997” (13). The passage 
opens, in its topic sentence, with “quantum entanglement”, explicitly mentioning its 
importance (3), enhanced by connection to its “unique properties” (2), and the fact that 
“recent years” have seen more attention to it. The second paragraph focuses in on one of 
the applications mentioned in (3), “quantum teleportation”, and various schemes to 
implement it. Clauses 6 and 7 form an opposition between a “theoretical scheme” and 
“practice”, followed by more theoretical schemes introduced by clause 8’s “studies” and 
elaborated on by mention of two eponymous “schemes” in clauses 9 and 10. This gives 
a ‘bracketed’ structure: Theory-Practice-Theory( 3). This opposition between theory 
and practice is then seen at a higher level when moving now to the third paragraph, 
which begins with the adversative expansion of but, contrasting what is to come with 
the previous paragraph. The initial theme of the last paragraph, as of the previous one, is 
“teleportation”, but the next move is to “potential”, then temporally located recently in 
1997 (13), recalling the “recent years” of the opening paragraph. The structure 
continues to mirror that of the second paragraph, where clauses 14 and 15 catalog other 
practical schemes for realizing teleportation, which then are contrasted with the scheme 
“[i]n this Letter” (16), giving a structure of Promising Potential-Realization( 3)–
This Letter. If seen as a rough parallel of the bracketing in the preceding paragraph, the 
scheme to be presented in “this letter” may be seen as a realization of the “promising 
potential” of clause 12.  
Note in particular how conjunctions make explicit certain rhetorical relations 
between clauses or paragraphs in the passage. Most of the conjunctions mark one clause 
as subservient to another (elaborating on it, or enhancing our understanding of the 
context): Because (2 to 3), Although (6 to 7), Hitherto (9 to 10), and So (13 to 12). 
The sole exception is But in clause 11, which marks the entire third paragraph as 
contrasting with the second. Overall, the conjunctions make explicit the tightly-coupled 
storyline of each paragraph and the passage as a whole, moving from “stating the 
importance of quantum entanglement” to “establishing the practical difficulties in 
purely theoretical schemes for quantum teleportation” to “more recent practical 
schemes, including the more efficient one given in this Letter”.  
Assessment: There are only a few realizations of modal assessment in the passage, 
which presents its ‘story’ as certain and uncontroversial. The three modal finite 
auxiliary verbs that do appear are all realizations of Modulation, i.e., they assess ability 
or necessity of actions or events, as opposed to the frequency or usuality of occurrence 
of events in reality (termed Modalization). In clause 6 ‘can’ allows fidelity to 
theoretically reach unity, which ability is then contrasted with the difficulty of preparing 
such a state in practice (7). Clause 11 asserts the utter inability of achieving 
teleportation in practice if only theoretical proposals are considered, and clause 12 
consequently asserts the necessity for researchers to work on realizing experimental 
schemes.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
214 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Analysis of passage B 
Cohesion: By contrast to the previous passage, whose development created a 
storyline of different theories and studies, the current passage first (clauses 1–13) builds 
a picture whose thematic elements are largely physical entities and phenomena. Each of 
the three thematic entities “granulite facies”, “melt”, and “anhydrous assemblages” is 
associated with a process, “dehydration melting”, “melt loss”, and “hydrous 
retrogression”, respectively. Clauses 1–3 move from the main entity of “granulite 
facies” to the process of dehydration melting; clauses 4–7 introduce the “melt” as a 
product of melting and move to “melt loss”, noting in clause 8 that melt loss has been 
estimated, implying that this estimation is important. This point is then justified by 
moving from the condition “no melt” to the process of retrogression of anhydrous 
assemblages, focusing attention on the case where such retrogression is limited and 
assemblages are preserved (clauses 12, 13). The remainder of the first paragraph 
establishes a gap in the current research (see LEWIN & AL. [1986] for a discussion of 
gap-establishing strategies), establishing first the problem of “understanding the 
preservation...” then asserting that only the “origin and behavior” of such rocks have 
been examined by “field and geochemical studies” and “most experimental studies”. 
The gap thus created is then filled (via foreshadowing) in the second paragraph by “this 
paper” (clause 18) which will show “effects of melt loss on...granulite facies mineral 
assemblages”.  
Thematic analysis thus shows an overall organization of the passage around three 
main foci (facies, melt, and assemblages), along with the final shift from describing 
phenomena to discussing studies (including the current paper). Examination of 
conjunctions in the passage bears out this impression as well-six out of nine are 
EXTENSION, which links two independent information units together (rather than merely 
elaborating or enhancing a single information unit). For example, in clause 4 
“partitioning of H2O” is contrasted to the “progressive dehydration” mentioned in 
clause 3. Similarly, the and in clause 13 creates an aggregate idea comprising the facts 
that “the effects of ... retrogression are ... limited” and that “the ... assemblages are 
preserved.” Note the linking of two independent ideas, as opposed to the elaboration in 
clause 14, where the notion that “understanding the preservation...is important” is 
presented as a clear conclusion of the paragraph up to that point, and not as an 
independent idea being introduced. So we see that in terms of both THEME and 
EXPANSION, the passage exhibits a multifocal structure, placing the main topic of the 
paper (melt loss) at the center of a complex of entities and phenomena: granulate facies, 
dehydration processes, anhydrous assemblages, and hydrous retrogression, whose 
causal relationships are quite complicated.  
Assessment: Modal assessments in clauses 10, 11, and 12 show how explicit 
expression of modal strength implies the possibility of exceptions. First, we see in 
clauses 10 and 11 a pair of similar assessments of MODALIZATION/USUALITY: clause 10 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 215
expresses (inter alia) that hydrous assemblages are a usual feature of the upper 
amphibolite facies and clause 11 that hydrous retrogression is frequent in granulite 
facies. Clause 12 contrasts this frequency with the limited effect of such retrogression, 
but then qualifies this limitation as applying “generally”. In all three of these cases, 
omission of the assessing words would have strengthened the statements; their inclusion 
thus nuances the text’s claims (and makes it more resistant to possible counter-
examples). One example of MODULATION is present in the text, in clause 16, referring 
to the inherent limitations of observational methodology.  
Summary of passage analyses 
In sum, we first note the strong interaction between thematic structure and the types 
of conjunctions used, in creating cohesion. In (experimental) Passage A, we saw that the 
strong use of elaborative and enhancing conjunctions, together with tightly-coupled 
themes in neighboring clauses, produces a highly focused effect. In (historical) 
Passage B, on the other hand, the use of extensive conjunction works with a more 
dynamic thematic development to create a multi-focal effect, keeping distinct entities 
and processes in simultaneous view.  
Second, we also see how differences in kinds of modal assessment produce a 
different picture of how and why assertions in the text are so qualified. Passage A has 
very little modal qualification, and what is there relates to the mere possibility of certain 
events; this gives it a highly authoritative and definitive tone. Passage B, by contrast, 
qualifies statements by their usuality, making it clear that while general conclusions can 
be drawn, certainty cannot be claimed regarding any particular instance of the 
phenomenon under study.  
4. Scientific methods and linguistic variation 
The dominant view in the philosophy of science, during the 19th and early 20th 
centuries, was that a single “experimental” scientific method was the key to all true 
science [RUDOLPH & STEWART, 1998]. Based on the success of Newtonian physics, 
philosophers took physics as the model of how proper science should be done. Indeed 
the views of 19th century philosophers on science reflected a strong bias towards direct 
observations made during controlled experimental manipulation of nature [MAYR,
1985; KITCHER, 1993; RUDOLPH & STEWART, 1998]. It was believed at the time that by 
using experimental methods, that is, by manipulating independent variables and 
measuring changes in dependent variables, scientific conclusions could be established 
with certainty.  
Indeed, GOULD [1986] has noted that many in the British scientific community of 
the time who accepted Darwin’s conclusions concerning Evolution by Natural Selection 
still had deep misgivings about the historical-comparative method he used to arrive at 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
216 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
his conclusions. As RUDOLPH & STEWART [1998] note, such misgivings partially derive 
from the broader philosophical backdrop of the time. Earlier in the century, 
philosophers including John Herschel in his Preliminary Discourses on the Study of 
Natural Philosophy (1830) and John Stuart Mill’s System of Logic (1843) had 
established supposedly firm foundations for ‘scientific methodology’ [HULL, 1973]. In 
their view, true science was firmly associated with the empirical, inductive methods of 
Newton and other physicists.  
This restricted view of the scientific method, however, ignored the epistemic basis 
of evolutionary biology up to the time of Darwin. Naturalists of the time had described 
and classified a great many phenomena of the past and present which could explain 
general patterns of development. In contrast to the complex diversity of life that 
naturalists tried to explain, the methods of Newton attempted to reduce the world to its 
simplest forces. The success that Newton had with such reductionist methods provided 
the model for science that many in the philosophical community of the 19th century 
used as their standard for how to produce (supposedly) certain knowledge. Perhaps due 
to this bias, it was not until Darwin’s development of a historical scientific 
methodology that a physical theory of biological evolution could be provided that was 
generally accepted by the scientific public.  
The bias of philosophers towards Newtonian physics as the model of science 
continued well into the 20th century, and was reinforced by the development of the 
school of thought known as ‘logical empiricism’. In its view, the goal of inquiry in 
science is the establishment of laws or universal mathematical statements [SOBER,
1993]. Such sciences then produce theories that lend themselves well to experimental 
confirmation [RUDOLPH & STEWART, 1998]. While such a methodology can be, and is, 
generally applied in the physical sciences, attempts at reconfiguring historical sciences 
such as evolutionary biology and geology towards this methodology have largely failed. 
As an illustration, consider Charles Lyell’s attempt to base geology on a Newtonian 
model by requiring geologists to assume a priori that actual causes observed in the 
present were wholly adequate to explain the geological past, not only in kind but also in 
degree [RUDWICK, 1998]. This framework greatly influenced many geologists’ practice 
in the modern age. However, recent work on large scale problems such as glacial 
flooding and dinosaur extinction has shown that this framework is inappropriate for 
investigating many such geological problems [DODICK & ORION, 2003]. 
More generally, as noted by FRODEMAN [1995], some philosophers of science have 
specifically labeled geology as a “derivative science”, viewing its reasoning and 
methodology as reduceable to elements supplied by physics and chemistry. Moreover, 
in contrast to experimental sciences in which all variables could be controlled, geology 
has been said to have a number of fundamental problems (including the great expanse 
of geological time, and gaps in the stratigraphic record) that undercut its claim to 
knowledge.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 217
Recently, however, a growing group of philosophers, scientists, and educators have 
become skeptical about the existence or even possibility of a single method for all of 
science [CLELAND, 2001, 2002; COOPER, 2002, 2004; DIAMOND, 2002; GOULD, 1986; 
MAYR, 1985; RUDOLPH & STEWART, 1998]. This work recognizes that experimental 
and observational methods and various kinds of evidential reasoning can play different 
roles in different sciences. Nonetheless as CLELAND [2001, 2002] notes, most 
philosophers have been reluctant to make large scale comparisons concerning 
methodology across different disciplines. The ultimate result is that many outside the 
philosophy of science are often left with the impression that historical science is lacking 
when compared to experimental science.  
While approaches differ among different researchers, a broad outline of the 
differences that have been proposed between the experimental and historical sciences 
may be given. Based on DIAMOND [2002], we consider here four (interrelated) 
fundamental dimensions categorizing this difference, summarized in Table 2.  
Experimental science, as is well known, gathers knowledge by controlled 
experimentation, in which natural phenomena are manipulated in order to test a theory. 
The quality of such a theory is measured by the consistency of its predictions with such 
experiments, and ideally, such a theory expresses a general causal law or universal 
statement that is applicable to a wide variety of phenomena in many contexts. Finally, 
the form of such research is dictated in large part by the study of uniform entities, either 
singly or in assemblage; the fact that such entities (atoms, molecules, genes) are 
identical, or nearly so, makes the formulation of general laws possible in principle, and 
experimental reproducibility a reasonable requirement in practice.  
Historical science, on the other hand, investigates ultimate causes which often lie 
very deep in the past, and whose effects are observed only after very long and complex 
causal chains of intervening events. Consequently, evidence is gathered by observation 
of naturally occurring traces of phenomena, since manipulation is impossible (e.g., we 
cannot wait millions of years for the results of a hypothetical geological experiment!). 
Comparison of similar observed phenomena has thus developed as a key analytical 
technique for the historical sciences, typified by a kind of ‘natural experiment’ 
[DIAMOND, 2002] in which systems differing in a key variable are compared in order to 
estimate the effect of that variable on other system characteristics.  
Table 2. Summary of dimensions of difference between experimental and 
historical scientific methodologies (after DIAMOND [2002])
 Experimental  Historical  
Research goal  General laws of behavior  Explanations for ultimate and 
contingent causes 
Evidence gathered by  Controlled manipulation of nature  Observing pre-existing entities and 
phenomena 
Hypotheses are tested for  Predictive accuracy  Explanatory adequacy 
Objects of study  Uniform and interchangeable entities Complex and unique entities  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
218 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
This focus on investigating past causation further implies that the ultimate test of 
quality in historical science is explanatory adequacy, because the phenomena under 
investigation are unique and contingent, and so cannot be expected to repeat in the 
historical record. The methodology of such explanatory reasoning derives from what 
CLELAND [2002] calls the ‘assymmetry of causation’, in that effects of a unique event in 
the past tend to diffuse over time, with many effects being lost and others muddled by 
other intervening factors. Making sense of this complexity requires, therefore, 
‘synthetic thinking’ a lá BAKER [1996], in which one fits together complex 
combinations of many pieces of evidence to form arguments for and against competing 
hypotheses. In addition to sorting through this great causal complexity, historical 
scientists must also deal with the complexity of the individuals under study. Unlike 
(atomic) particles (for example), which are all uniform, entities that are studied by 
historical scientists – people, species, strata – are all unique (though often similar) 
individuals, whose precise details of configuration and function are not always 
recoverable, in practice or even in theory. This removes the possibility of formulating 
universal laws of behavior, allowing only statistical statements of relative likelihoods at 
best – it is very difficult to rule a specific possibility out entirely, but rather arguments 
for and against hypotheses must be made on the preponderance of the best evidence. 
Thus reasoning about the relative likelihood of different assertions is endemic to 
historical science’s synthetic thinking.  
4.1 Hypotheses 
What sorts of linguistic variation between experimental and historical science 
writing would be expected, based on the methodological differences posited above 
(Section 4)? We clearly must only consider topic-independent (or ‘stylistic’) features, 
since each field will be trivially distinguished by its own jargon (such as ‘fossil’ in 
paleontology, or ‘quantum entanglement’ in physics). Thus our main hypothesis is that 
the two kinds of science will be stylistically distinctive:  
H1: Stylistic features of the texts will distinguish more strongly between articles 
from different kinds (historical or experimental) of science than between articles from 
different journals4 in the same kind of science.
We also formulate more detailed hypotheses regarding the kinds of rhetorical 
features we expect to be most significant in distinguishing articles in the different fields, 
based on the above-discussed methodological differences between historical and 
experimental sciences, as follows.  
Recall that the goal of historical reasoning is to find ultimate causes, rather than the 
general laws sought by experimental science. This leads to the related issue of how 
                                                          
4 We compare different journals to partially control for possible influence of editorial rules on article style. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 219
research quality is measured, whether by adequacy of reconstructive explanation 
(historical science) or of prediction (experimental science). Thus, a key element of 
historical reasoning is the need to differentially weigh the evidence. Since any given 
trace of a past event is typically ambiguous as to its possible causes, many pieces of 
evidence must be combined in complex ways in order to form a confirming or 
disconfirming argument for a hypothesis. Such thinking is, as CLELAND [2002] argues, 
a necessary commitment of historical science (as opposed to experimental science), due 
to the fundamental asymmetry of causation. A single cause will often have a great many 
disparate effects, which if taken together would specify the cause with virtual certainty. 
Since all the effects cannot actually be known (as some are lost in the 
historical/geological record), evidence must be carefully weighed to decide between 
competing hypotheses (the methodology sometimes known as “multiple working 
hypotheses”). Experimental sciences tend, on the other hand, to adhere more or less to a 
“predict and test” methodology, in which manipulative experiments are used to confirm, 
refute, or revise specific hypotheses [CLELAND, 2002]. We therefore hypothesize:  
H2a: Writing in historical science has more features expressing the weight, validity, 
likelihood, or typicality of different assertions or pieces of evidence. 
H2b: Writing in experimental science has more features typical of explicit reasoning 
about predictions and expectations, including the necessity or possibility of different 
events under different circumstances.
Next, as also discussed above, historical science primarily studies complex, 
ultimately unique, entities via observation and comparison, while experimental science 
studies uniform and interchangable entities via manipulative experimentation. The 
consequent manipulative nature of information-gathering in the experimental sciences 
will tend towards highly focused and controlled experimentation (indeed, this is 
considered a key quality of good methodology). Historical scientific methodology 
differs here, for two reasons. First, the limitation of evidence to that which is observed 
requires the broader context of any given observation to be explicitly noted and taken 
into account (as that context cannot be controlled or preserved). Second, since the 
objects of study are highly complex and individualized entities, rather than 
comparatively uniform entities or phenomena, true repeatability is not possible, and 
hence detailed comparison among similar and dissimilar observations is required to 
generalize across the data. Argumentation in the historical sciences thus may be 
expected to require a higher density of separate ‘information units’, than the more 
focused argumentation we expect in the experimental sciences. We therefore 
hypothesize:  
H3a: Writing in historical science has more features indicating a greater number 
and variety of information units in the text, reflecting both ‘synthetic thinking’ about multiple 
hypotheses, comparing and contrasting evidence for all of them in parallel, as well as a 
concern with contextualizing information about varied and unique objects of study. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
220 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
H3b: Writing in experimental science has more features indicating more focused 
attention to a single (or small number of) ‘storylines’, reflecting a more focused 
approach of controlled manipulation of nature to test specific hypotheses about non-
unique objects.
It is certainly clear that the mere presence or absence of a few linguistic features that 
can be linked to reasoning of a particular type is not by itself evidence of such 
reasoning. However, a consistent pattern of many of these features (as shown below) 
together aligned with the dichotomies proposed above strongly argues for such 
differences, which future research will attempt to elucidate in greater detail. The next 
section discusses in more detail methods of textual analysis that enable us to access 
relevant features of the text.  
5. Methodology 
5.1 The corpus 
The study reported here analyzes a corpus of recent (2003) articles drawn from 
twelve peer-reviewed journals in both historical and experimental sciences. The 
historical scientific journals in geology, evolutionary biology, and paleontology that we 
used are:  
Journal of Geology includes research on the full range of geological principles 
including geophysics, geochemistry, sedimentology, geomorphology, petrology, plate 
tectonics, volcanology, structural geology, mineralogy, and planetary sciences.  
Journal of Metamorphic Geology focuses on metamorphic studies,5 from the scale 
of individual crystals to that of lithospheric plates.  
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society publishes work on organic evolution in a 
broad sense, particularly research unifying concepts of evolutionary biology with 
evidence from genetics, systematics, biogeography, or ecology.  
Journal of Human Evolution covers all aspects of human evolution, including both 
work on human/primate fossils and comparative studies of living species.  
Palaeontologia Electronica publishes papers in all branches of paleontology as well 
as related biological or paleontologically-related disciplines.  
Quaternary Research published research in diverse areas in the earth and biological 
sciences which examine the Quaternary period of the Earth’s history (from roughly 1.6 
million years ago to the present).  
The experimental scientific fields considered are physics, physical chemistry, and 
organic chemistry; the journals used in our corpus are:  
                                                          
5 Metamorphism refers to changes in mineral assemblage and texture in rocks that have been subjected to 
temperatures and pressures different from those under which they originally formed. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 221
Physics Letters A publishes research in a wide range of areas, including : condensed 
matter physics, theoretical physics, nonlinear science, statistical physics, mathematical 
and computational physics, atomic, molecular and cluster physics, plasma and fluid 
physics, optics, biological physics and nanoscience.  
Physical Review Letters also covers a wide range of physics research, including: 
gravitation and astrophysics, elementary particles and fields, nuclear physics, atomic, 
molecular, and optical physics, nonlinear dynamics, fluid dynamics, plasma and beam 
physics, and condensed matter physics.  
Journal of Physical Chemistry A publishes chemical research at the level of 
molecules (including dynamics, spectroscopy, gaseous clusters, molecular beams, 
kinetics, atmospheric and environmental physical chemistry, molecular structure, 
bonding, quantum chemistry, and general theory).  
Journal of Physical Chemistry B publishes research on materials (including 
nanostructures, micelles, macro-molecules, statistical mechanics and thermodynamics 
of condensed matter, biophysical chemistry, and general physical chemistry), as well as 
studies on the structure and properties of surfaces and interfaces.  
Heterocycles publishes research in the areas of organic, pharmaceutical, analytical, 
and medicinal chemistry of heterocyclic compounds.  
Tetrahedron publishes general experimental and theoretical research results in the 
field of organic chemistry and applications in related disciplines especially bio-organic 
chemistry.  
The numbers of articles used from each journal and their average (preprocessed) 
lengths in words are given in Table 3.  
Table 3. Journals used in the studies with number of articles and average length 
(in words) per article
 Journal # Art. Avg. Len. 
H1 Journal of Geology 93 4891  
H2 Journal of Metamorphic Geology 108 5024  
H3 Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 191 4895  
H4 Human Evolution 169 4223  
H5 Palaeontologia Electronica 111 4132  
H6 Quaternary Research 113 2939  
E1 Physics Letters A 132 2339  
E2 Physical Review Let. 114 2545  
E3 Journal of Physical Chemistry A 121 4865  
E4 Journal of Physical Chemistry B 71 5269  
E5 Heterocycles 231 3580  
E6 Tetrahedron 151 5057  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
222 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
5.2 Computational methods 
Research in computational stylistics seeks effective models of language style by 
applying machine learning algorithms to stylometrically meaningful features. In 
stylometrics, researchers have traditionally sought simple statistically valid models of 
stylistic distinctions, based on a small number (dozens, at most) of easily-computed 
textual statistics, such as word-frequencies [MOSTELLER & WALLACE, 1964], phrase-
type frequencies [BAAYEN & AL., 1996], or sentence-complexity [YULE, 1938]. 
Research on machine-learning techniques for text classification, on the other hand, has 
applied more sophisticated learning algorithms which can use combinations of many 
thousands of features to classify documents according to topic (see SEBASTIANI’S
[2002] excellent survey). Working systems that have been developed use a variety of 
modern machine learning techniques such as Naïve Bayes [LANG, 1995; LEWIS, 1998], 
Winnow [Dagan & al., 1997], and Support Vector Machines [JOACHIMS, 1998]. Recent 
work on applying machine learning and statistical methods to stylometric features for 
style analysis has achieved useful techniques for authorship attribution [ARGAMON &
AL., 1998A; STAMATATOS & AL., 2000; ARGAMON & AL., 2003], genre analysis 
[BIBER, 1995; MATTHEWS & MERRIAM, 1997; ARGAMON & AL., 1998B; DIMITROVA &
AL., 2002], and other applications [HOLMES, 1998; GRAHAM & HIRST, 2003; KOPPEL
& AL., 2003]. 
Linear separator learning algorithms, which do not require feature independence and 
are robust to presence of irrelevant features (such as Winnow and SVMs), tend to work 
quite well for stylistic categorization problems. The main current research issue in the 
field is the question of what kinds of textual features are good style discriminators, 
especially with the use of algorithms that can effectively deal with very large numbers 
of such features. Features for stylistic discrimination must be invariant as to topic but 
vary with the specific stylistic dimension under study. Our results and those of others 
[FINN & AL., 2002; ARGAMON & AL., 2003; ARGAMON & AL., 2003; GRAHAM & HIRST,
2003] have shown that using just relative frequencies of several hundred function words 
often gives excellent results, while adding syntactic or complexity-based features can 
sometimes be advantageous as well.  
More recently, we and others [HERKE-COUCHMAN & AL., 2004; WHITELAW &
ARGAMON, 2004; WHITELAW & AL., 2005; ARGAMON & AL., 2007] have successfully 
applied features based on SFL to stylistic text classification problems. The main idea 
(described in more detail in Section 3 below) is to build a lexicon of words and phrases 
associated with various options in a system network (this is only possible for those 
systems, such as EXPANSION, which are highly lexicalized). Counts of such ‘indicators’ 
are then used to estimate the relative contribution of various options within each 
system; those estimates are used as features for computing a classification model using 
machine learning.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 223
5.3 Stylometric features 
To apply machine learning over the corpus for text classification, each document 
was represented as a point in a high-dimensional space, that is, as a vector of numeric 
feature values. Our classification analysis was done using two feature sets (described in 
detail below): function words, a standard choice for stylistic text classification, and 
systemic contribution in three systems related to cohesion and modal assessment (as 
introduced in Section 3 above).  
5.3.1 Function Words (FW). As a standard stylistic baseline, we used a set of 546 
function words (such as “the”, “as”, “of”, “if”, and “have”) taken en masse from the stop-
word list of the popular research information retrieval system AIRE [GROSSMAN & FRIEDER,
2004]; this procedure ensures task and theory neutrality. The set of function words used are 
similar to those used in many previous studies, such as MOSTELLER & WALLACE’S
[1964] seminal stylometric work studying the authorship of the disputed Federalist 
Paper, for example. Under FW, each article is represented as a vector of 546 numbers 
between 0 and 1, each the relative frequency of one of the function words in the article.  
5.3.2 System Contribution (SC). The systemic features we used are based on options 
within three main systems related to cohesion and assessment (see Sec. 3), following 
MATTHIESSEN’S [1992] grammar of English, a standard SFL reference. Indicator lists 
were constructed by starting with the lists of typical words and phrases given by 
Matthiessen, and expanding them to related words and phrases taken from Roget’s 
Interactive Thesaurus6 (manually filtered for relevance). Keyword lists were constructed 
entirely independently of the target corpus, ensuring that we did not ‘cook the books’.  
As discussed above in Section 3, we used systems and options within: EXPANSION
(Figure 4), linking clauses together (either within or across sentences); COMMENT
(Figure 5), expressing modal assessments of attitude or applicability; and MODALITY
(Figures 6 and 7), giving judgments regarding probability, usuality, inclination, and the 
like. MODALITY and COMMENT relate directly to how propositions are assessed in 
evidential reasoning (e.g., for likelihood, typicality, consistency with predictions, etc.), 
while EXPANSION is a primary system by which texts are constructed out of smaller 
pieces, and so will reflect choices of overall rhetorical structure.7
                                                          
6 http://www.thesaurus.com
7 Other textual/cohesive systems, such as PROJECTION, TAXIS, THEME, and INFORMATION [HALLIDAY, 1994] 
are relevant, but could not be addressed in this work, due to the difficulty of automatically extracting them 
using current methods. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
224 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Figure 4. The Expansion system, options, and examples of indicators (in italics) 
Figure 5. Comment options, and examples of indicators (in italics) 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 225
Figure 6. Modality systems and options; any expression of modality simultaneously realizes options 
from all four systems of Type, Value, Orientation, and Manifestation 
We use the relative frequencies of sets of keywords and phrases which indicate that 
a particular part of the text realizes a certain system in the language. For example, an 
occurrence of the word ‘certainly’ usually indicates that the author is making a high-
probability modal assessment of an assertion. Such a keyword-based approach has 
obvious practical advantages in the current absence of a reliable general systemic 
parser. The primary downside is the fact that a number of these keywords are 
ambiguous, since a keyword’s precise interpretation can depend crucially on its context. 
By using as complete a set of such systemic indicators as possible for each system we 
represent, and then by using only measures of comparative frequency between such 
aggregated features, we hope to reduce the effect of ambiguity. In addition, since we 
use very large sets of indicators for each system, it is unlikely that such ambiguity 
would introduce a systematic bias, and so such noise is more likely to just reduce the 
clarity of any results instead of biasing them. The details of the systems we use in this 
study are as follows (refer to Section 3 for real-world examples).  
EXPANSION. On the discourse level, the system of EXPANSION serves to link a clause 
with its textual context, by denoting how the given clause expands on some aspect of its 
preceding context. Similar systems also operate at the lower levels of noun and verbal 
groups, ‘overloading’ the same lexical resources which, however, generally denote 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
226 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
similar types of logico-semantic relationships, e.g., ‘and’ usually denotes “additive 
extension”. The three options within EXPANSION are Elaboration, Extension, and 
Enhancement. Each of these options has its own options, also used as features. (Note 
that the system network can be deepened further [MATTHIESSEN, 1992, P. 521], but our 
keyword-based method allows only a relatively coarse analysis.) The EXPANSION
system, with examples of systemic indicators we use, is shown in Figure 4.  
Note that the actual features by which we represent an article are the frequencies of 
each option’s indicator features, each measured relative to its siblings. So, for example, 
one feature is Appositive Elaboration, whose value is the total number of occurrences of 
Appositive indicators divided by the total number of occurrences of Elaboration 
indicators (Appositive + Clarifying). The relative frequencies of Elaboration, Extension, 
and Enhancement within EXPANSION are also used as features.  
COMMENT. The system of Comment is one of modal assessment, comprising a 
variety of types of “comment” on a message, assessing the writer’s attitude towards it, 
or its validity or evidentiality. Comments are generally realized as adjuncts in a clause 
(and may appear initially, medially, or finally). MATTHIESSEN [1992] lists eight types of 
Comment, given in Figure 5 along with representative indicators for each option.  
MODALITY. The features for interpersonal modal assessment that we consider here 
are based on Halliday’s analysis of the Modality system, as formulated by 
MATTHIESSEN [1992]. In this scheme, modal assessment is realized by a simultaneous 
choice of options within four systems as shown in Figure 6. The cross-product of all of 
these systems and subsystems creates a large number of potential modality assessment 
features, each of which is realized through a particular set of indicators (see Figure 7). 
Figure 7. Examples of indicator features for various combinations of Modality options. Note that not all 
combinations are realized in the language; note also the ambiguity of some of the indicators 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 227
We consider as simple features each option in each system (e.g., the frequency of 
Modalization/Probability vs. Modalization/Usuality), as well as complex features made 
up of all the pairwise combinations of simple features from different systems (such as 
“Median Probability”). The indicator set for each such feature is the intersection of the 
indicator sets for the two component features. Frequencies were normalized by the total 
set of occurrences of both primary systems (Modalization and Value in the previous 
example). 
5.4 Machine learning for text categorization 
The method was to represent each document as a numerical vector, each of whose 
elements is the relative frequency (as above) of a particular lexical feature of the text. 
We then applied the SMO learning algorithm [PLATT, 1998] as implemented in Weka 
[WITTEN & FRANK, 2000], using a linear kernel, no feature normalization, and the 
default parameters. (Other options did not appear to improve classification accuracy in 
early tests, so we used the simplest option, which also enables easy interpretation of 
results.) SMO is a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm [CRISTIANINI & SHAW-
TAYLOR, 2000]; as noted above, SVMs have been previously applied successfully to 
text categorization problems [JOACHIMS, 1998].
6. Results 
6.1 Distinctiveness 
We first consider hypothesis H1 (refer to Section 4 above), that experimental 
science texts are strongly distinguished from historical science texts, by estimating 
learning accuracy (via 10-fold cross-validation) for distinguishing articles in different 
journals. For each pair of two different journals, we used SMO (as above) to learn 
classifiers distinguishing articles in one journal from those in the other; the estimated 
learning accuracy is a measure of how distinguishable the journals are from one another 
(in terms of the features we have defined). These pairwise classification results are 
shown for feature sets FW and SC in Figures 8 and 9, respectively.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
228 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Figure 8. Learning accuracy for distinguishing articles in different pairs of journals using FW features. ‘Same’ 
are pairs where both journals are in the same field, ‘Exper’ pairs of journals in different experimental fields, 
‘Hist’ pairs of journals in different historical fields, and ‘Diff’ pairs of journals where one is experimental and 
the other historical. Means and  ranges are shown 
Figure 9. Learning accuracy (as in Figure 8) using SC features 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 229
Note that journal pairs from a single field are the least distinguishable, followed by 
those from two different (out of three) historical fields, then from two different 
experimental fields, and finally the most distinctive are journal pairs where one journal 
is historical and the other experimental. While there is some variance within each 
group, the difference between the “Diff” pairs and the pool of all “Similar” pairs (i.e., 
the union of “Same”, “Exper” and “Hist”), for both feature sets, is quite noticeable and 
statistically significant (FW Mann-Whitney U = 940.5, p<0.0001; SC Mann-Whitney  
U = 915.5, p<0.0001).
We further considered 10-fold cross-validation for learning over the entire corpus of 
articles from 12 journals. Average accuracy was 81.6%. To calibrate these results, we 
ran the same discrimination test for all 462 different partitions of the twelve journals 
into two groups of six journals each, which gave a mean accuracy of 65.4% (s.d. 4.9%, 
range 55.4% to 81.6%). The highest accuracy is thus attained specifically for the 
partition between experimental and historical fields, which has p<0.0022. The linguistic 
difference between experimental and historical science articles is thus highly unlikely to 
be due to chance.  
Hypothesis H1 is thus confirmed, in that articles from different kinds of science are 
more easily distinguished from one another stylistically than are articles from a single 
kind of science (from different journals in one field or from totally different fields).  
6.2 Distinguishing features 
Given this result, we now consider what consistent pattern of distinguishing 
features, if any, emerges. That is, what system contribution (SC) features can be said to 
consistently indicate either historical or experimental science articles. To do this, we ran 
SMO (with a linear kernel) on all training data for each pair of a historical science 
journal with an experimental science journal (36 pairs in all), and ranked the features by 
their weight for one or the other journal in the weight vector computed by SMO. 
Figures 10, 11, and 12 show, for each SC feature f, for how many classification pairs 
(out of 36) f was weighted as an indicator feature for Experimental science, and for how 
many f was weighted as an indicator for Historical science. High values ( 25) are 
boldfaced, for ease of reference. Features which are indicators for one kind of science 
consistently over many pairwise comparisons have high values; we are mainly 
concerned with such features.  
Examination of these results reveals some striking patterns, in the form of 
meaningful oppositions, where one option in a particular system is indicative of one 
article class (either experimental or historical science) and another option of that system 
is indicative of the other class. Such an opposition indicates a meaningful linguistic 
difference between the classes of articles, in that each prefers a distinctive way (each’s 
preferred option) of expressing the same general meaning (the parent system). This 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
230 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
notion derives from the key fact that even if a particular second-level option indicates a 
certain class (say Additive Extension for experimental articles) it does not necessarily 
mean that its parent (in this case, Extension) will be indicative of the same class. This is 
because options are only compared within a single system.  
First, consider the system of EXPANSION. At the top level, we see an opposition 
between Extension, indicating historical science, and Enhancement, indicating 
experimental science. This implies that historical science articles generally have a 
higher density of discrete informational items, whereas experimental science articles 
tend to have fewer information items, which may have their meaning deepened or 
qualified by informationally-related clauses. This appears to reflect differing principles 
of rhetorical organization (as seen in the example passages in Section 3) – experimental 
scientists may prefer a single coherent ‘story line’ focused on enhancements of a small 
number of focal propositions, whereas historical scientists may prefer a multifocal 
‘landscape’ of connected propositions. This supports hypotheses H3a and H3b,
respectively, comparing the contextual examination of various and highly unique 
entities by historical science with the more universalist, hence focused, examination of 
generic entities by experimental science.  
Two other oppositions are visible in the ‘subsystems’ of Extension and 
Enhancement as well, which, while not bearing directly on our hypotheses, seem 
related. Within Extension, we see an experimental preference for Additive Extension, 
compared with a historical preference for Adversative Extension. This further supports 
the notion that historical scientists use a “multiple working hypotheses” method, in 
which comparison of alternatives is key (cf. H3a). Further, we see that SpatioTemporal 
relationships form a core type of Enhancement for experimental scientists (presumably 
describing forms and relationships of experimental subjects and results), while 
historical scientists do Enhancement more via Matter and so contextualize their 
statements more (cf. H2a).
Posited methodological distinctions between the kinds of science are further 
supported by our results for COMMENT. Here we see preference for Validative and 
Admissive Comments by historical scientists compared to a very strong consistent 
preference for Predictive Comments by experimental scientists. The latter result is a 
straightforward consequence (hypothesis H2b) of the experimental scientist’s focus on 
predictive consistency. The historical scientist, on the other hand, evinces a rhetorical 
need (via Validative Comments) to explicitly delineate the scope of validity of different 
assertions (hypothesis H2a), likely as a consequence of synthetic thinking [BAKER,
1996] about complex and ambiguous webs of past causation [CLELAND, 2002]. An 
Admissive comment marks a clause as the opinion (perhaps strongly held) of the 
author; this too appears indicative of a more hedged and explicitly comparative 
argumentation style.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 231
Finally, we consider the (more complicated) system of MODALITY, starting with the 
coarse level represented by the simple features. The primary opposition is in modality 
Type. The preference of experimental science writing for Modulation (assessing what 
‘must’ or ‘is able’ to happen) is supportive of hypothesis H2b and consistent with a 
focus on prediction and manipulation of nature. Concurrently, historical science writing 
shows a preference for Modalization (assessing ‘likelihood’ or ‘usuality’), supporting 
hypothesis H2a. Such a preference is consistent with the outlook of an observer who 
usually cannot directly manipulate or replicate outcomes, and therefore (i) cannot make 
unqualified statements of what must (or must not) happen, and (ii) uses therefore the 
method of “multiple working hypotheses”.  
Within Modulation, we see also a more delicate opposition, where experimental 
science articles prefer Readiness (possibility), and historical science articles prefer 
Obligation (necessity). To understand this, note first that either kind of assessment 
opens up a clause for value-based consideration; if a statement is to be simply accepted, 
on the other hand, modal assessment will typically be avoided (compare “John went to 
the store” with “John should have gone to the store”; the first is either true or false, 
whereas the second makes a value judgement that can be disputed). Thus experimental 
scientists open Readiness up for consideration and possible disputation by the reader, 
while the default is for events to be necessary (and so they need not be noted explicitly 
as such). For historical scientists, on the other hand, necessity cannot be assumed, rather 
Obligation is noted openly in the text, allowing dispute, while the possible and 
contingent is assumed as the default (and nuanced levels of probability are expressed by 
Modalization, as noted above).  
Digging still deeper, related patterns are also seen within the paired features 
conjoining two independent dimensions of MODALITY (Figures 11 and 12). Some 
results here simply confirm the one-dimensional results discussed above, though others 
give a more detailed view. First, consider oppositions between Implicit and Explicit 
variants of different MODALITY Types. Implicit realizations are more likely to be used 
for options that are well-integrated into the expected rhetoric than corresponding 
Explicit variants, which have more attention drawn towards them and so are more likely 
to be used for less usual modal assessments. First, we see Implicit Modulation for 
experimental science writing, and Implicit Modalization for historical science writing. 
This implies that Modalization is integrated smoothly into the overall environment of 
historical scientific rhetoric, whereas Modulation is a normal part of the rhetorical 
environment of experimental science. This is further support for hypotheses H2a and 
H2b, emphasizing the focus of experimental science on possibility/necessity and that of 
historical science on relative likelihood and typicality.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
232 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
Figure 10. Number of times different systemic features were indicators for either Experimental or Historical 
journals in the 36 classification runs. For ease of reference, values 25 (a heuristic value) are boldfaced, to 
show the most salient oppositions found 
Figure 11. Feature weightings for paired Modality features indicative of experimental journal articles. Each 
cell represents a pair-wise feature for the conjunction of two independent attributes of Modality; the number 
in the cell shows in how many models the feature was indicative of the experimental journal (out of all 36 
pairs of an experimental and a historical journal). For example, Medium Modulation values were indicative of 
experimental fields 27 times out of 36, while Medium values for Objective modality were indicative of 
Experimental fields just 12 times 
The evident preference for Implicit and Subjective Usuality in experimental science 
is probably explained by the fact that most keywords used to indicate these options are 
ambiguous, and may very well be indicating other options in MODALITY. This is likely 
connected to the historical preference for Objective Usuality, which may just indicate 
that unambiguous Usuality (as a clear option of Modalization) is an indicator for 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 233
historical science writing. The historical preference for Implicit Probability, on the other 
hand, seems to indicate more directly the importance in historical methodology (noted 
above) of weighting propositions by likelihood (H2a), by placing such assessment in the 
rhetorical background (as above).  
Figure 12. Feature weightings for complex Modality features indicative of historical journal articles, 
formatted as in Figure 11 above 
Some other interesting oppositions may also be observed in these results. One is an 
opposition within Modalization, of Implicit Readiness (experimental) vs. Implicit 
Obligation (historical). This likely reflects the overall opposition (noted above) between 
Readiness and Obligation. Too, an opposition is observed between Objective Obligation 
(experimental) and Subjective Obligation (historical) paralleled by an opposition 
between Subjective Usuality (experimental) and Objective Usuality (historical).  
This appears to reflect the choice of Objective realization for types of modality 
which is rhetorically central (Modulation/Obligation for experimental science, 
Modalization/Usuality for historical science, as discussed above) and Subjective for less 
central types of assessment.  
7. Conclusions 
In this paper, we have provided the first empirical evidence (however indirect) for 
methodological variation among the sciences, by analysis of their main product, the 
peer-reviewed research article. Application of machine learning techniques to 
linguistically well-motivated textual features has provided clear empirical evidence for 
rhetorical differences between writing in different scientific fields, supporting recent 
claims by philosophers of science for a broad division of sciences into ‘experimental’ 
and ‘historical’ fields. Moreover, analysis of the models output by the learning 
procedure gives insight into which language features most consistently realize the 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
234 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
differences in functional text type corresponding to different kinds of science. The main 
linguistic preferences identified can be directly linked with the particular modes of 
reasoning posited by philosophers for these different kinds of science. This study thus 
lends empirical weight to the argument for a multiplicity of methods in science, rather 
than a single monolithic “scientific method”.  
In addition to the philosophical and linguistic implications of our results, we believe 
that this line of research may have meaningful application for improving science 
education. By precisely articulating some of the specific language skills necessary for 
effective communication in different styles of science, we may develop methods to 
improve teaching of such skills to scientific novices both at the high school and 
university levels. Such skills are a key part of a greater set of competencies needed for 
pursuing scientific research in inquiry-based environments [AAAS, 1990; NRC, 1996]. 
It may also be possible to design novel assessment methods which evaluate how a 
student develops the conceptual structure of a field, by measuring use of the 
corresponding linguistic and rhetorical structures.  
Future work 
Immediate future work includes validating these results against a larger corpus of 
articles including more scientific fields. In particular, potentially ‘mixed’ fields, such as 
astrophysics, need to be studied, to examine more precisely the interface between 
historical and experimental scientific language. Another important area for future 
research is suggested by the fact that while the current study treats each article as a 
single indivisible whole, the rhetorical organization of an article varies strongly among 
the different sections of the text, as noted by LEWIN & AL. [1986] in their analysis of 
social science texts; Introductions differ from Materials and Methods sections, which 
differ from Results sections, and so on. We thus intend next to study linguistic variation 
across different sections of individual texts within and across fields. Techniques such as 
those of TEUFEL & MOENS [1998, 2002] for determining rhetorical saliency and 
function of sentences in scientific texts may be applicable. 
Too, as a complement to this work on written communication, we are beginning to 
study historical scientists in vivo, as they pursue their research (in real time) within the 
authentic setting of the field and the laboratory. Results of this work will be compared 
with those of other similar studies focusing on experimental scientists [DUNBAR, 1995, 
1999; DUNBAR & BLANCHETTE, 2001; STUCKY & BOND-ROBINSON, 2004; 
NERSESSIAN, 2005]. Ultimately, this work will provide a fuller account of the relation 
between language and methodological reasoning in different fields of science. Such 
expert models of reasoning and communication are critical to current work in science 
education, as they will enable researchers and curriculum designers to better model the 
inquiry-based materials currently being proposed and implemented in science 
curriculum reform.  
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 235
On the technical side, we are also working on refining automated methods for 
linguistic processing, first on refining identification of systemic indicators, and then 
linking individual indicators with their context for greater information. In this regard, 
lexical chains as used in text summarization [BARZILAY & ELHADAD, 1999; 
HARABAGIU, 1999; BRUNN & AL., 2001] may be useful, as may recent work on 
automated rhetorical structure analysis of texts [HOVY, 1993; MARCU, 2000]. Methods 
for discovering important features of opinion expression might also help, such as 
subjectivity collocations [WIEBE, 2000; RILOFF & AL., 2003].
*
We would like to thank Martha Evens, Jonathan Fine, Peter Greene, and Don Swanson for their helpful 
comments on earlier drafts of this paper, as well as the anonymous reviewers. Especial thanks to the late 
Nambury Raju for his statistical advice and friendship.  
References 
ABRAMS, E., WANDERSEE, J. H. (1995). How does biological knowledge grow? A study of life scientists’ 
research practice. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32 (6) : 643–663. 
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE. (1990). Benchmarks for Science Literacy.
New York: Oxford University Press. 
ARGAMON, S., KOPPEL, M., AVNERI, G. (1998A). Routing documents according to style. In: Proc. Int’l 
Workshop on Innovative Internet Information Systems. Pisa, Italy. 
ARGAMON, S., KOPPEL, M., AVNERI, G. (1998B). Style-based text categorization: What newspaper am I 
reading? In: Proc. AAAI Workshop on Learning for Text Categorization (pp. 1–4). 
ARGAMON, S., KOPPEL, M., FINE, J., SHIMONY, A. R. (2003). Gender, genre, and writing style in formal 
written texts. Text, 23 (3) : 321–346. 
ARGAMON, S., SARIC, M., STEIN, S. S. (2003). Style mining of electronic messages for multiple author 
discrimination. In: Proc. ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ARGAMON, S., WHITELAW, C., CHASE, P., DHAWLE, S., GARG, N., HOTA, S. R., ET AL. (2007). Stylistic text 
classification using functional lexical features. Journal of the American Society of Information Science.
58 (6) : 802–822. 
BAAYEN, R. H., HALTEREN, H. VAN, TWEEDIE, F. (1996). Outside the cave of shadows: Using syntactic 
annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 7 : 91–109. 
BAKER, V. R. (1996). The pragmatic routes of American Quaternary geology and geomorphology. 
Geomorphology, 16 : 197–215. 
BARZILAY, R., ELHADAD, M. (1999). Using lexical chains for text summarization. In: I. MANI,
M. T. MAYBURY (Eds), Advances in Automatic Text Summarization (pp. 111–121). The MIT Press. 
BAZERMAN, C. (2004). What activity systems are literary genres part of? Journal of the Interdisciplinary 
Crossroads, 1 (3). 
BAZERMAN, C., PRIOR, P. (2005). Participating in Emergent Socio-Literate Worlds: Genre, Disciplinarity, 
Interdisciplinarity. In Multidisciplinary Perspectives on Literacy Research. Hampton Press. 
BIBER, D. (1995). Dimensions of Register Variation: A Cross-Linguistic Comparison. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
BOND-ROBINSON, J., STUCKY, A. P. (2005). Grounding scientific inquiry and knowledge in situated 
cognition. In: Proceedings of the 27th Annual Cognitive Science Society. Stresa, Italy. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
236 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
BRUNN, M., CHALI, Y., PINCHAK, C. J. (2001). Text Summarization Using Lexical Chains. In: Proceedings of 
the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval. New Orleans, LA. 
CLELAND, C. E. (2001). Historical science, experimental science, and the scientific method. Geology, 29  
(11) : 987–990. 
CLELAND, C. E. (2002). Methodological and epistemic differences between historical science and 
experimental science. Philosophy of Science.
COOPER, R. A. (2002). Scientific knowledge of the past is possible: Confronting myths about evolution and 
the nature of science. The American Biology Teacher, 64 : 476–481. 
COOPER, R. A. (2004). Teaching how scientists reconstruct history: Patterns and processes. The American 
Biology Teacher, 66 (2) : 101–108. 
CRISTIANINI, N., SHAW-TAYLOR, J. (2000). An introduction to Support Vector Machines. Cambridge Press. 
CRONIN, B. (2005). The Hand of Science: Academic Writing and Its Rewards. Scarecrow Press. 
CRONIN, B., OVERFELT, K. (1994). Citation-based auditing of academic performance. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 45 (2) : 61–72. 
DAGAN, I., KAROV, Y., ROTH, D. (1997). Mistake-driven learning in text categorization. In: C. CARDIE,
R. WEISCHEDEL (Eds), Proceedings of EMNLP-97, 2nd Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (pp. 55–63). Providence, US: Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Morristown, US. 
DIAMOND, J. (2002). Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W.W. Norton. 
DIMITROVA, M., FINN, A., KUSHMERICK, N., SMYTH, B. (2002). Web genre visualization. In: Proc. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
DODICK, J. T., ORION, N. (2003). Geology as an historical science: Its perception within science and the 
education system. Science and Education, 12 (2) : 197–211. 
DUNBAR, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In: 
Mechanisms of Insight (p. 365-395). Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
DUNBAR, K. (1999). The scientist InVivo: How scientists think and reason in the laboratory. In: Model-Based 
Reasoning in Scientific Discovery. Plenum Press. 
DUNBAR, K. (2001). What scientific thinking reveals about the nature of cognition. In: Designing for Science
(pp. 115–140). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
DUNBAR, K., BLANCHETTE, I. (2001). The invivo/invitro approach to cognition: The case of analogy. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 5 : 334–339. 
FINN, A., KUSHMERICK, N., SMYTH, B. (2002). Genre classification and domain transfer for information 
filtering. In: F. CRESTANI, M. GIROLAMI, C. J. VAN RIJSBERGEN (Eds), Proceedings of ECIR-02, 24th 
European Colloquium on Information Retrieval Research. Glasgow, UK: Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 
DE. 
FRODEMAN, R. (1995). Geological reasoning: Geology as an interpretive and historical science. Geological 
Society of America Bulletin, 107 : 960–968. 
FUJIMURA, J. H. (1987). Constructing ‘do-able’ problems in cancer research: Articulating argument. Social
Studies of Science, 17 : 257–293. 
GOODWIN, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96 (3) : 606–633. 
GOODWIN, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25 : 237–74. 
GOULD, S. J. (1986). Evolution and the triumph of homology, or, why history matters. American Scientist
(Jan.–Feb.) : 60–69. 
GRAHAM, N., HIRST, G. (2003). Segmenting a document by stylistic character. In: Workshop on 
Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis, 18th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence. Acapulco. 
GROSSMAN, D., FRIEDER, O. (2004). Information Retrieval: Algorithms and heuristics (Second ed.). Springer. 
HALLIDAY, M. A. K. (1994). Introduction to Functional Grammar (Second ed.). Edward Arnold. 
HALLIDAY, M. A. K., HASAN, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman. 
HALLIDAY, M. A. K., MARTIN, J. R. (1993). Writing Science: Literacy and Discursive Power. London: 
Falmer. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
Scientometrics 75 (2008) 237
HARABAGIU, S. (1999). From lexical cohesion to textual coherence: A data driven perspective. Journal of 
Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, 13 (2) (4) : 247–265. 
HARRIS, J. (1989). The idea of community in the study of writing. College Composition and Communication,
40 (1) : 11–22. 
HASAN, R. (1988). Language in the process of socialisation: Home and school. In: Language and 
Socialisation: Home and School. North Ryde, N.S.W.: Macquarie University. 
HERKE-COUCHMAN, M., WHITELAW, C., PATRICK, J. (2004). Identifying interpersonal distance using 
systemic features. In: Proc. AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories 
and Applications.
HOLMES, D. I. (1998). The evolution of stylometry in humanities scholarship. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing, 13 (3) : 111–117. 
HOVY, E. (1993). In defense of syntax: Informational, intentional, and rhetorical structures in discourse.  
In: O. RAMBOW (Ed.), Intentionality and Structure in Discourse Relations (pp. 35–39). Ohio. 
HULL, D. (1973). Darwin and His Critics: The Reception of Darwin’s Theory of Evolution by the Scientific 
Community. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
HYLAND, K. (2000). Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing. Longman. 
JOACHIMS, T. (1998). Text categorization with support vector machines: Learning with many relevant 
features. In: Machine Learning: ECML-98, Tenth European Conference on Machine Learning
(pp. 137-142). 
KELLY, G. J., BAZERMAN, C. (2003). How students argue scientific claims. Applied Linguistics,
24 (1) : 28–55. 
KILLINGSWORTH, M., GILBERTSON, M. (1992). Signs, Genres, and Communities in Technical 
Communication. Baywood Pub. Co. 
KITCHER, P. (1993). The Advancement of Science. New York: Oxford University Press. 
KOPPEL, M., ARGAMON, S., SHIMONI, A. R. (2003). Automatically categorizing written texts by author 
gender. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17 (4) : 401–412. 
LANG, K. (1995). NewsWeeder: learning to filter netnews. In: Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 331–339). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.: San Mateo, CA, 
USA. 
LATOUR, B., WOOLGAR, S. (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
LEWIN, B. A., FINE, J., YOUNG, L. (1986). Expository Discourse: A Genre-Based Approach to Social Science 
Research Texts. Continuum. 
LEWIS, D. D. (1998). Naive (Bayes) at forty: The independence assumption in information retrieval. In:  
C. N’EDELLEC, C. ROUVEIROL (Eds), Proceedings of ECML-98, 10th European Conference on Machine 
Learning (pp. 4–15). Chemnitz, DE: Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, DE. 
MACROBERTS, M. H., MACROBERTS, B. R. (1996). Problems of citation analysis. Scientometrics,
36 (3) : 435–444. 
MANN, W., THOMPSON, S. (1988). Rhetorical structure theory: Towards a functional theory of text 
organization. Text, 8 (3) : 243–281. 
MARCU, D. (2000). The rhetorical parsing of unrestricted texts: A surface-based approach. Computational 
Linguistics, 26 (3) : 395–448. 
MATTHEWS, R. A. J., MERRIAM, T. V. N. (1997). Distinguishing literary styles using neural networks. In: 
Handbook of Neural Computation (chap. 8). IOP publishing and Oxford University Press. 
MATTHIESSEN, C. (1992). Lexicogrammatical Cartography: English Systems. Tokyo, Taipei and Dallas: 
International Language Sciences Publishers. 
MAYR, E. (1976). Evolution and the Diversity of Life. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
MAYR, E. (1985). How biology differs from the physical sciences. In: Evolution at the Crossroads: The New 
Biology and the New Philosophy of Science (p. 43-46). Cambridge: MIT Press. 
MOSTELLER, F., WALLACE, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist. Massachusetts: 
Addison-Wesley. 
MULKAY, N., GILBERT, G. N. (1983). Scientist’s theory talk. Canadian Journal of Sociology, 8 : 179–197. 
S. ARGAMON & AL.: Language use reflects scientific methodology 
238 Scientometrics 75 (2008)
MYERS, G. (1990). Writing Biology: Texts in the Social Construction of Scientific Knowledge. University of 
Wisconsin Press. 
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. 
NERSESSIAN, N. J. (2005). Interpreting scientific and engineering practices: Integrating the cognitive, social, 
and cultural dimensions. In: M. GORMAN, R. TWENEY, D. GOODING, A. KINCANNON (Eds), Scientific
and technological Thinking (pp. 17–56). New York: Erlbaum Press. 
OCHS, E., JACOBY, S. (1997). Down to the wire: The cultural clock of physicists and the discourse of 
consensus. Language in Society, 26 (4) : 479–506. 
OCHS, E., JACOBY, S., GONZALES, P. (1994). Interpretive journeys: How physicists talk and travel through 
graphic space. Configurations, 1 : 151–171. 
OKADA, T., SIMON, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21 (2) : 
109–146.
PLATT, J. (1998). Sequential Minimal Optimization: A Fast Algorithm for Training Support Vector Machines.
Redmond, Wa: Microsoft Research Technical Report Msr-Tr-98-14. 
PLUM, G., COWLING, A. (1987). Social constraints on grammatical variables: Tense choice in english. In: 
Language Topics (Vol. 2). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
RILOFF, E., WIEBE, J., WILSON, T. (2003). Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern bootstrapping. 
In: Proceedings of CONLL-2003 (pp. 25–32). Edmonton, Canada. 
RUDOLPH, J. L., STEWART, J. (1998). Evolution and the nature of science: On the historical discord and its 
implication for education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35 : 1069–1089. 
RUDWICK, M. J. S. (1998). Lyell and the principles of geology. In: D. BLUNDELL, A. SCOTT (Eds), Lyell: The 
Past is the Key to the Present (pp. 3–15). Geological Society of London. (Special Publications 143). 
SEBASTIANI, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys,
34 (1) : 1–47. 
SOBER, E. (1993). Philosophy of Biology. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
STAMATATOS, E., FAKOTAKIS, N., KOKKINAKIS, G. K. (2000). Automatic text categorization in terms of 
genre, author. Computational Linguistics, 26 (4) : 471–495. 
STUCKY, A. P., BOND-ROBINSON, J. (2004). Empirical studies of scientists at work: Analysis of Authentic 
Inquiry experiences. In: Proceedings of the national association of research in science teaching annual 
meeting. Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
SWALES, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge University Press. 
TEUFEL, S., MOENS, M. (1998). Sentence extraction and rhetorical classification for flexible abstracts. In: 
Proc. AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelligent Text Summarization.
TEUFEL, S., MOENS, M. (2002). Summarising Scientific Articles – Experiments with Relevance and 
Rhetorical Status. Computational Linguistics, 28 (4) : 409–445. 
WHEWELL, W. (1837). History of the Inductive Sciences. London: John W. Parker. 
WHITE, H. D., MCCAIN, K. W. (1989). Bibliometrics. Annual Reviews of Information Science and 
Technology, 24 : 119–186. 
WHITE, H. D., MCCAIN, K. W. (1998). Visualizing a discipline. an author co-citation analysis of information 
science, 1972–1995. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49 : 327–355. 
WHITELAW, C., ARGAMON, S. (2004, OCTOBER). Systemic functional features in stylistic text classification. 
In: Proc. AAAI Fall Symposim on Style and Meaning in language, Art, Music, and Design. Washington, DC. 
WHITELAW, C., GARG, N., ARGAMON, S. (2005, NOVEMBER). Using appraisal taxonomies for sentiment 
analysis. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. Bremen, 
Germany. 
WIEBE, J. (2000). Learning subjective adjectives from corpora. In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence (pp. 735–740). AAAI Press / The MIT Press. 
WITTEN, I. H., FRANK, E. (2000). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools with JAVA 
Implementations. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann. 
YULE, G. (1938). On sentence length as a statistical characteristic of style in prose with application to two 
cases of disputed authorship. Biometrika, 30 : 363–390. 
