 
Chapter X 
 
Corpus-Based Study of Scientific Methodology: 
Comparing the Historical and Experimental Sciences 
  
  
Shlomo Argamon 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
Department of Computer Science 
10 W 31st Street 
Chicago, IL 60616, U.S.A. 
Email: argamon@iit.edu 
  
Jeff Dodick 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
Science Teaching Center 
Givat Ram Campus 
Jerusalem 91904, ISRAEL 
Email: jdodick@vms.huji.ac.il 
  
  
Abstract 
This chapter studies the use of textual features based on systemic functional 
linguistics, for genre-based text categorization.  We describe feature sets that 
represent different types of conjunctions and modal assessment, which together 
can partially indicate how different genres structure text and may prefer certain 
classes of attitudes towards propositions in the text.  This enables analysis of 
large-scale rhetorical differences between genres by examining which features are 
important for classification.  The specific domain we studied comprises scientific 
articles in historical and experimental sciences (paleontology and physical 
chemistry, respectively).  We applied the SMO learning algorithm, which with our 
feature set achieved over 83% accuracy for classifying articles according to field, 
though no field-specific terms were used as features.  The most highly-weighted 
features for each were consistent with hypothesized methodological differences 
between historical and experimental sciences, thus lending empirical evidence to 
the recent philosophical claim of multiple scientific methods. 
 
Keywords: Text classification, systemic functional linguistics, computational stylistics, 
philosophy of science, science education 
 
1 Introduction 
Research in automatically using features of a text to determine its stylistic character has a long 
history, going back to Mosteller and Wallace’s landmark study on authorship attribution of the 
Federalist Papers (Mosteller & Wallace 1964).  The kind of features typically used in such studies 
has not changed much over the years: frequencies of different function words (Mosteller & 
Wallace 1964), frequencies of different kinds of syntactic constituents (Baayen et al. 1996; 
Stamatatos et al. 2001), and various measures of sentence complexity (Yule 1938; Losee 1996).  
The implicit understanding is that such lexical, syntactic, or complexity-based features serve as 
useful proxies for the ‘behind-the-scenes’ pragmatic or contextual factors that determine stylistic 
variation, because such factors are realized in specific texts via word choice and syntactic 
structure.  However, for the most part, computational stylistics research has not explicitly 
examined the semantics or pragmatics of such features.  In particular, although it is clear that 
different textual genres use different rhetorical modes and different generic document structures 
(Martin 1992), the relation of low-level stylistic features to aspects of rhetorical structure remains 
obscure.  Our highest-level goal is to elucidate this relationship by exploring genre-based text 
categorization problems where particular rhetorical or cognitive communicative needs can be 
identified.  In the future, this approach may be enhanced by incorporating rhetorical ‘parsing’ of 
the text (see the recent work of Marcu (2000)). 
In this chapter we outline an approach to defining linguistically-motivated features for genre 
classification based on systemic functional principles, and present an initial implementation of the 
approach.  The specific domain we study here is that of scientific discourse, with the aim of 
gaining a better understanding of the nature and methods of science.  We apply our system to a 
corpus-based study of genre variation between articles in a historical science (in this case 
paleontology) and an experimental science (in this case physical chemistry), where we expect to 
find significant rhetorical differences.  Our results show how computational stylistic techniques 
can give a consistent picture of differences in methodological reasoning between scientists in the 
two fields.  This line of research also has the potential to contribute to the philosophy of science, 
by enabling empirical investigation of hypothesized methodological differences among fields. 
(See for example the work of Cleland (2001; 2002) where she strongly argues for such 
methodological differences.)  Also, since properly understanding different forms of scientific 
reasoning is critical for science education (Dodick & Orion 2003), we hope to contribute 
eventually to the development of better pedagogical practices. 
2 Background 
2.1 Genre, Register, and Systemic Choice 
The linguistic framework we assume is that of systemic functional linguistics (Halliday 1994).  
Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) construes language as a set of interlocking choices for 
expressing meanings: “either this, that, or the other”, with more general choices constraining the 
possible specific choices.  For example: “A message is either about doing, thinking, or being; if 
about doing, it is either standalone action or action on something; if action on something it is 
either creating something or affecting something pre-existent,” and so on. A system, then, is a set 
of options for meanings to be expressed, with entry conditions, i.e., when that choice is possible – 
for example, if a message is not about doing, then there is no possible choice between expressing 
standalone action or action on something.  Each option has also a realization specification, which 
gives constraints (lexical, featural, or structural) on statements that express the given option.  
Options often serve as entry conditions for more detailed systems, which we will term here 
subsystems. 
By structuring language as a complex of choices between mutually exclusive options, the systemic 
approach is particularly appropriate to examining variation in language use.  Thus a systemic 
grammar specification allows us to ask:  
In places where a meaning of type A is to be expressed in a text (e.g., “connection 
between two clauses”), what sorts of more specific meanings (e.g., “extension by new 
information” or “elaboration by qualification”) are most likely to be expressed in different 
contexts?   
While much of the meaning potential of language is determined by the sort of ideas being 
expressed, the specific form of an utterance is underdetermined by its purely representational 
meaning.  Other layers of meaning in terms of interpersonal relations, attitude towards 
propositions, and intratextual logical or rhetorical connections (cohesion) are also present, as well 
as subtle choices of focus.  As an example of a cohesive system in English, when expanding the 
meaning of one clause by conjoining another clause, one may choose between three possibilities: 
elaboration (deepening by restatement, comment, or exemplification: “He left, which was good”, 
commenting on the event), extension (adding new information: “He left, and I felt better”, adding 
on a related event), and enhancement (qualification by reference to circumstance, cause, manner, 
or result: “He left, so I rejoiced”, creating a short causal chain).  Note that all three examples have 
similar representational meanings, though more subtle distinctions are drawn.  A general 
preference for one or another option is thus largely a question of style or of attitude, in which 
individual and social/contextual factors come to bear.  Such preferences can be measured by 
evaluating the relative probabilities of different options by tagging their realizations in a corpus of 
texts (Halliday 1991).  By comparing how these probabilities vary between situations with 
different characteristics, we may determine how those characteristics affect linguistic behavior.   
By examining differences between systemic preferences across scientific genres, we are 
performing a quantitative analysis of register.  Register denotes functional distinctions in language 
use related to the context of language use (Eggins & Martin 1997), and may be considered to 
comprise: mode, the communication channel of the discourse (interaction between producer and 
audience); tenor, the effect of the social relation between the producer and the audience; and field, 
the domain of discourse.  We study here the field distinction between historical and experimental 
science, with mode and tenor held relatively constant, by using articles written by working 
scientists drawn from peer-reviewed journals.  Our hypothesis, borne out by our results below, is 
that the difference in the types of reasoning needed by historical and experimental sciences leads 
to correlated differences in rhetorical preferences (perhaps best understood as ‘functional tenor’ 
(Gregory 1967)), which are realized by how the writer expresses attitudes towards assertions in the 
text (via modal assessment), as well as by what strategies they use for cohesion.   
Previous work in this vein has investigated the relationship between choice probabilities and 
contextual factors.  For example, Plum & Cowling (1987) demonstrate a relation between speaker 
social class and choice of verb tense (past/present) in face-to-face interviews.  Similarly, Hasan 
has shown, in mother-child interactions, that the sex of the child and the family’s social class 
together have a strong influence on several kinds of semantic choice in speech (Hasan 1988).  The 
methodology that has been applied in these works has two stages: first hand-coding a corpus for 
systemic-functional and contextual variables and second comparing how systemic choice 
probabilities vary with contextual factors, using correlation statistics or multivariate analysis 
techniques (such as principal components analysis).  This chapter presents a first attempt at 
extending this idea to larger corpora using automated text analysis and machine learning.  
2.2 Scientific Language 
Our domain of interest in this study is scientific discourse, which we approach by examining peer-
reviewed journal articles.  Our goal in analyzing scientific communication is to study the nature 
and methods of science.  Paradigmatic of this general approach is research on how scientists 
communicate with each other while doing science.  It is clear that group communication between 
the various scientists working in a laboratory is often crucial to scientific success (Dunbar 1995).  
The particular uses of language by scientists serve to create a sort of “collaborative space”, whose 
background worldview makes possible communication about complex observations and 
hypotheses (Goodwin 1994).  Analysis of specific linguistic features can help elucidate important 
features of the way discourse contributes to problem solving, as in the study by Ochs et al. (1994) 
of physicist’s metaphoric talk of travel in a variety of graphical spaces.   
2.3 Historical and Experimental Science 
Increasingly, philosophers of science recognize that the classical model of a single “Scientific 
Method” based on experimentation does a disservice to sciences such as geology and 
paleontology, which are no less scientific by virtue of being historically, rather than 
experimentally, oriented.  Rather, differences in method may stem directly from the types of 
phenomena under study.  Experimental science (such as experimental physics) attempts to 
formulate general predictive laws, and so relies heavily on repeatable series of manipulative 
experiments to refine hypotheses about such laws (Latour & Woolgar 1986).  Historical science, 
on the other hand, deals with contingent phenomena, involving study of specific individuals and 
events from the past, in an attempt to find unifying explanations for effects caused by those events 
(Diamond, 1999; Mayr 1976).  Based on these differences, reasoning in historical sciences is 
understood as a form of explanatory reasoning, as opposed to the reasoning from causes to effects 
more characteristic of experimental science (Gould 1986; Diamond 1999).   Indeed, as far back as 
the 19th century philosopher William Whewell (1837, v3, p. 617) noted that in (the historical 
science of) geology “the effects must themselves teach us the nature and intensity of the causes 
which have operated”.   
An important element of historical reasoning is the need to differentially weight the evidence.  
Since any given trace of a past event is typically ambiguous as to its possible causes, many pieces 
of evidence must be combined in complex ways in order to form a confirming or disconfirming 
argument for a hypothesis (termed synthetic thinking by Baker (1996)).  Such synthetic thinking 
is, as Cleland (2002) argues, a necessary commitment of historical science (as opposed to 
experimental science), due to the fundamental asymmetry of causation.  A single cause will often 
have a great many disparate effects, which if taken together would specify the cause with virtual 
certainty; however, since all the effects cannot actually be known, and moreover since some 
effects are not historically connected to a specific cause, the evidence must be carefully weighed 
to decide between competing hypotheses (a methodology sometimes known as “multiple working 
hypotheses”).     
This chapter describes our first steps towards the analysis of linguistic and rhetorical features of 
scientific writing in experimental and historical science, using several types of linguistically-
motivated document features together with machine learning methods.  Our goal is to show how 
linguistic features that are indicative of different classes of scientific articles may be usefully 
correlated with the rhetorical and methodological needs of historical and experimental sciences. 
To make this more concrete, note that the posited methodological differences described above 
generate the following linguistic predictions: 
 First, we expect historical science’s posited focus on observation and explanation to result 
in language containing more delicate shadings of likelihood and frequency of occurrence 
than that of experimental science, where we expect more direct assessments of necessity 
and possibility.   
 Second, the focus of historical science on explanation in order to find ultimate causes 
implies that its argumentation will involve combinations of multiple lines of evidence of 
differing validity and generality, due to the complexity of the phenomena and the 
asymmetry of causation (Cleland 2002).  This further implies that historical science will 
use more complex and explicit qualifications of likelihood.  On the other hand, since 
experimental science is posited to rely more on manipulation of variables in nature and is 
focused on consistency with prediction, we would expect its language to more often qualify 
assertions as to their predictive value or consistency with predictions.   
 Third, the fact that historical scientists study complex and unique entities by observation 
and comparison implies that they might tend to use ‘panoramic’ language, in which many 
different independent pieces of information are linked together by geographical or 
comparative links.  Consider a geologist describing a particular site—connections between 
statements are likely to be geographical (“…and near that is…”) or temporal (“when that 
process completed, then…”).  Conversely, since experimental science focuses on finding 
deep causal descriptions of essentially uniform entities, we expect a more ‘unifocal’ prose, 
where links between assertion are based on tight causal, conditional, or temporal 
connections (e.g., “X causes Y whenever Z”). 
3 Systemic Indicators as Textual Features 
The features used in this study are the relative frequencies of sets of keywords and phrases which 
indicate that a particular part of the text realizes a certain system in the language.  For example, an 
occurrence of the word “certainly” usually indicates that the author is making a high-probability 
modal assessment of an assertion.  Such a keyword-based approach has obvious practical 
advantages in the current absence of a reliable general systemic parser.  The primary drawback, of 
course, is the possibility of ambiguity, in that the proper interpretation of such a keyword depends 
crucially on its context.  By using as complete a set of such systemic indicators as possible for 
each system we represent, and then by using only measures of comparative frequency between 
such aggregated features, we hope to reduce the effect of ambiguity.  In addition, since we use 
very large sets of indicators for each system, it is unlikely that such ambiguity would introduce a 
systematic bias, and so such noise is more likely to just reduce the significance of our results 
instead of biasing them. 
We describe in this section the features we developed (Figure 1) which are based on the options 
within three main systems, following Matthiessen’s (1995) grammar of English, a standard SFL 
reference.  Keyword lists were constructed starting with the lists of typical words and phrases 
given by Matthiessen, and expanding them to related words and phrases taken from Roget’s 
Interactive Thesaurus1 (manually filtered for relevance to the given feature).  The keyword lists 
were constructed entirely independently of the target corpus.   
                                                     
1 http://www.thesaurus.com 
We use systems and subsystems within: CONJUNCTION, linking clauses together (either within or 
across sentences); MODALITY, giving judgments regarding probability, usuality, inclination, and 
the like; and COMMENT, expressing modal assessments of attitude or applicability.  MODALITY and 
COMMENT relate directly to how propositions are assessed in evidential reasoning (e.g., for 
  
CONJUNCTION: Joining two clauses 
 Elaboration: Deepening the content of the context 
  Appositive: Restatement or exemplification 
   in other words, for example, to wit 
  Clarifying: Correcting, summarizing, or refocusing 
   to be more precise, in brief, incidentally 
 Extension: Adding new related  
  Verifying: Adjusting content by new information 
   instead, except for, alternatively 
 Enhancement: Qualifying the context 
  Matter: What are we talking about 
   here, as to that, in other respects 
  Spatiotemporal: Relating context to space/time 
   Simple: Direct spatiotemporal sequencing 
    then, now, previously, lastly 
   Complex: More complex relations 
    soon, that day, meanwhile, immediately 
  Manner: How did something occur 
   in the same way, similarly, likewise 
  Causal/Conditional: 
   Causal: Relations of cause and effect 
    so, therefore, for this reason 
   Conditional: Logical conditional relations 
    then, in that case, otherwise 
COMMENT: Status of the message in discourse 
Admissive: Message is assessed as an admission 
  frankly, to tell the truth, honestly 
Assertive: Emphasizing the reliability of the message 
  really, actually, positively, we confirm that 
Presumptive: Dependence on other assumptions 
  evidently, presumably, reportedly, we suspect that 
Desiderative: Desirability of some content 
  fortunately, regrettably, it was nice that, hopefully 
Tentative: Assessing the message as tentative 
  tentatively, initially, depending on, provisionally 
Validative: Assessing scope of validity 
  broadly speaking, in general, strictly speaking 
Evaluative: Judgement of actors behind the content 
  wisely, sensibly, foolishly, justifiably, by mistake 
Predictive: Coherence with predictions 
  amazingly, fortuitously, as expected 
(a) Options and indicators for CONJUNCTION (b) Options and indicators for COMMENT 
  
TYPE: What kind of modality? 
 Modalization: How ‘typical’ is it? 
  Probability: How likely is it? 
   probably, maybe, perhaps, might, are likely to 
  Usuality: How frequent/common is it? 
   often, sometimes, rarely, is frequent 
 Modulation: Will someone do it? 
  Readiness: How ready are they (am I)? 
   will, able to, decided to 
  Obligation: Must I (they)? 
   should, is needed, will permit, must, required to 
 
ORIENTATION: State of mind or attribute of the message? 
 Objective: Modality as an attribute of the message 
  probably, perhaps, usually, frequent, it is necessary 
 Subjective: Modality expressed as a state of mind 
  I think, we imagine, we know, it ought, it will allow 
 
VALUE: What degree of the relevant modality scale? 
 Median: In the middle of the normal range 
  will, likely, we expect, usually, should 
 High: More than normal 
  must, should, certainly, always, never, we require 
 Low: Less than normal 
  might, perhaps, seldom, rarely, is unusual, will allow 
 
 
 
 
 
MANIFESTATION: In the clause, or as a projection? 
 Implicit: Modality in the clause as an adjunct or 
auxiliary 
  possibly, maybe, shall, should, definitely, ought to 
 Explicit: Modality in a verb with a projected clause 
  I think, we require, it is necessary that, it is likely that 
 
(c) Systems, options, and indicators for MODALITY 
 
Figure 1. Systems and indicators used in the study 
likelihood, typicality, consistency with predictions, etc.), while CONJUNCTION is a primary system 
by which texts are constructed out of smaller pieces2. 
3.1 Conjunction 
On the discourse level, the system of Conjunction serves to link a clause with its textual context, 
by denoting how the given clause expands on some aspect of its preceding context.  Similar 
systems also operate at the lower levels of noun and verbal groups, ‘overloading’ the same lexical 
resources which, however, generally denote similar types of logico-semantic relationships, e.g., 
“and” usually denotes “additive extension”.  The three options within CONJUNCTION are 
Elaboration, Extension, and Enhancement.  Each of these options (subsystems) has its own 
options which we also use as features.  (Note that the system network can be deepened further 
(Matthiessen 1995, p. 521), but our keyword-based method allows only a relatively coarse 
analysis.)  The hierarchy of CONJUNCTION SYSTEMS WITH THEIR OPTIONS IS given in Figure 
1(a), along with examples of the indicator keyphrases we used.  Note that the features by which 
we represent an article are the frequencies of each option’s indicator features, each measured 
relative to its siblings.  So, for example, one feature is Elaboration/Appositive, whose value is the 
total number of occurrences of Appositive indicators divided by the total number of occurrences of 
Elaboration indicators (Appositive + Clarifying).  The relative frequencies of Elaboration, 
Extension, and Enhancement within CONJUNCTION are also used as features. 
3.2 Comment 
The system of COMMENT is one of modal assessment, comprising a variety of types of “comment” 
on a message, assessing the writer’s attitude towards it, or its validity or evidentiality.  Comments 
are generally realized as adjuncts in a clause (and may appear initially, medially, or finally).  
Matthiessen (1995), following Halliday (1994), lists eight types of COMMENT, shown in Figure 
1(b), along with representative indicators for each subsystem. 
3.3 Modality 
The features for interpersonal modal assessment that we consider here are based on Halliday’s 
(1994) analysis of the MODALITY system, as formulated by Matthiessen (1995).  In this scheme, 
modal assessment is realized by a simultaneous choice of options within the four systems3 shown 
in Figure 1(c).  The cross-product of all of these systems and subsystems creates a large number of 
modality assessment types, each of which is realized through a particular set of indicators.  We 
consider as simple features, each option in each system above (for example, 
Modalization/Probability opposed to Modalization/Usuality) as well as complex features made up 
of pairwise combinations4 of simple features.  The indicator set of keyphrases for each such 
combined feature is the intersection of the indicator sets for the two component features.  For 
example, the complex feature Modalization/Probability:Value/Median will have as indicators all 
keyphrases that are indicators for both Modalization/Probability and Value/Median.  Frequencies 
are normalized by the total set of options in both primary systems. 
                                                     
2 Other textual/cohesive systems, such as PROJECTION, TAXIS, THEME, and INFORMATION cannot be easily addressed, if at 
all, using a keyword-based approach. 
3 Note that we did not consider here the system of POLARITY , since it too cannot be properly addressed without more 
sophisticated parsing. 
4 For simplicity, we did not consider 3- or 4-way combinations here.  We may address this in future work. 
4. Experimental Study 
4.1 The Corpus 
The study reported here was performed using a corpus of articles (Table 1) drawn from four peer-
reviewed journals in two fields: Palaios and Quaternary Research in paleontology, and Journal of 
Physical Chemistry A and Journal of Physical Chemistry B in physical chemistry.  (These 
particular journals were chosen initially in part for ease of access.)  Palaios is a general 
paleontological journal, covering all areas of the field, whereas Quaternary Research focuses on 
work dealing with the quaternary period (approximately 1.6 million years ago to the present).  The 
two physical chemistry journals are published in tandem but have separate editorial boards and 
cover different subfields of physical chemistry, specifically: studies on molecules (J. Phys Chem 
A) and studies of materials, surfaces, and interfaces (J. Phys Chem B).  The numbers of articles 
used from each journal and their average (preprocessed) lengths in words are given in Table 1. 
4.2 Methodology 
We took the preprocessed articles in our corpus and converted each of them into a vector of 
feature values (relative frequencies of system options), as described above.  Throughout, 
classification models were constructed using the SMO learning algorithm (Platt 1998) as 
implemented in the Weka system (Witten & Frank 1999), using a linear kernel, no feature 
normalization, and the default parameters.  (Using other kernels did not appear to improve 
classification accuracy, so we used the option that enabled us to determine easily the relevant 
features for the classification.)  SMO is a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm; SVMs have 
been applied successfully to many text categorization problems (Joachims 1998).  By using a 
linear kernel, we can easily evaluate which features contribute most to classification, by 
examining their weights. 
4.3 Experimental Results 
We first tested the hypothesis that paleontology articles are distinct from physical chemistry 
articles (along the field-independent linguistic dimensions we defined).  Table 2 presents average 
classification accuracy using 20-fold cross-validation.  In all four cross-disciplinary cases, 
classification accuracy is 83% and above, while in the two intra-disciplinary cases, accuracy is 
noticeably lower; Palaios and Quat.  Res. are minimally distinguished at 74%, while J. Phys. 
Chem.  A and J. Phys. Chem. B are entirely undistinguishable (note that 68% of the articles are 
from J. Phys. Chem. A, the majority class).  This supports our main hypothesis, while pointing 
towards a more nuanced possible analysis of the difference between the two paleontology journals.  
Such a difference would be expected, since, unlike Palaios, which covers most subdisciplines of 
paleontology, Quaternary Research deals with analysis of just the last 1.6 million years of earth 
history, including the use of a wider variety of chemical and physics based research tools, and 
Journal # Art. Avg. Words Total Size 
Palaios 116 4584 3.4 Mb 
Quaternary Res. 106 3136 2.0 Mb 
J. Phys. Chem. A 169 2734 3.2 Mb 
J. Phys. Chem. B 69 3301 1.6 Mb 
Table 1. Peer reviewed journals included in the corpus. 
 
hence we may expect a rhetoric closer to that of physical chemistry.  A more detailed analysis is 
clearly needed.  
We now consider if a consistent linguistic picture of the difference between the two classes of 
scientific articles (paleontology and physical chemistry) emerges from the patterns of feature 
weights in he learned models.  To do this, we ran SMO on all the training data for each of the four 
pairs of a paleontology with a physical chemistry journal, and ranked the features according to 
their weight for one or the other journal in the weight vector.  Table 3 shows graphically which 
features were most indicative for each journal in its two trials.  We restrict consideration to cases 
where a feature was strong (i.e., among the 30 weights with largest magnitude) for a single class 
across all journal pairs (note that there were a total of 101 features).  Even with this strong 
restriction, several striking patterns emerge.  Space limits us to discussing the most important. 
First, in the textual system of CONJUNCTION, we see a clear opposition between Extension, 
indicating paleontology, and Enhancement, indicating physical chemistry.  This implies (as 
predicted) that paleontological text has a higher density of discrete informational items, linked 
together by extensive conjunctions, whereas in physical chemistry, while there may be fewer 
information items, each is more likely to have its meaning deepened or qualified by related 
clauses.  This corroborates the understanding that paleontological articles are more likely to be 
primarily descriptive in nature, as they focus on wide scale systems, thus requiring a higher 
information density, whereas physical chemists focus their attention deeply on a single 
phenomenon at a time.  At the same time, this linguistic opposition may also reflect differing 
principles of rhetorical organization: perhaps physical chemists prefer a single coherent ‘story 
line’ focused on enhancements of a small number of focal propositions, whereas paleontologists 
may prefer a multifocal ‘landscape’ of connected propositions.  Future work may include also 
interviews and surveys of the two types of scientists, regarding these points. 
Next, in the system of COMMENT, the one clear opposition that emerges is between preference for 
Validative comments by paleontologists and for Predictive comments by physical chemists.  This 
linguistic opposition can be directly related to methodological differences between the historical 
and experimental sciences.  The (historical) paleontologist has a rhetorical need to explicitly 
delineate the scope of validity of different assertions, as part of synthetic thinking process (Baker 
1996) about complex and ambiguous webs of past causation (Cleland 2002).  This is not a primary 
concern, however, of the (experimental) physical chemist; his/her main focus is prediction: the 
predictive strength of a theory and the consistency of evidence with theoretical predictions. 
Finally, we consider the (complicated) system of MODALITY.  At the coarse level represented by 
the simple features (in Table 3), we see a primary opposition in Type.  The preference of the 
(experimental) physical chemist for Modulation (assessing what ‘ought’ or ‘is able’ to happen) is 
consistent with a focus on prediction and manipulation of nature.  The (historical) paleontologist’s 
preference for Modalization (assessing ‘likelihood’ or ‘usuality’) is consistent with the outlook of 
a “neutral observer” who cannot directly manipulate or replicate outcomes. This is supported also 
by patterns within the complex features crossing modality Type and Manifestation (see Table 4).  
In Manifestation, we might say that Implicit variants are more likely for options that are well-
integrated into the expected rhetorical structure, while Explicit realizations are more likely to draw 
attention to less characteristic types of modal assessment.  We find that Modalization is preferably 
Implicit for paleontology but Explicit for physical chemistry; just the reverse holds true for 
Modulation.  In this way, Modalization is integrated smoothly into the overall environment of 
paleontological rhetoric, and similarly Modulation is a part of the rhetorical environment of 
physical chemistry. 
 
 Historical Experimental 
 Palaios Quat Res Ph Ch A Ph Ch B 
Palaios -- 74% 91% 91% 
Quat Res 74% -- 83% 86% 
Ph Ch A 91% 83% -- 68% 
Ph Ch B 91% 86% 68% -- 
Table 2. Accuracy for linear SMO learning (with feature normalization) for 
pairs of journals, using 20-fold cross-validation. 
 
Historical Experimental 
Palaios QR PCA PCB 
Systemic Features PCA PCB PCA PCB Pal QR Pal QR 
         
Appositive         
Elaboration 
Clarifying         
         
Additive         
Adversative         
Extension 
Verifying         
         
Manner         
Matter         
         
Simple         
S/T 
Complex         
         
Cause         
CONJUNCTION 
Enhancement 
CC 
Cond.         
Admissive         
Assertive         
Presumptive         
Desiderative         
Tentative         
Validative         
Evaluative         
COMMENT 
Predictive         
         
Probability         
Modalization 
Usuality         
         
Obligation         
Type 
Modulation 
Readiness         
Median         
High         
Value 
Low         
Objective         Orientation 
Subjective         
Implicit         
M
O
D
A
L
IT
Y
 
Manifest 
Explicit         
Table 3. Significant simple features for each class in classification tests pairing each 
historical science journal in the study with each experimental journal.  Features were 
sorted according to their weights learned in each two journal classification test (e.g., 
Palaios vs. Phys. Chem. A  in the first column, Palaios vs. Phys. Chem. B in the second, 
and so forth).  Black squares represent features whose weights are in the top 15 for the 
main class of the column, and grey squares those with weights in the second 15.   
 
 
 
 
Value Orientation Manifestation    
Med High Low Obj Subj Impl Expl 
 Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B B/P 
 Q/A A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Prob Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B B/P 
 A/Q P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Modal 
Usual Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
 B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
 B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Oblig B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
Type 
Modul 
Readi Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
— 
Median    Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
High    B/Q B/P 
 A/Q P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 Q/A A/P 
Value 
Low    B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
Q/B B/P 
 Q/A A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
Objective Q/B P/B 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q P/A 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
  Q/B B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
Orient 
Subjective B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B B/P 
 Q/A A/P 
  B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Q/B B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
Implicit Q/B B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
Q/B B/P 
 Q/A P/A 
B/Q B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
  Manif 
Explicit B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
B/Q B/P 
Q/AA/P 
Q/B P/B 
 A/Q A/P 
B/Q P/B 
 A/Q P/A 
Q/B B/P 
 A/Q A/P 
  
 
Table 4. Combined features from Modality.  Each cell in the table represents a feature 
corresponding to a modal indicator realizing options from two Modality systems simultaneously.  
For example, the top-left cell gives results for the aggregate of indicators realizing 
Type/Modalization and also Value/Median.  In each cell are listed the models in which the 
corresponding feature is associated: A=J. Phys. Chem A, B=J. Phys. Chem. B, P=Palaios, 
Q=Quaternary Res.  The lower portion of each notation shows the “opposing” class for a given 
model, i.e.,  P/A represents the model that classifies an article as being from Palaios as opposed to 
J. Phys. Chem. A, and so forth.  The heavily outlined cells are those whose preferring classes are 
consistent, i.e, either all historical (P, Q) or all experimental (A, B).  
 
5 Example Texts 
We now consider two short illustrative passages from articles in our corpus.  These have been 
marked up (by hand) for the three main oppositions we identified above—we have marked 
realizations of each of the six features: EXTENSION, enhancement, validative comment, 
predictive comment, modalization, and modulation. 
Paleontology: 
Biologists agree that global warming is likely to produce changes in the diversity and 
distribution of species, BUT the magnitude, timing and nature of such responses remains 
unclear. Animals may be affected directly by altered temperature and/or moisture regimes, for 
example, OR indirectly through associated vegetation changes. For herbivores in particular, 
direct effects are likely to be compounded by vegetation changes, especially in the case of 
animals with specialized habitat affinities or relatively small home ranges. Climatic change may 
ALSO occur too rapidly for animals to adapt, OR they may be unable to adapt because of 
physiological or phylogenetic constraints. Under such circumstances, species may become 
locally extinct. Estimating the potential range of adaptive response to climatic and vegetative 
shifts is clearly crucial to an understanding of the effects of global warming on terrestrial 
ecosystems, YET it requires a more thorough understanding of life history and ecosystem 
function than is often available.   
(Smith & Betancourt 2003) 
Physical Chemistry: 
In this experiment, the oxidation scan was run first and then followed by the reduction scan in 
the reverse direction.  Above E=0.4V, the Cu(II) spin density reaches an average plateau value 
indicating that no spin coupling occurs between the neighboring copper centers.  HOWEVER, in 
addition to this plateau, obtained in the oxidation scan, three local maxima in spin density are 
clearly observed at 0.48, 0.78, and 1.1 V, which very well correlate with the redox waves 
observed in the CV of poly[1,3,cu+].  Interestingly, in the reduction scan, the polymer film 
gives rise to only two spin density maxima at potential values close to those of the redox waves 
corresponding to the reduction of copper AND to the first redox wave of the polymer reduction.  
Surprisingly, the matrix spin density is very low AND reaches only ca. 5% of the copper(II) spin 
density, whereas both oxidizable components of poly[1,3,Cu+] show comparable 
electroactivity.  In the simplest interpretation, such behavior can be regarded as a clear 
manifestation of the recombination of initially formed radical cations to spinless dications.  This 
is not unexpected, since bipolarons are the dominant charge-storage configurations in 
essentially all thienylene-based conducting polymers.  The onset of the spin appearance can be 
correlated with the onset of the first oxidation wave of the polymer oxidation.  HOWEVER, 
contrary to the case of copper spin response, the spin response of the polymer is smooth and 
monotonic AND does not follow the current peaks recorded in the CV experiment.  This 
underlines the efficiency of the polaron recombination process. 
(Divisia-Blohorn et al. 2003) 
Briefly, in the first passage above, from Quaternary Research, we see in a short space how 
frequent use of extension allows the construction of a complex of interrelated propositions, with 
no one focal point (though all are related to the basic theme of “global warming” and “climatic 
change”).  We also see a clear preference for modalization, involving multiple levels of 
probabilistic assessment (e.g., “may”, “likely”, “clearly”), placing most propositions explicitly on 
a scale of variable likelihood.  The use of validative comments (“under such circumstances”) also 
serves to circumscribe the validity of the assertions in the passage. 
In the passage from J. Phys. Chem. B, on the other hand, we see the use of enhancement (primarily 
temporal and causal) in creating a narrative story-line which serves to organize presentation both 
of the experimental procedure but also of the interpretation of results.  Extension is used mostly to 
construct small local structures which fit as a whole into the larger narrative line.  Predictive 
comments are used (“surprisingly”, “not unexpected”) to emphasize certain results and also to 
place them into the larger context.  Note also that the ambiguous modal assessment “can be” is 
used here to realize modulation (i.e., “it can be regarded…” = “we are able to regard it as…”).   
6 Conclusions 
This chapter has demonstrated how the use of machine learning techniques combined with a set of 
linguistically-motivated features can be used to provide empirical evidence for rhetorical 
differences between writing in different scientific fields.  Further, by analyzing the models’ output 
by the learning procedure, we can see what features realize the differences in register that are 
correlated with different fields.  This method thus provides indirect empirical evidence for 
methodological variation between the sciences, insofar as rhetorical preferences can be identified 
which can be linked with particular modes of methodological reasoning.  This study thus lends 
empirical support to those philosophers of science who argue against a monolithic “scientific 
method”. 
The current study is only the beginning, of course.  To make more general and stable conclusions, 
a much larger corpus of articles, from a wider variety of journals, will be needed.  We are 
currently working on collecting and processing such a corpus.  More fundamentally, there are 
serious limitations to using keyword/phrase counts as indicators for systemic options.  
Overcoming this limitation will require the construction of an accurate shallow systemic parser, 
which can enable a more general and more precise way to analyze the systemic functional options 
realized in a text.  The rhetorical parsing methods developed by Marcu (2000) are an important 
step in this direction.  Also, automatic methods for discovering rhetorically important features, 
similar to the subjectivity collocations of Wiebe et al. (2001) may be helpful. 
It should also be noted that the current study treats each article as an indivisible whole.  However, 
as noted by Lewin et al. (2001) in their analysis of social science texts, the rhetorical organization 
of an article varies in different sections of the text—future work will include studying how 
systemic preferences vary also across different sections of individual texts, by incorporating 
techniques such as those developed by Teufel and Moens (1998). 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Jonathan Fine for feedback on an early version of the manuscript, as well as to the 
editors and anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments. 
References 
Argamon, S., M. Koppel, J.  Fine and A. R.  Shimoni (2003a).  Gender, Genre, and Writing Style 
in Formal Written Texts.  Text, 23(3). 
Argamon, S., M. Šari, S. S. Stein (2003b).  Style mining of electronic messages for multiple 
authorship discrimination: First Results.  In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining 2003. 
Baayen, H., H. van Halteren, F. Tweedie (1996). Outside the cave of shadows: Using syntactic 
annotation to enhance authorship attribution, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 11. 
Baker, V.R. (1996). The pragmatic routes of American Quaternary geology and geomorphology. 
Geomorphology 16, pp. 197-215. 
Cleland, C.E.  (2002).  Methodological and epistemic differences between historical science and 
experimental science.  Philosophy of Science. 
Diamond, J. (1999).  Guns, Germs, & Steel, New York: W. W. Norton and Company. 
Divisia-Blohorn, B., F. Genoud, C. Borel, G. Bidan, J-M. Kern, and J-P. Sauvage (2003).  
Conjugated Polymetallorotaxanes: In-Situ ESR and Conductivity Investigations of Metal-
Backbone Interactions, J. Phys. Chem. B, 107, pp. 5126-5132. 
Dodick, J. T., & N. Orion. (2003). Geology as an Historical Science: Its Perception within Science 
and the Education System. Science and Education, 12(2). 
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In 
R.J. Sternberg, & J. Davidson (Eds.). Mechanisms of Insight. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, pp. 365-
395. 
Eggins, S. & J. R. Martin, (1997).  Genres and registers of discourse. In T. A. van Dijk, Discourse 
as structure and process. A multidisciplinary introduction. Discourse studies 1.  London: Sage, pp. 
230–256.  
Goodwin, C. (1994).  Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), pp. 606-633. 
Gould, S. J. (1986).  Evolution and the Triumph of Homology, or, Why History Matters, American 
Scientist, Jan.-Feb. 1986:60-69. 
Gregory M., (1967).  Aspects of varieties differentiation, Journal of Linguistics 3:177-198. 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1991). Corpus linguistics and probabilistic grammar. In Karin Aijmer & Bengt 
Altenberg (ed.), English Corpus Linguistics: Studies in honour of Jan Svartvik. (London: 
Longman), pp. 30-44. 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994). An Introduction to Functional Grammar. (London: Edward Arnold). 
Hasan, R. (1988). Language in the process of socialisation: Home and school. In J. Oldenburg, Th. 
v Leeuwen, & L. Gerot (ed.), Language and socialisation: Home and school; Proceedings from 
the Working Conference on Language in Education, 17-21 November, 1986. North Ryde, N.S.W.: 
Macquarie University. 
Holmes, D. I. and Forsyth, R. S. (1995). The federalist revisited: New directions in authorship 
attribution. .  Literary and Linguistic Computing, 10(2):111-126 
Joachims, T. (1998). Text categorization with Support Vector Machines: Learning with many 
relevant features. In Machine Learning: ECML-98, Tenth European Conference on Machine 
Learning, pp. 137-142. 
Koppel, M., S. Argamon, and A. R. Shimoni (2003).  Automatically categorizing written texts by 
author gender.  Literary and Linguistic Computing 17(4). 
Latour, B. & S. Woolgar, (1986).  Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Lewin, B.A., J. Fine, & L. Young (2001).  Expository Discourse: A Genre-Based Approach to 
Social Science Research Texts, Continuum Press. 
Losee, R. M. (1996).  Text Windows and Phrases Differing by Discipline, Location in Document, 
and Syntactic Structure.  Information Processing & Management, 32(6):747-767. 
Marcu, D. (2000). The Rhetorical Parsing of Unrestricted Texts: A Surface-Based Approach. 
Computational Linguistics, 26(3):395-448. 
Martin, J. R. (1992).  English Text: System and Structure. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Matthews, R. A. J. and Merriam, T. V. N. (1997). Distinguishing literary styles using neural 
networks. In Fiesler, E. and Beale, R., editors, Handbook of Neural Computation, chapter 8. 
Oxford University Press. 
Matthiessen, C. (1995). Lexicogrammatical Cartography: English Systems.  Tokyo, Taipei & 
Dallas: International Language Sciences Publishers. 
Mayr, E. (1976).  Evolution and the Diversity of Life.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist 
Papers, Reading, Mass. : Addison Wesley. 
Ochs, E., S. Jacoby, & P. Gonzales, (1994).  Interpretive journeys: How physicists talk and travel 
through graphic space, Configurations 1:151-171. 
Platt, J. (1998), Sequential Minimal Optimization: A Fast Algorithm for Training Support Vector 
Machines, Microsoft Research Technical Report MSR-TR-98-14. 
Plum, G. A. & A. Cowling. (1987). Social constraints on grammatical variables: Tense choice in 
English. In Ross Steele & Terry Threadgold (ed.), Language topics. Essays in honour of Michael 
Halliday. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization, ACM Computing 
Surveys, 34(1):1-47. 
Smith, F. A. and J. L. Betancourt (2003).  The effect of Holocene temperature fluctuations on the 
evolution and ecology of Neotoma (woodrats) in Idaho and northwestern Utah, Quaternary 
Research 59:160 -171. 
Stamatatos, E., N. Fakotakis & G. Kokkinakis, (2001).  Computer-based authorship attribution 
without lexical measures, Computers and the Humanities 35. 
Teufel, S., and Moens, M. (1998). Sentence extraction and rhetorical classification for flexible 
abstracts. In Proc. AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelligent Text Summarization. 
Wiebe, J., T. Wilson and M. Bell.  (2001).  Identifying Collocations for Recognizing Opinions.  In 
Proc. ACL/EACL ’01 Workshop on Collocation, Toulouse, France, July 200. 
 
Whewell, W. (1837). History of the Inductive Sciences, John W. Parker, London. 
Witten, I.H. and Frank E. (1999).   Weka 3: Machine Learning Software in Java; 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka. 
Yule, G.U. (1938). On Sentence Length as a Statistical Characteristic of Style in Prose with 
Application to Two Cases of Disputed Authorship, Biometrika, 30:363-390. 
 
 
