Introduction
Welcome to this special topic section on the computa-
tional analysis of style, which brings together for the first
time diverse research work in this unique and exciting area.
This marks the emergence, within the information sciences,
of a new research community focused on understanding
style as it is expressed in and understood from human
artifacts and behaviors of various kinds, including (among
others) natural language texts, visual art, music, architecture,
cinema, and games. Researchers working on these prob-
lems come from backgrounds as diverse as computational
linguistics, cognitive science, computer graphics/vision,
architecture, computer music, decision theory, and machine
learning. What all of us have in common is an interest in un-
derstanding and analyzing style using computational tools.
Style-related work in every medium involves the problem
of how to formalize some notion of what “style” is, and of
developing a modeling language that supports the represen-
tation of differing styles; however, due to the widely varying
technical requirements of work in different media, little
communication has traditionally existed between different
“style researchers.” The main goal of this special topic sec-
tion of the Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology is to help bridge this gap.
We first started to explore the possibility of useful connec-
tions between work in various media at a 1-day workshop on
“Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthe-
sis” in August 2003, held in Acapulco, as part of the Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI).
The goal of the workshop was to bring style researchers
together to seek common languages and frameworks for dis-
cussion as well as to explore the possibility of a shared test-
bed of stylistic analysis tasks. Because we come from very
different research areas, much of our effort at that workshop
was naturally spent bridging language barriers; however,
though no meaningful shared tasks could be defined, we did
succeed in identifying a number of common issues and
themes in our research. This workshop was followed by a 
21⁄2-day American Association for the Advancement of Infor-
mation (AAAI) Fall Symposium on “Style and Meaning in
Language, Art, Music, and Design” in October 2004. During
this second meeting, an even more diverse body of scientists,
musicians, and artists attempted, and often succeeded, at
shedding some light on what themes unite us and what issues
may divide us as style researchers.
It is indeed quite difficult to characterize what we mean
by “style” in a satisfactorily formal manner, rather we tend
to know it when we see it. Hence, it is unsurprising that
widely disparate methods are used in research on different
media; however, some common denominators of much of
this work can be identified. They include:
• An interest in separating “manner” from “topic,”
• a focus on how feeling and attitude is expressed and
understood,
• an examination of the relationships between natural
varieties, or “genres,” of artifacts in a particular medium, and
• a search for “dense” representations in which elements
simultaneously symbolize multiple layers of meaning at once.
Specific technological application of style analysis has
resulted in applied research and development of many sys-
tems for a variety of tasks, such as forensic authorship attri-
bution of natural language texts, genre-based information
retrieval, opinion analysis of product reviews and consumer
feedback, composition of new music in a given composer’s
style, intelligent musical accompaniment systems, rendering
of animation in different motion styles, and analysis of
architectural style for function and affect.
Furthermore, study of style analysis and synthesis from
the perspective of information science has the promise of
illuminating fundamental humanistic and social issues as
well as helping bring a more human face to our increasingly
technology-centered society.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 57(11):1503–1505, 2006
Introduction to the Special Topic Section on the
Computational Analysis of Style
Shlomo Argamon
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, 10 West 31st Street, Chicago, IL 60616. 
E-mail: argamon@iit.edu
Accepted March 24, 2005
© 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. • Published online 14  July 2006 in Wiley
InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.20426
Research Questions
Computational work on style in all media must deal with the
question of how to formalize what is meant by style (in a partic-
ular context), and how to develop a suitable modeling language
tosupport the representationofvariousstyles.Due to thewidely
varying technical requirements of work in different media,
methods used to address this problem differ quite widely.At the
same time, though, thereareanumberofoverarching issues that
most style-analysis methods must deal with in some way.
Layers of Style
A primary issue is the fact that the style of any particular
artifact will be derived from a great variety of influences.
For example, the style of a Beethoven violin concerto will
have similarities to (a) other concerti, (b) other violin pieces,
(c) other classical period pieces, (d) other pieces written
around the end of the 18th century, (e) Beethoven’s other
works of that time, (f) other works written for that particular
patron, and so on. While some of these effects may be sub-
tle, an overall style is composed of a mixture and interaction
between many such stylistic “strata.” A key problem, then, is
how to separate these strata and coherently model them.
Surface Versus Depth
Closely related is the question of what kinds of models
may be used to effectively model different styles. Work to date
has typically used models based on structural and statistical
relationships between “surface” features such as words and
parts-of-speech in text; notes, intervals, and chords in music;
and geometric relations between lines or regions in images.
While many methods exist (in the statistics, information the-
ory, and machine learning literature) for modeling and ex-
ploiting short-range statistical relations in such data (once
features are extracted), effectively, application to style
requires addressing some novel scientific problems. One of
the problems is characterization of statistical dependencies
between multiple concurrent variables, such as different mu-
sical lines in a musical piece or visual, audio, and narrative
content in a film (in addition to the multiple stylistic strata that
may be present even in a single structural layer of an artifact).
Another important question is how to characterize
generic structure with stylistic variation: Most artworks gen-
erally start from a typical “generic” structure (e.g., scene se-
quence in a film, sonata form in music, or even narrative
structure in a written novel) and construct a variation on that
theme. How might such high-order structure be generally
characterized? What may determine long-distance depen-
dencies in the data, and can we formalize or model the
dynamics of such long-term processes?
Furthermore, we may assume that the statistical relation-
ships between features that constitute a stylistic model are re-
flective of some deeper characteristic of the context that gives
rise to a particular style. For example, the fact that advertising
text typically contains more second-person pronouns than do
news articles may be ascribed (more or less) to the desire of
advertising to “personalize” its message whereas journalism
will typically strive for an “objective” voice. How, then, might
such contextual links between features and deeper “stylistic
meanings” be discovered? How might more meaningful fea-
tures of artifacts be extracted to make more explicit the con-
nection with purpose and affect in the stylistic context?
Indeed, the interdependence of content and style is quite
complex, and work to date has barely scratched the surface.
Other than simply teasing apart features representing style
from those representing content, we also may investigate in
what ways content may inform or constrain style. Moreover,
we may ask how style may relate to particular interpretations
of the content, in that style may affect not only the connota-
tion of a piece but also how its denotational meaning is per-
ceived. Ultimately, a satisfactory computational theory of
style must confront the necessity of modeling interactions
between people which can take place across large intervals
of time and space, mediated by a shared artifact (e.g., text,
musical piece, artwork, building).
Articles in This Special Section
The five articles in this special topic section cover a broad
cross-section of current computational work on stylistic
problems, illuminating a range of fundamental issues in
computational style analysis. Articles for this section were
sought via three channels: (a) an open call for papers, (b) so-
licitation of expanded versions of the best papers accepted to
the 2003 IJCAI workshop, and (c) solicitation of articles
from selected top researchers in the field. All submitted arti-
cles were reviewed by at least two expert referees. The Guest
Editor made the final decisions and ensured that requested
revisions were made. This procedure ensured inclusion of a
wide variety of high-quality research in this emerging area.
The first two articles in the special section address issues
of stylistic classification of natural language text, developing
general computational techniques which also may (with suit-
able modification) be applicable to other media as well. The
third article addresses the relationship of statistical measures
of musical style with human perception. The last two articles
address aspects of geometric features useful for classifying
style of two-dimensional patterns, in architecture and in art.
The first article, “Learning to Classify Documents Ac-
cording to Genre,” by Finn and Kushmerick addresses the
fundamental stylistic task of classifying documents by
genre. In contrast to previous studies of this question, this
article focuses on “domain transfer;” that is, determining
how a stylistic model of genre differences learned in one
topic domain (e.g., “football”) can be usefully applied to
documents from a different domain (e.g., “politics”). The
authors show that attaining such domain transfer is nontriv-
ial, although it can be achieved by the proper choice of fea-
tures by which to represent a document. Based on this
observation, they further show how using an ensemble
learner that combines results of multiple independent mod-
eling processes can improve results by combining multiple
views on the stylistic classification problem.
1504 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
In “Feature Instability as a Criterion for Selecting Poten-
tial Style Markers,” Koppel, Akiva, and Dagan describe a
novel and unique method for addressing a difficult and criti-
cal problem in style analysis: Which textual features should
be used for stylistic text classification? The main idea is to
try and find those features (e.g., words or affixes) of a text
that have many “semantic equivalents.” Such features are
expected to vary with language style, and thus to be useful
for modeling different document styles. The authors’ method
is based on examining what happens to a text when trans-
lated back and forth from its original language to one of sev-
eral other languages. Features of the text (e.g., words, parts
of speech, etc.) that are topic-dependent will tend to be trans-
lated back to the same elements (most of the time) while
stylistic features will have more tendency to vary (due to
syntactic and semantic differences between languages).
Experimental results show that a measure of “feature insta-
bility,” derived from the entropy of the feature distribution in
multiple “equivalent” versions of the same document, gives
a useful ranking of features for stylistic text classification.
This work thus points toward how “style” may be teased
apart from “topic” by creating multiple “equivalent” texts.
A different statistical approach to stylistic analysis is
taken by Dubnov, McAdams, and Reynolds in “Structural
and Affective Aspects of Music from Statistical Audio
Signal Analysis,” a study of human perception of stylistic
aspects of musical performance over time. The authors
examine how the statistics of signal self-similarity and
information-theoretic measures of redundancy can predict
listeners’ reports of the “familiarity” and “emotional force”
of different passages in two versions of a modern musical
composition. They show that such “low-level” measures of
properties of the audio signal actually predict listeners’
responses quite well, indicating that people’s expectancies
and feelings can be usefully (if partially) modeled by such
statistical models. These methods and results give a new
basis for validating computational measures of stylistic sim-
ilarity and difference, and have clear implications for cogni-
tive psychological studies of perception. The work also
has likely application in musical information retrieval and
possibly for automated music composition.
“A Qualitative Feature-Based Characterization of 2D
Architectural Style,” by Jupp and Gero, also describes the
use of information-theoretic methods to stylistic analysis; in
this case, to the novel problem of automated analysis of
architectural style based on building floor plans. The com-
plexity engendered by the combination of geometrical and
topological features in a two-dimensional space severely
limits the applicability of traditional analysis methods. The
authors therefore developed a novel method for addressing
this problem, first developing a scheme for encoding floor-
plan designs as topological arrangements of spatial features.
Such features include both the shape of particular areas in the
floor plan as well as several types of geometric relations be-
tween adjacent areas. This methodology enables the authors
to represent a floor plan as a graph whose properties give a
stylistic characterization of the design. Information-theoretic
measures of complexity are applied to the graph and sum-
marize the global stylistic character. They demonstrate the
utility of the method by using it to analyze the evolution of
Frank Lloyd Wright’s architectural style, showing that each
of his definable “periods” have distinctive stylistic charac-
terizations in terms of the Encoder–Analyzer model.
In the final article, “Modal Relationships as Stylistic
Features: Examples from Seljuk and Celtic Patterns,” Özkar
and Lefford give another view on how to analyze style in geo-
metric patterns, by looking for modal relationships between
visual elements that can serve as stylistic descriptors. The au-
thors note that relevant relationships between elements often
depend on an artist’s or perceiver’s historical, cultural, or
cognitive context, and so cannot be defined objectively once
and for all. The key point is that a given artifact works within
a structural framework within which the relevant modal rela-
tionships may be defined. This framework can be thought of
as similar to a “genre” in literature, and comprises constraints
(physical, cultural, or personal) on possible relationships be-
tween artistic elements in a piece. To date, almost no formal
work has been done on representing such context-dependent
features due to the difficulty of formalizing them. In this in-
novative article, the authors show how a detailed analysis of
such relationships can illuminate stylistic issues within a
given artistic context, applied to analysis of Seljuk (Turkish)
geometric motifs and Celtic knot patterns. While the analyses
here are specific to these genres, the approach bodes well for
development of more general techniques in the future.
Conclusion
It is clear that however we may understand it, style is an
essential part of what it means to be human, and thus an ef-
fective computational treatment of style is of increasing im-
portance as our lives become ever more intertwined with a
great variety of information technologies. In application, we
may envision that computational research on style will be
increasingly central to the effort to “build bridges of under-
standing” between people and information-system systems
such as in machine translation, user-adaptive interfaces, or
intelligent agents. Beyond any specific technological appli-
cations, though, a deeper understanding of style, from the
mundane (e.g., the different ways people walk) to the sub-
lime (e.g., Monet’s lilies or Verdi’s operas), is fundamental
to understanding how we perceive and interact with our
environment and our society. A new research community is
now coalescing to study this age-old problem, informed
by the diverse traditions of artificial intelligence, cognitive
science, statistics, and psychology, together with humanities
scholarship, artistic expression, and philosophical inquiry.
Acknowledgments
I extend many thanks to all the reviewers for their superb
contribution to this special topic section. I also thank the
JASIST editorial board, particularly Don Kraft and Ophir
Frieder, for helping to bring this special section  to fruition.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2006 1505
DOI: 10.1002/asi
