Automatic text block separation in document images
Arvind.K.R, Peeta Basa Pati, A.G.Ramakrishnan
M.I.L.E Laboratory, Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore-560012, India,
arvind@ ragashri. ee. iisc. ernet. in, pati@ ee. iisc. ernet. in, ramkiag@ ee. iisc. emret. in
Abstract
Separation of printed text blocks from the non-text areas,
containing signatures, handwritten text, logos and other such
symbols, is a necessary first step for an OCR involving printed
text recognition. In the present work, we compare the efficacy
of some feature-classifier combinations to carry out this sep-
aration task. We have selected length-normalized horizontal
projection profile (HPP) as the starting point of such a sepa-
ration task. This is with the assumption that the printed text
blocks contain lines of text which generate HPP's with some
regularity. Such an assumption is demonstrated to be valid.
Our features are the HPP and its two transformed versions,
namely, eigen and Fisher profiles. Four well known classifiers,
namely, Nearest neighbor, Linear discriminantfunction, SVM's
and artificial neural networks have been considered and
efficiency of the combination of these classifiers with the above
features is compared. A sequential floating feature selection
technique has been adopted to enhance the efficiency of this
separation task. The results give an average accuracy of about
96%.
Keywords: Eigen profiles, Fisher profiles, horizontal projec-
tion profile.
1. INTRODUCTION
Analysis of a document image involves some of the following
tasks: (i) to convert a it to editable text for its re-usability, (ii)
extract important information from it, (iii) separate the text and
non-text elements of the image and interpret the nature of the
image either by analysis of the text or non-text elements, (iv)
analyze the document image, either in parts or as a whole to
extract information to enable efficient archiving and retrieval.
Many official documents consist of a multiple set of objects
such as text (printed and handwritten), signature, bar-codes,
logos and seals. An ideally drafted document would contain
these objects as non-overlapping blocks. In such cases, it is
easy to separate each of these blocks into distinct classes
of objects, before further processing to interpret them. For
example, if a segmented block from a text image is known to
be a scenic natural image, we could probably employ a scene
analysis technique to interpret the nature of the document. If
the block has a face image, we may employ a face recognition
algorithm to see the person and the context of the document.
In many situations, this would aid the job of text image
interpretation.
Djeziri et. al. [1] propose a scheme for extraction of signa-
tures from bank cheques. They assume that such documents
have a lot of background patterns which they state causes
a lot of difficulty for extraction of signatures. Based on a
topological criterion specific to handwritten lines, which they
call filiformity, they report good accuracy in segmenting the
signatures out of such patterned background documents.
Guo and Ma [2] propose a scheme which combines the
statistical variations in projection profiles with hidden markov
models (HMM's) to separate the handwritten material from the
machine printed text. They hypothesize that machine printed
text has a large number of regularities on the projection profile.
This is missing in handwritten annotations owing to the varia-
tions in style, author and environment. In a similar approach,
Kavallieratou and Stamatatos [3] try to take advantage of the
structural properties that help humans discriminate printed
from handwritten text. In their opinion, the height of the
printed characters is more or less stable within a text-line
while the distribution of the height of handwritten characters is
quite diverse. These remarks stand for the height of the main
body of the characters as well as the height of both ascenders
and descenders. Thus, the ratio of ascender's and descender's
height to main body's height would be stable in printed text
and variable in handwriting.
Fan et. al. [4] propose a scheme for classification of
machine-printed and handwritten texts using variance of the
character block layout. In their approach, the orientation of a
text block is first divided into horizontal or vertical direction by
analyzing the widths of valleys of vertical (X) and horizontal
(Y) projection profiles of a text block image. Then, a reduced
X-Y cut algorithm is utilized to obtain the base blocks from a
text block image. Finally, the spatial feature, character block
layout variance, is devised to achieve the classification goal.
They claim that this technique could be applied to English or
Chinese document images.
Neumann et. al. [5] present a comparative study involving
the local and global shape descriptors for logo classification.
They use a negative shape method which is based on local
shape information and a wavelet-based method which uses
global information. Finally, they use these results to develop a
new adaptive weighing scheme which is based on the relative
performances of these two methods. They claim that this
scheme is robust to all kinds of degradations.
Hobby [6] proposes a scheme to find signatures, text and
graphic objects in document images by using shape and layout
information. Pal and Chaudhuri [7] use horizontal projection
1-4244-0612-9/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.
profiles for separating the printed and hand-written lines in
Bangla script. Sabari et. al. [8] use Gabor function based filter-
bank to classify the text elements against all other kinds of
clutter. They claim the technique to be working efficiently on
camera captured images as well.
Thus, researchers have taken various approaches to segment
and analyze a document page image for its constituent objects.
Most of such reported schemes either deal with segmenting
an image into blocks of text and non-text or assume a fair
segmentation scheme and take each of the segmented blocks
for analysis of its content. In most of the latter case scenarios,
segmentation of the image is accomplished manually. In the
present work, we demonstrate the efficiency of various feature
classifier combinations for separating text blocks from non-text
blocks. Our non-text blocks consist of signatures, handwritten
text, logos and other such objects. We consider a block
containing text and also some non-text elements as a text block
so as not to lose any text material. Typical examples of text
and non-text blocks are shown in figures 1(a) and 1(b).
(b)
Fig. 1: (a)Example of a typical text block. (b)Example of a typical non text
block.
2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
We employ a transform based scheme for separation of text
blocks from non-text blocks. However, in a case where both
text and non-text elements are present, we consider this block
as a text block. In the following sub-sections, we briefly
describe the various features and classifiers, we intend to
employ, for accomplishing the separation task and the results
obtained by various combinations of them.
A. Building Block Segmentation
We start the process with the assumption that text blocks
contain atleast a few lines of text. When we consider the
horizontal projection profile of such blocks, we see a repetitive
pattern as demonstrated in the Figure 2(b). In most cases of
non-text blocks, this pattern is more of random in nature (see
figure 2(a)). Thus, we proceed to classify the text blocks from
the non-text elements.
Our dataset consists of 1000 document images, scanned
at 200 dpi and stored in 1-bit depth, black and white text
format. These documents contain signatures, logos and other
(a)
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~OW,PP
(b)
Fig. 2: (a)Figure showing HPP of text block. (b)Figure showing HPP of
non-text block.
such things along with free-flowing text paragraphs. Since our
starting point is a set of document page images, containing
both text and non-text elements, we divided the page image
into smaller segments. These segments are typical paragraphs
and we call them building blocks, since they combine to build
up the page. This task is accomplished as mentioned below
(refer figure 3):
F Run-length smooth the page document image both along
the rows and columns. The parameter for this is selected
such that the intra- and inter-character gaps, up to a
paragraph level, are filled.
s Sometimes two building blocks join because of the pres-
ence of straight lines or other noisy elements. Mostly, the
bridge between these building blocks are thin structures.
We apply a morphological opening operation to separate
these joints.
* Connected Component Analysis (CCA) segregates these
building blocks into separate entities. Each segmented
block is considered as an input for the text-separation
scheme.
As mentioned above, any building block which contains a
small amount of printed text in it is considered as a text-block.
B. Feature Vector Extraction
For separating the building blocks into text and non-text
blocks, we extract a feature vector from each block. In this
work, we have compared 3 different features that we have
employed to achieve a goal. The features are (i) horizontal
projection profile vector, (ii) eigen profile vector, and (iii)
Fisher profile vector. We provide a brief description of each
of these features in the following paragraphs.
1) Horizontal projection profile (HPP): HPP of an image
is a vector where each vector element contains the sum of the
pixel values in the corresponding row.
Fig. 3: Figure depicting the process of segmentation of the document image into blocks. First the document image is run-length smoothed. Then morphological
operators are applied. From this image, the blocks are segmented using Connected Component Analysis. Finally these blocks are classified.
ChMffi6tion .A
HPP(i)
No.ofcolumns
j=o
I(i, j)
where I(i, j) is the image. Since each building block has
different number of rows, it generates HPP's of different
dimension. We need to normalize the length of this feature
vector to a pre-defined standard size, so that it could easily be
used for classification. We have used bi-linear interpolation
to get the HPP's to a standard length. The length of our
normalized HPP is 330.
2) Eigen Profile (EP): Turk and Pentland [9] have used
K-L transform as a means of creating a linear subspace for
face recognition. Here, they consider training samples of face
images, each of the same dimension, M x N. The rows of each
face image are appended to make a MN dimensional vector.
They consider each face as a point in this MN dimensional
space. A linear subspace is created from this set of example
images by taking the eigen vectors of the covariance matrix of
the training set. This linear subspace is represented by these
eigen vectors and they call such vectors as eigen faces.
We consider a training set consisting of equal number of
text and non-text blocks. The length-normalized HPP's from
this set are used to create a subspace, as mentioned above.
We call these eigen vectors, representing the linear space, as
eigen profiles. Each length-normalized HPP is then projected
into this space and gets represented by a lower dimensional
coefficient vector. We use this coefficient vector as our feature
vector. For our experiments, we have taken 100 coefficients to
represent each building block.
3) Fisher Profile (FP): Belhumeur et. al. [10] proposed an
extension to the work by Turk and Pentland [9]. They observed
that the failure of the eigen faces, in case of lighting and
pose variation, to yield superior quality discrimination is due
to the large intra-class variability. The eigen faces, the eigen
vectors of the covariance matrix, don't really discriminate
between the intra- and inter-class variances. So, they proposed
a generalized eigen vector solution to overcome this problem.
They named these generalized eigen vectors, which are the
eigen vectors pointing to the directions of large inter-class
variance, as Fisher faces. The Fisher faces were also proven
to yield better result in cases of large lighting, expression and
pose variation. They yield no worse result if such variations
are not there, since in such cases, the Fisher faces are none
other than the eigen faces.
We have employed the scheme proposed by Belhumeur et.
al. on our length-normalized HPP's and extract the generalized
eigen vectors on our training set. We call them as the fisher
profiles. Here, also we consider the feature vector containing
100 projected coefficients, as in the case of eigen profiles.
C. Classification
We have used the following well known classifiers to accom-
plish the separation task. They are: (i) nearest neighbor (NN)
classifier, (ii) linear discriminant function (LDF), (iii) support
vector machines (SVM's) and (iv) artificial neural networks
(ANN).
Each building block is considered as a point in the feature
space. Our training set is a distribution of points in the feature
space. Each test feature vector is used for evaluating its
distance from all the points, in the feature space, using the
Euclidean metric. Using the Nearest neighbor (NN) classifier
principle, we assign the class value of the training vector with
minimum distance from the test vector, to the test building
block.
We assign a class value of 1 to the text blocks and -1
to the non-text blocks. A linear discriminant function (LDF)
is a hyper-plane in the feature space which separates these
two classes. A least-square solution approach is applied to
evaluate this function from the training set. Each test vector
is multiplied with this LDF to generate a class value. The
test block is assigned a text-block label if this generated class
value is found to be positive.
SVM's have been tested for their consistency in delivering
classification results across a wide variety of problems and
datasets. We have tested two different topologies of SVM's
[11], with RBF of degree 3 as the kernel function, to accom-
plish this text-block separation task. In the first case (SVM-
I), the ay factor is considered to be 2-19 and the trade-off
between training error & margin(C) is 1024. In the second
case (SVM-II), the above parameter has been chosen as 2-18
and 512, respectively. These values have been chosen based
on experimental evaluations over a wide range of values.
We also have explored the use of artificial neural networks
(ANN's) as possible decision maker. Here again, we have
explored the efficiency of two different topologies of ANN's.
ANN-I is a linear neural network while ANN-Il is a feed-
forward 3 layer ANN with the hidden and the output layer
containing 25 and 2 neurons, respectively. ANN-Ill is a Radial
Basis network with spread being 1.5 for all three profiles.
D. Feature Selection
A feature vector consists of a number of features. These
features could be statistical or syntactic features. We, gen-
erally, evaluate a number of features from our data without
considering the classifiability of a feature. In a situation like
this, a feature could have one of the following effects on the
classifier:
* contributes positively to the classification process,
* contributes negatively, and
* doesn't do anything - sits idle.
If a feature contributes positively, it enhances the accuracy
of classification. A feature with a negative impact, adversely
affects the accuracy while a feature which sits idle neither
enhances nor deteriorates the accuracy of the classification
process. However, it is always a good practice to remove both
the idle sitting and negatively impacting features from our
feature set.
Pudil et. al. [12] have proposed a sequential floating feature
selection scheme. This scheme has two approaches - (i)
starting from a single feature, keep adding features till the
optimal set is obtained, and (ii) starting from the whole set
of features, go on removing the features till the optimal set
is obtained. We have adopted this scheme for our feature
selection task.
3. EXPERIMENTS & RESULTS
In the first experiment, we tried to separate the text and
non-text blocks using various combinations of features and
classifiers. Here, we have used the HPP, EP and FP as the
features. NN, LDC, ANN-I, ANN-II, ANN-Ill, SVM-I and
SVM-II have been used as classifiers.
TABLE 1: RECOGNITION ACCURACY FOR THE TEXT/NON-TEXT BLOCK
SEPARATION FOR VARIOUS FEATURE-CLASSIFIER COMBINATIONS.
Method HPP EP FP
LDF 61.5 68 69
NN 81 81.5 79.5
SVM-I 91 94 89.5
SVM-II 94 92 91
ANN-I 62 68 69
ANN-II 82 85 62
ANN-III 81.5 82 85
It is, generally, observed that the length-normalized HPP's
yield better result in the transform domain than otherwise.
So, in the next experiment, we tried to select those features
from the EP's and FP's which yield us the maximum accuracy.
Figure 5 demonstrates that adopting such a scheme rewarded
us well. It can be noted from table II that the accuracy of
EP-NN combination rises to 96.5% after feature selection
from 81.5% before. Besides, we achieve this improvement
in accuracy with only 37 features in feature-reduced domain
as against 100 features in the previous case. Examples of
the classified and misclassified blocks are shown in figures
4(a), 4(b) and 4(c), 4(d) respectively. Similar studies on some
other combinations also yield improvement in accuracy. The
accuracies and the number of features for various feature-
classifier combination are shown in table II.
TABLE 2: RECOGNITION ACCURACY WITH SELECTED FEATURES AND
NUMBER OF FEATURES SELECTED IN THE FEATURE SELECTION PROCESS
FOR VARIOUS FEATURE-CLASSIFIER COMBINATIONS.
Accuracy No of Features
Method EP FP EP FP
LDF 91.5 84 10 85
NN 96.5 93 37 66
4. CONCLUSION & DISCUSSION
In this paper we present a comparative study of text/non-
text separation using various feature-classifier combinations.
Some of these reported combinations perform with accuracy
more than 90%. Our assumption that the text blocks have a
repetitive and cyclic profile is justified. Given that there is
little information about the non-text elements present in these
blocks, the achieved accuracy can be considered a success of
this experiment. However, further studies could only reveal the
optimal feature-classifier combination for this task.
The results have disproved our anticipation about the per-
formance of Fisher profiles. We, definitely, had expected better
I. I;
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 4: (a)Example of a correctly classified text block. (b)Example of a
correctly classified non-text block. (c)Example of a mis-classified text block
(d)Example of a mis-classified non-text block.
results from FP than from EP. The reason may be that there
is not much intra-class variability in the dataset.
Figure 5 demonstrates the efficiency of the employed feature
selection technique. It could be noted from this figure that the
optimal set contains only 37 features out of the set of 100
features. Any further addition to this optimal set maintains
the accuracy at the same level for some time and then reduces
the accuracy. Thus our feature set not only has sit-idles but
also many negative-impacting features.
The feature selection algorithm has definitely helped in
improving both the accuracy of separation and time of com-
putation. The selected set of 37 as against 100 features for
EP-NN combination gives us much better accuracy and a huge
saving in computation time. This study if evaluated for other
classifiers as well, may provide us with better results.
14
12
10
8
Lu
2 _
0 20 40 60
Number of Features
Fig. 5: Efficiency of sequential feature selection algorit
is achieved with 37 features only, further addition either
accuracy or increases error.
REFERENCES
[1] Salim Djeziri, F. Nouboud, and R. Plamondon,
tures from check background based on a filiform
Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 7, no. 10, F
[2] Jinhong K. Guo and Matthew Y Ma, "Separating
from machine printed text using hidden markov mo
of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition,
2001, pp. 439-443.
[3] Ergina Kavallieratou and Stathis Stamatatos, "Discrimination of
machine-printed from handwritten text using simple structural character-
istics," in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR'04), 2004, pp. 437-440.
[4] Kuo-Chin Fan, Liang-Shen Wang, and Yin-Tien Tu, "Classification
of machine-printed and handwritten texts using character block layout
variance," Pattern Recognition, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 1275-1284, 1998.
[5] Jan Neumann, Hanan Samet, and Aya Soffer, "Integration of local
and global shape analysis for logo classification," Pattern Recognition
Letters, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 1449-1457, 2002.
[6] J D Hobby, "Using shape and layout information to find signatures, text,
and graphics," Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol. 80, pp.
88-110, 2000.
[7] U. Pal and B. B. Chaudhuri, "Automatic separation of machine-
printed and hand-written text lines.," in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 1999, pp. 645-648.
80 100 [8] S Sabari Raju, P B Pati, and A G Ramakrishnan, "Gabor filter based
block energy analysis for text extraction from digital document images,"
in Proc. of the First Int. Workshop on Document Image Analysis for
thm. The lowest error Libraries (DIAL'04), 2004, pp. 233-243.
r doesn't improve the [9] M Turk and A Pentland, "Eigen faces for recognition," Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 71-86, 1991.
[10] Peter N. Belhumeur, J. P. Hespanha, and David J. Kriegman, "Eigenfaces
vs. fisherfaces: Recognition using class specific linear projection," IEEE
transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 19, no.
7, pp. 711-720, 1997.
[11] T. Joachims "Making large-Scale SVM Learning Practical. Advances in
"Extraction of signa- Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning," B. Schlkopf and C.Burges
iity criterion," IEEE and A. Smola (ed.), MIT-Press, 1999.
pp. 1425-1438,1998. [12] P. Pudil, J. Novovicova, and J. Kittler, "Floating search methods in
handwritten material feature selection," Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 15, pp. 1119-1125,
dels," in Proceedings 1994.
