Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
319 
 
A NOVEL STEERABLE FILTERS BASED FUZZY UNSHARP 
MASKING SCHEME FOR DOCUMENT IMAGES 
ENHANCEMENT  
 E. BALAMURUGAN1, DR. P. SENGOTTUVELAN2, K. SANGEETHA3  
1,3
Assistant Professor(s), Department of CA, BIT, Sathyamangalam, TamilNadu, India 
2
Associate Professor, Department of IT, BIT, Sathyamangalam, TamilNadu, India 
E-mail:  1rethinbs@gmail.com    
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Document image sweetening is to focus on the texts, handwritten characters and images in the Document. 
Problem with most of the document image analysis system is images with low contrast not able to produced 
optimal results. In this paper, a steerable filters based fuzzy unsharp masking algorithmic rule is given to 
improve the contrast of the document image. In this method we introduce the fuzzy set theory into the 
unsharp masking scheme. Moreover, in this proposed model includes the new methods to replace a high 
pass filter with manageable filters in unsharp masking scheme. Contrast enhancement is achieved through 
the open membership performance is projected to rework the output of steerable filters into fuzzy domain. 
The experimental results clearly show that the proposed methodology not slowly improves the image 
quality however will get a far better recognition performance. 
 
Keywords:- Document Image Enhancement, Steerable Filters, Unsharp Masking, And Fuzzy Set Theory, 
Unsharp Masking (UM) 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Recognition of Document Analysis aims to the 
automatic extraction of information presented on 
paper and initially addressed to human 
comprehension. The desired output of Document 
analysis and recognition systems is usually in a 
suitable symbolic representation that can 
subsequently be processed by computers. The 
most widely known applications of Document 
analysis and recognition are related to the 
processing of office documents (such as invoices, 
bank documents, business letters, and checks) and 
to the automatic mail sorting. With the current 
availability of inexpensive high-resolution 
scanning devices, combined with powerful 
computers, OCR packages can solve simple 
recognition tasks for most users. Recent research 
directions are widening the use of the recognition 
of document techniques, significant examples are 
the processing of ancient/historical documents in 
digital libraries, the information extraction from 
“digital born” documents, such as PDF and 
HTML, and the analysis of natural images 
(acquired with mobile phones and digital cameras) 
containing textual information. 
Several Preprocessing methods are proposed and 
tested by various researchers and also available 
for Document analysis and recognition system 
such as Binarization, image restoration, noise 
reduction, Skew detection etc [1].  In this paper 
our approach is to enhance the document image 
using steerable filters. In the literature survey 
various methods results are considered and we 
tend to found Negishi’s several automatic 
thresholding algorithms [2] in extracting character 
bodies from the noisy background.  In this 
algorithm it produces negative result for 
significantly large pictures and cases wherever the 
grey levels of the character elements overlap there 
with of the background. We later found in [3] 
morphological approach to extract text strings 
from regular periodic overlapping 
text/background images. [4]  [5] proposed  two 
binarization algorithms to victimization 
histogram-based edge detection and thin line 
modeling, severally. Finally   [6]  used the noise 
attribute options supported a simple noise model 
to beat the problem that some objects don't type 
outstanding peaks within the histogram. 
An approach for the improvement of faxed 
documents that's supported assumptions of 
character regularity is represented by metallic 
element by [7] during this approach, bitmaps of 
identical symbols present on constant page are 
clustered and averaged. The averaged symbols are 
then accustomed enhance the image. This is often 
a very effective technique for enhancing low 
resolution scans by combining multiple low-
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
320 
 
resolution instances of constant symbol to get a 
better resolution of it. Binarization of historical 
documents supported adaptive threshold 
segmentation and varied pre and post-processing 
steps is represented by [8] during this approach, a 
background surface is computable and  same may 
be adapted in the image. An iterative approach for 
segmenting degraded document pictures is 
represented by [9]  there a world thresholding 
technique is employed to get an initial 
segmentation. Areas with doubtless incorrect 
segmentation are detected, and a neighbourhood 
thresholding is applied in them. This approach is 
efficient therein native thresholds are computed 
slowly at chosen locations. It is also noted that 
general segmentation techniques provided higher 
performance on historical documents as compared 
with document-specific segmentation techniques. 
2. STEERABLE FILTER 
Steerable filters, introduced by Freeman and 
Adelson, 1991, are spatial oriented filters that 
have received a great interest in image analysis. 
The basic idea is to generate a rotated filter from a 
linear combination of a fixed set of basis filters 
(Simoncelli, E.P et al,1995). 
The steerability condition is not restricted to 
derivative filters and could be expressed for any 
signal f as: fx, y  ∑ kθf x, y                    (1) 
 
Where  fx, y is the rotated version of f by an 
arbitrary angle θ , kθ  are the interpolation 
functions, fx, y are the basis functions and M 
the number of basic functions required to steer the 
functionfx, y. 
To determine the conditions under which a given 
function satisfies the steering condition in 
equation 1, let us work in popular coordinates r  x  yand	∅  arg	x, y. The function 
f could be expressed as Fourier series in polar 
angle,	∅ : fr, ∅  ∑ are∅

                   (2) 
 
Where j  √1 and N is the discrete length of 
coefficients. 
It has been demonstrated in the steering condition 
in Equation (1), is satisfied for functions 
expandable in the form of Equation (2) if and 
only if the interpolation function   kθ  are 
solution of: cθ  ∑ kθcθ               (3) 
 
Where cθ  e, and	n  0, … . , N! 
From equation 3, fr, ∅ is expressed as: fr, ∅  ∑ kθg r, ∅                  
(4) 
 
Where gr, ∅ can be any set of functions. 
It has also been demonstrated that the minimum 
number M of basic functions required to 
steer fr, ∅  is equal to the number of non-zero 
Fourier coefficients ar. 
3. 3.  DESIGNING STEERABLE FILTERS 
All functions which are band limited in angular 
frequency are steerable, given enough basis filters. 
But in practice the most useful functions are those 
which require a small number of basis filters. 
As an example, we will design a steerable 
quadrature pair based on the frequency response 
of the second derivative of a Gaussian,". A pair 
of filters is said to be in quadrature if they have 
the same frequency response but differ in phase 
by 90 (i.e. are Hilbert transforms of each other 
[12]). Such pairs allow for analyzing spectral 
strength independent of phase, and allow for 
synthesizing filters of a given frequency response 
with arbitrary phase. They have application in 
motion, texture, shape, and orientation analysis 
[13]. Gaussian derivatives are useful functions for 
image analysis [14] and a steerable quadrature 
pair of them would be useful for many vision 
tasks. 
First, we design a steerable basis set for the 
second derivative of a Gaussian, #$, %  "  4$  2(.  
For interpolation function, )*, 
+ 1(,  + 1( 1( 1(,-)
*)*)*.                 
(5)                                      
 
Requiring that both the real and imaginary 
parts of Equation 5 agree gives a system of three 
equations. Solving the system, using * 0, *  60, *  120, yields )*   01  2cos	2*  *3                         
(6) 
And we have "  )*"^  )*"^  )*"^          
(7) 
 
We can form an approximation to the Hilbert 
transform of " by finding the least squares fit to 
polynomial times a Gaussian. We found a 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
321 
 
satisfactory level of approximation (total error 
power was 1% of total signal power) using a 3rd 
order, odd parity polynomial, which is steerable 
by four basic functions. We refer to this 
approximation as 4. Its steering formula is given 
with that for several other polynomial orders in 
[2]. 
4. UNSHARP MASKING TECHNIQUE 
 
The popular unsharp masking (UM) technique 
is a simple and effective method, both 
computationally and conceptually, for 
emphasizing high frequency contents to enhance 
edges and other details in an image. Its basic idea 
is that a high-pass filtered and scaled version of 
an input image is added to itself and the enhanced 
image %5, 6is obtained from the input image $5, 6 as 
    %5, 6  $5, 6 7 895, 6          (8) 
Where zm, nthe output of a linear high pass 
filter, λ is is a positive scaling factor that controls 
the gray level of the output image. If the centre 
coefficient of the high pass filter operator is 
positive, the operator sign is plus in Equation 8. 
Contrarily, it is subtraction sign. 
The linear unsharp masking technique is used 
and works well in many applications. However, 
the linear high-pass filter is extremely sensitive to 
noise. In order to reduce the noise sensitivity of 
the UM technique, in [15] used an order statistic 
(OS) Laplacian operator in the UM. They 
demonstrated that UMOS filter could amplify 
much less noise than the conventional UM filter. 
In addition, different nonlinear filters have been 
proposed to reduce the noise. In [16] replaced the 
Laplacian filter with a simple second-order 
Volterra filter. In [17] introduced a modified 
version of unsharp masking, in which they used a 
quadratic filter. A cubic unsharp masking (CUM) 
technique was presented by [18] to suppress the 
effect of noise amplification. In [19] introduced a 
variation of the basic UM scheme that contain an 
adaptive filter in the correction path. Still, all 
previous unsharp masking method suffer from 
another common drawback and they are not 
effective for low-contrast images. 
5. FUZZY SET THEORY 
 
Fuzzy set theory is a useful mathematical tool 
for handling ambiguous situations, particularly for 
the vagueness in human languages and reasoning. 
It has advanced in a variety of way and applied in 
many disciplines. The application of the theory 
can be found, for example, in artificial 
intelligence, computer science, control 
engineering, decision theory, expert systems, 
logic, management science, operations research, 
pattern recognition, and robotics [20]. While 
many branches of mathematics are dichotomous 
regarding truth and falsehood, the fuzzy set theory 
provides a systematic way to study human factors 
with all its vagueness of perception, subjectivity, 
attitudes, goals and conceptions. 
The fuzzy set theory is an extension of the 
conventional set theory. By introducing 
vagueness and linguistics, fuzzy set theory 
becomes more robust and flexible than the 
classical dichotomous set theory. 
A membership function describes the fuzziness 
of a fuzzy set. Determining a suitable membership 
function is a basic task [21]. 
Let the inverse be X  x, x, …… . , x! . A 
fuzzy set A on X is set defined by a membership 
function μ  representing a mapping, μ: X →@0,1A, here the value of μx for the fuzzy set A 
is called membership value or the membership 
degree of xϵX. The membership value represents 
the degree of x belonging to the fuzzy set A. The 
membership value of a fuzzy set can be an 
arbitrary real value between 0 and 1. The closer 
the value of μx  to 1 is, the higher the 
membership degree of the element x in fuzzy set 
A. Ifμx  1, the element x completely belongs 
to the fuzzy set A. If μx  0, the element x 
does not belong to A at all. According to the 
shape of a membership function, commonly used 
membership functions are classified into three 
classes: downtrend, central limit and uptrend. 
A. Fuzzy Membership Function 
The fuzzy set theory has been successfully 
applied in image enhancement [22-26].Image 
fuzzification is an important and necessary 
process for fuzzy enhancement. It uses a member 
function to map all the gray levels of an image 
into real numbers in [0, 1]. The most commonly 
used membership function for gray levels is the 
standard S-function. For example, a standard S-
function is used to transform a function image 
from the intensity domain into the fuzzy domain 
in [22]. In [23] extended the standard S-function 
by combining S-function and the Z-function. 
Define a half open fuzzy membership function: 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
322 
 
C 
DE
F
EG 0,				$ H I0.5  0.5KL6 M  N , I O $ O I
. 	

	



,!!
.. 	

	



,!!	
     
(9) 
 
 
Where x is a variable in the real domain, and a, a, aand	a" are the parameters which 
determine the shape of the half open membership 
function. These parameters can be determined by 
some statistic values of x. 
6. STEERABLE FILTERS BASED 
FUZZY  UNSHARP MASKING 
ALGORITHM 
A. Basic Idea 
 
By analysing document images, the following 
characters are identified: 
 
• The intensity values of texts are lower than 
document background surface. 
 
• The gray levels of handwritten texts are higher 
than other lines. Furthermore, images are 
blurry, even some of them cannot be made out. 
 
• Texts in the document are irregular and have 
various directions and depths. 
 
•   Because the recessed part in the document 
image deviates from its original because of the 
image acquisition source which can cause a 
shadow effect. 
 
In the document image, texts are very 
important information, and they are just what we 
want. The UM method uses a high pass filter, 
such as Laplacian filter, to obtain the high 
frequency components and effectively highlight 
them. But it is extremely sensitive to noise. Thus, 
to decrease noise, in our method, the high 
frequency components in original image are 
obtained by steerable filters at different directions 
not by a Laplacian filter. 
Here the negative values of the responses of 
both the filters of Laplacian and steerable are 
ignored. That the output of the Laplacian filter 
contains a great amount of noise, and part of high 
frequency components are faded away in the 
noise. In comparison with the result of the 
Laplacian filter, there is only relatively little noise 
in the output of steerable filters, and the high 
frequency components are still clear. Thus using 
steerable filters to obtain high frequency 
information is a better choice in the UM method. 
Though the noise can be reduced, the degree of 
enhancement is far from satisfactory. It is because 
the degree of enhancement varies with the 
response of filters. Thus, to a certain extent, we 
can distinguish them and control their degree of 
enhancement. To increase the degree of 
enhancement of image, a half open fuzzy 
membership function is designed for fuzzification 
of the response of steerable filters. By the fuzzy 
membership function, the medial response, that is 
the response of steerable filters, are mapped into 
the maximum value, and the stronger responses 
are weakened. In the way, the degree of 
enhancement of image is increased and the 
degrees of enhancement are balanced .After the 
process of fuzzification, the scheme of the 
unsharp masking is generalized into fuzzy field. 
The enhancement performed in the fuzzy field 
can be described as: 
 gm, n  γm, n  λwm, n            (10) 
 
Where gm, n the enhanced image in fuzz 
domain is,	γm, n is the normalized input image, wm, n  is the fuzzification of the response of 
steerable filters,  is the positive scaling factor. The 
block diagram of steerable filters based fuzzy 
unsharp masking approach is shown in    Fig. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The Block Diagram Of Steerable Filters 
Based Fuzzy UM. 
Normalizatio
n 



Fuzzificati
on 
Steerable 
Filters 
Enhanced 
Image 

   
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
323 
 
B. Implementation of the Proposed Method 
 
Suppose that xm, n    is the intensity values 
of the pixel at (m, n) the input image. In order to 
implement Equation 10, the value of wm, nshould be calculated first. The steerable 
filters based fuzzy unsharp masking algorithm 
consists of the following steps: 
 
Step 1: Use steerable filters, like Equation 7, to 
get the high frequency components of the original 
image. 
 
We chose five synthesized filters G along θ# ,here θ#  20  i∗40, i  1,2, . . ,5 . The 
response of every filter isZ#  G ∗ x. The final 
output of steerable filters is Zm, n ∑ Z#m, n.#  
 
The output of steerable filters Zm, n consists of 
positive and negative values. If Zm, n  is 
positive, the pixel at m, n in the original image 
maybe is a high frequency component; otherwise, 
the pixel at m, n  does not belong to high 
frequency component. In addition, the larger the 
absolute value of Z(m, n) is, the higher the 
probability that the pixel at (m, n) has a high 
frequency component. Since we are only 
interested in texts  and their intensity values are 
lower than other areas, we modify the result of Z 
to z to make the images stand out: Zm, n  WZm, n		Zm, n0		otherwise            
(10) 
Step 2: Fuzzification. 
 
Using Equation 9 maps the final output of 
steerable filters Z5, 6 into fuzzy field and gets [5, 6. The parameters of the membership 
function directly affect the result of fuzzification. 
In our algorithm, the parameters depend on the 
mean and variance of the final output of steerable 
filters 
\I  5  % I  5  5]/2I  5  % I"  Z&                    (11) 
Where m and 	δ  are the mean and standard 
deviation of the final output of steerable filters, z, 
respectively.Z'(is the maximum value of  z.  
 
Step 3: Normalization. 
 
Because the output of fuzzification is mapped 
into [0, 1], we normalize the original image by the 
following function: `                     (12) 
Where x is the gray level of the original 
document image, x#and x'( are the minimum 
and maximum gray levels of the document image. 
If the function γ is considered as a fuzzy 
membership function, the normalized image can 
also be seen a fuzzification image 
Step 4: Calculate the values of gm, n 
 
Using Equation10 calculates the value gm, nand implements the image enhancement in 
the fuzzy domain 
Step 5: Map into the image filed. 
The enhanced image in fuzzy field should be 
mapped to gray levels 
        ym, n  )*,***                              (13) 
 
Whereym, nthe enhanced image pixel is gray 
level, g'(  and g#  are the maximum and 
minimum values ofgx, y, respectively. L is the 
maximum gray level of the enhanced image, and 
it means that the dynamic range of the enhanced 
image is in [0, L]. 
7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
For this image enhancement database are 
collected from the IAM Handwriting Database. 
This contains forms of handwritten and Printed 
English text which can be used to train and test 
handwritten text recognizers and to perform 
writer identification and verification experiments. 
The database contains forms of unconstrained 
handwritten text, which were scanned at a 
resolution of 300dpi and saved as PNG images 
with 256 gray levels. 
That the figure 2 contain the input image, it is 
collected from IAM handwritten database. And 
figure 3 gives or produce the output of enhanced 
image by using Steerable Filters based Fuzzy 
Unsharp Masking approach. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this paper we have proposed a  steerable 
filters based fuzzy unsharp masking method  for 
document image enhancement by introducing 
steerable filters and the fuzzy set theory into the 
unsharp masking scheme. Membership function is 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
324 
 
designed to highlight the intermediate frequency 
components of the output of steerable filters so as 
to enhance the contrast of texts , which is 
significantly propitious for extracting character 
features. The result images  demonstrate that the 
proposed approach can enhance the contrast of 
printed and handwritten text  in the document 
image  visually in figure2, 3. In summary, the 
steerable filters based fuzzy unsharp masking 
method is simple and effective enhancement 
approach of the document  images for document 
analysis and recognition. 
 
Figure 2 : Input Image 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 : Enhanced Image Using Steerable Filters 
REFERENCES 
[1] Marinai S, Gori M, Soda G "Artificial 
neural networks for document analysis and 
recognition," Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, vol.27, 
no.1, pp.23,35, Jan. 2005 
[2] H. Negishi, J. Kato, H. Hase and T. 
Watanabe, Character extraction from noisy 
background for an automatic reference 
system, Proc. of 5th International 
Conference on Document Analysis 
&Recognition, India, 1999, pp. 143-146. 
[3] S.Liang, M. Ahmadi, A morphological 
approach to text string extraction from 
regular periodic overlapping text/ 
background images, Graphical Models and 
Image Table 1. Evaluation of image 
restoration results Processing. CVGIP, Vol. 
56, No. 5, Sep.1994, pp. 402-413. 
[4] M. S. Chang, S. M. Kang, W. S. Rho, H. G. 
Kim and D. J. Kim, Improved binarization 
algorithm for document image by histogram 
and edge detection, Proc. of 3rd 
International Conference on Document 
Analysis and Recognition, Canada, 1995, pp. 
636-639. 
[5] J. H. Jang and K. S. Hong, Binarization of 
noisy gray-scale character images by thin 
line modeling, Pattern Recognition, 32, 
1999, pp. 743-752. 
[6] H. S. Don, A noise attribute thresholding 
method for document image binarization, 
Proc. of 3rd International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, 
Canada, 1995, pp. 231-234. 
[7]  J. Hobby and T. K. Ho, “Enhancing 
degraded document images via bitmap 
clustering and averaging," in Proc. Int'l Conf. 
Document Analysis and Recognition 
(ICDAR), 1, pp. 394{400, (Ulm, Germany), 
1997. 
[8] B. Gatos, I. Pratikakis, and S. J. Perantonis, 
\An adaptive binarization technique for low 
quality historical documents," in Proc. Int'l 
Workshop Document Analysis Systems 
(DAS), pp. 102{113, (Florence, Italy), 2004. 
[9] E. Kavallieratou and E. Stamatatos, 
“Improving the quality of degraded 
document images," in Proc. Int'l Conf. 
Document Image Analysis for Libraries 
(DIAL), (Lyon, France), 2006. 
[10] Freeman, W.T., Adelson, E.H.: The design 
and use of steerable filters. IEEE Trans. 
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 13, 891–906 
(1991). 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 
 20th March 2014. Vol. 61 No.2 
© 2005 - 2014 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.  
 
ISSN: 1992-8645                                                       www.jatit.org                                                          E-ISSN: 1817-3195      
 
325 
 
[11] Simoncelli, E.P., Freeman, and W.T.: The 
steerable pyramid: a flexible architecture for 
multi-scale derivative computation. In: 
Second Int’l Conf on Image Proc, vol. 3, pp. 
444–447, Washington, DC, October 1995 
[12] R. N. Bracewell. The Fourier Transform and 
its Applications. McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
[13] A. C. Bovik. Multichannel texture analysis 
using localized spatial filters. IEEE Pat. 
Anal. Mach. Intel l., 12(1):55-73, 1990 
[14] J. J. Koenderink and A. J. van Doorn. 
Representation of local geometry in the 
visual system. Biol. Cybern., 55:367375, 
1987. 
[15] Y. H. Lee and S. Y. Park, “A study of 
convex/concave edges and edge-enhancing 
operators based on the Laplacian,” IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems, Vol. 
37, 1990, pp. 940-946. 
[16] S. K. Mitra, H. Li, I. S. Lin, and T. H. Yu, 
“A new class of nonlinear filters for image 
enhancement,” in Proceedings of 
International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 4, 1991, 
pp. 2525-2528. 
[17]  N. Strobel and S. K. Mitra, “Quadratic 
filters for image contrast enhancement,” in 
Proceedings of the 28th Asilomar 
Conference on Signals, Systems and 
Computers, Vol. 1, 1994, pp. 208-212. 
[18] G. Ramponi, “A cubic unsharp masking 
technique for contrast enhancement,” Signal 
Processing, Vol. 67, 1998, pp. 211-222. 
[19]  A. Polesel, G. V. Ramponi, and J. Mathews, 
“Image enhancement via adaptive unsharp 
masking,” IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, Vol. 9, 2000, pp. 505-510. 
[20] H. J. Zimmermann, Fuzzy Set Theory and 
Its Applications, 4th ed., Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston/Dordrecht/London, 2001. 
[21] Y. J. Lai and C. L. Hwang, Fuzzy 
Mathematical Programming: Methods and 
Applications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 
Heidelberg, 1992. 
[22] H. D. Cheng, Y. H. Chen, and Y. Sun, “A 
novel fuzzy entropy approach to image 
enhancement and thresholding,” Signal 
Processing, Vol. 75, 1999, pp. 277-301. 
[23] J. Hsieh, “Image enhancement with a fuzzy 
logic approach,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 31, 
1995, pp. 708-710. 
[24] Y. S. Choi and R. Krishnapuram, “A robust 
approach to image enhancement based on 
fuzzy logic,” IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, Vol. 6, 1997, pp. 808-825. 
[25]  F. Farbiz, M. B. Menhaj, S. A. Motamedi, 
and M. T. Hagan, “A new fuzzy logic filter 
for image enhancement,” IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics Part B, 
Vol. 30, 2000, pp. 110-119. 
[26]  G. J. Liu, J. H. Huang, X. L. Tang, and J. F. 
Liu, “A novel fuzzy wavelet approach to 
contrast enhancement,” Machine Learning 
and Cybernetics, Vol. 7, 2004, pp. 4325-
4330 
 
 
 
