Towards a taxonomy of suspected forgery in authorship 
attribution field. A case: Montale’s Diario Postumo 
Ilaria Bartolini 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
University of Bologna  
Viale Risorgimento, 2   
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512093550 
i.bartolini@unibo.it 
 
Valentina Garulli 
Dept. of Classical Philology and  
Italian Studies 
University of Bologna  
via Zamboni 32 
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512098529 
valentina.garulli@unibo.it 
Federico Condello 
Dept. of Classical Philology and  
Italian Studies 
University of Bologna 
via Zamboni 32 
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512098539 
federico.condello@unibo.it 
 
Francesca Tomasi 
Dept. of Classical Philology and  
Italian Studies 
University of Bologna  
via Zamboni 32 
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512098539 
francesca.tomasi@unibo.it 
Mirko Degli Esposti 
Dept. of Mathematics 
University of Bologna  
Piazza di Porta S. Donato 5 
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512094409  
mirko.degliesposti@unibo.it 
 
Matteo Viale 
Dept. of Classical Philology and  
Italian Studies 
University of Bologna  
via Zamboni 32 
40126 Bologna (Italy) 
+390512098585 
matteo.viale@unibo.it 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper wants to explore quantitative and qualitative practices 
generally exploited in different scientific fields (philology, 
mathematics, quantitative linguistics, computer science) in order 
to reveal forgery. Our study will be conducted on Montale‟s 
Diario postumo that shows all the typical features of a suspected 
forgery. The final aim is to merge all these methods in order to 
define a taxonomy of annotation elements useful, in this particular 
context of authorship attribution, for developing a data model to 
be potentially used in all forgery situations.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3 [INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL]: H.3.1 
Content Analysis and Indexing; I.4 [IMAGE PROCESSING 
AND COMPUTER VISION]: I.4.7 Feature Measurement; I.5 
[PATTERN RECOGNITION]: I.5.m Miscellaneous; I.7 
[DOCUMENT AND TEXT PROCESSING]: I.7.2 Document 
Preparation; J.5 [ARTS AND HUMANITIES]: Linguistics, 
Literature. 
General Terms 
Algorithms, Measurement, Documentation, Languages, Theory. 
Keywords 
forgery, quantitative linguistics, image analysis, mathematics, 
philology, annotation, data model, TEI. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The question “what a text is” is not a new topic. The variance of 
this concept implies different methods that could be exploited for 
managing an informational resource. A charming value of the text, 
in the domain of authorship attribution (A.A.), concerns how to 
reveal forgery. 
Mathematicians, computer scientists, philologists, quantitative 
linguists and digital humanists have different points of view on 
what a text is; this entails different strategies in order to reveal 
forgery. We argue that only constructive interactions between 
different approaches might help with complex problems such as 
forgery. 
Philologists usually adopt qualitative and comparative methods on 
the basis of phenomena like anachronisms concerning events and 
language, inconsistencies in style, patchwork effect, anomalies in 
the material medium or in handwriting style. 
Computational methods are instead essentially statistical. 
Authenticity, dubious attribution, plagiarism, interpolation are 
typical subjects of stylometry and quantitative linguistics. 
Quantitative linguists, but also mathematicians, use two different 
approaches: 1) texts as character strings, regardless of their 
meaning (algorithmic approach); 2) texts as word sequences that 
have to be studied statistically (“bag of words” approach);  
From the point of view of computer scientists, text could be 
represented also, for example, by means of the image of the text 
itself (e.g. a manuscript page). In this context, the application of 
pattern analysis and (dis)similarity search techniques 
(characterizing the handwriting of the page in term of “low-level 
features”) could help in solving the problem of authorship 
attribution.  
However, similarity is not a satisfactory criterion in order to 
attribute authorship in the case of suspected forgery: it is not 
surprising that a forgery is similar to the author‟s work: the 
problem is how to verify if a text is too similar to the author‟s 
work, and if such types of similarity cannot be found elsewhere in 
the extant corpus. 
Our first case study will be Montale‟s Diario postumo, that shows 
all the typical features of a suspected forgery: first of all, an excess 
– rather than a lack – of textual similarities (single words, word 
groups, sentence patterns, etc.) with Montale‟s authentic works 
(these similarities are mixed, of course, to many inconsistencies at 
the level of both style and meaning). This is why the traditional 
methods of authorship attribution, based on mere statistical data, 
are not sufficient to evaluate how „Montalian‟ is our text. 
The final aim of the project described in this paper is to explore 
these methods in order to define an annotation model able to 
formally represent all the different points of view on the text. The 
results derived from these different approaches will be used for 
the annotation of the whole poetical corpus, in order to acquire 
information useful to define an extensible taxonomy of all the 
phenomena that could reveal forgery. The taxonomy will be used 
for exploring the possibility to establish a data model with classes 
and predicates regarding forgery. 
2. RELATED WORKS 
The approach that we want to describe here has no former similar 
works. The methods we intend to analyze here have been studied 
independently from each other.  
In philology there are some well tested approaches used to reveal 
forgery: i.e. the study of the medium, the analysis of handwriting, 
the presence of anachronisms, the exam of contents and obviously 
of style. Secondary literature on this topic is really rich (for a 
general discussion see [24] and [25];  a „classical‟ history of the 
question is [26]). 
Computational methods used to face these problems could be 
mostly classify under the quantitative approach of the A.A. 
domain. A.A. has thus a quite long history and the interested 
reader is referred to [61] and [32]. But forgery has not exactly the 
same problems of the A.A. 
The idea of applying quantitative, although not always 
mathematically founded, ideas to the problem of recognizing the 
author of an anonymous or apocryphal text is not new: it dates 
back to the end of the 19th century at the latest, when two studies 
by the mathematician de Morgan [23] and the geophysicist 
Mendenhall [41] (wrongly) suggested that the average length of 
words in the works of different writers be calculated and 
compared them in order to establish authorship. 
From the first works by de Morgan and Mendenhall up to recent 
times there has been a shift in the methods used for attribution; 
the interest has moved from indicators based on words, which are 
very natural because words are the basic components of language 
(see section 4.3.), to methods where no syntactical structure of the 
text is taken into account (see section 4.2.). 
This approach, where the text is considered merely as a sequence 
of symbols, is far from being new. Already Markov [39], [40] and 
Shannon [59] regarded the texts as a sequence of symbols, where 
the words as basic components of the text have no more meaning 
than other aggregates of symbols. In this approach it is the 
statistics of sequences of n consecutive characters (the so called 
n–grams) that appears naturally as the fundamental object of 
investigation. 
Focusing now on authorship attribution, even if approaches based 
on words or other syntactical units are still frequently used, 
several works of the past decade adopted the “n-gram approach”: 
Clement and Sharp, for example, proposed in 2003 [17] a method 
based on n-gram frequencies, whereas in 2001 Khmelev and 
Tweedie [33] published some results obtained by considering 
texts as first order Markov chains, i.e. by calculating the empirical 
one-step transition matrix between characters from the reference 
texts of an author and then using it to establish the probability for 
a given anonymous text to have been written by that author. 
Around the same time, novel and efficient mathematical methods 
for A.A. based on compression algorithms have been introduced 
[7]. Recently the combinations of these two approaches, namely 
the one based on n-gram frequencies and the one based on 
compression algorithms have been successfully applied to two 
concrete problems in A.A. [6], [8] and [9]. These methods, 
roughly speaking, allow to introduce similarity distances between 
texts and can be used for designing methods of attribution with an 
approach which is in some way distinct from “usual” computer 
science approach to classification, where a text is basically 
represented as a vector of frequencies of words (bag-of-words 
model) and then, eventually after some dimension reduction 
(feature extraction) and in the spirit of machine learning, suitable 
algorithm/machine (neural nets, supported vector machine 
[SVM], Bayesian tools, etc...) are trained and used to discriminate 
and classify texts into known classes [61], [32].   
Recently, the bag-of-words approach made further progress 
through the so-called intertexual distance index created by the 
French scholar E. Brunet [13] and then adjusted by D. Labbé, 
who applied it in studies on the attribution of literary works of 
uncertain authors [36], [37]. New calibration and applications of 
this index are having particularly fruitful results (see e.g. [20], 
[54]). 
As regards the specific field of image analysis, OCR is a 
traditional approach based on pattern-recognition techniques that 
enable a computer to read texts (i.e. scanned images of a texts). 
However, if this is a feasible solution on printed text, its use for 
manuscripts is rather problematic. In general, OCR applied to 
handwritten texts is far from being perfect because of the issue of 
“variations”. For example, the same letter drawn by the same 
person is slightly different each time, as well as letters drawn by 
different hands. These variations make it hard for the computer to 
read the writing correctly and to make a successful match in the 
context of authorship attribution [14]. System for Paleographic 
Inspections (SPI) is the first tool for the study of handwritten 
manuscripts. SPI can solve the problem of variations by training 
and working on prototypes of letters, i.e. collecting abstracted 
models of a single person‟s handwriting. The prototype comes 
with a pre-defined set of limits between which the letter belonging 
to the unidentified document may deviate from the prototype. This 
decides whether a letter is written by the same hand, or someone 
else drew it [16]. The main limit of SPI is that the segmentation 
process focuses on the shape of individual letters only. Thus, the 
overall appearance of the manuscript page and its immediate 
context is completely ignored [44]. 
Finally, the Digital Humanities community has a long tradition in 
A.A. studies [28] and in quantitative analysis of texts [29]. 
Literary text analysis is a practice that reveals the complexity of 
the concept of text and the potential stratification of interpretative 
levels [51]. 
3. THE CASE STUDY 
Diario postumo is a collection of 84 poems written by Montale 
between 1969 and 1979 (according to the official version), and 
given by the poet to his young friend Annalisa Cima, with the 
precise order to publish the texts only after his death. Cima 
testifies that the poet himself arranged his poetic legacy as 
follows: ten sealed envelopes (numbered from I to X), each 
containing 6 poems, and a bigger packet, not numbered, 
containing another envelope with 6 poems (numbered XI) and 18 
additional compositions  [15, 89]1. In 1986, five years after the 
                                                                
1 It is important to observe that the only witness of the real 
existence of these envelopes is Cima herself, because Bettarini 
poet‟s death, the Foundation Schlesinger (Lugano) published the 
first 6 texts in a plaquette titled Poesie inedite di Eugenio 
Montale2. In 1991, the first section of Diario postumo (30 texts) 
was published by A. Mondadori. In 1996, all the remains of the 
legacy were edited by Annalisa Cima, with the substantial ecdotic 
contribution of one of the most important scholars in the field, 
Rosanna Bettarini [46]. It was then that the philological 
controversy flared up. In the previous years a poet like Giovanni 
Raboni, among others, had raised a doubt about the authenticity 
of the texts (although on the basis of an aesthetic judgment only 
[49]), but immediately after the publication of [46] another of the 
most authorative Montalian philologists, Dante Isella, launched 
his formidable attack against the authenticity [30]. In addition to 
philological arguments (based especially on the patchwork nature 
of many texts, which look like a mosaic of Montalian quotations: 
see section 4.1), Isella underlined – through an impressive 
expertise by Armando Petrucci, perhaps the most famous Italian 
paleographer – the highly implausible appearance of the supposed 
autographs published, in the meantime, by Annalisa Cima [30, 
20]). The reply by the supporters of the authenticity of Diario was 
immediate: those attending a Conference in Lugano, in autumn 
1997 [1], where the first exhibition of the discussed autographs 
took place, affirmed the authenticity of the collection 
unanimously. A key witness was provided by Maria Corti, who 
testified Montale‟s perfidious intention – revealed to her in 1971 
by the poet himself – of providing some kind of posthumous 
provocation directed against critics and philologists [21]. On the 
basis of such a witness, nowadays Diario is regarded by many 
scholars as an authentic, albeit ironic and self-ironic, Montale‟s 
work. However, some doubts remain, and the communis opinion 
was perhaps too hastily accepted: the illustrious philologist Pier 
Vincenzo Mengaldo has strongly supported Isella‟s position [42]. 
A skeptical view on the authenticity of Diario postumo is now 
provided by N. Scaffai [55] and P. Italia [31] (the best recent 
surveys on the question). 
4. APPROACHES  
4.1 Philology 
The traditional and well-tested approach of philologists, in order 
to reveal forgery, is based on some typical clues such as e.g.:  
1) implausible or impossible features of the material medium 
(concerning the material itself, but also the techniques used and, 
of course, its age); 
2) implausible or impossible features of the visual aspects of the 
object (e.g. mise en page of a text);  
3) in the case of a written document, implausible or impossible 
features of the handwriting (discordant either from a single 
author‟s hand, if known, or from the use of his/her age); 
4) anachronisms both factual (mention of events, persons, 
customs, etc. which are chronologically incompatible with the age 
of the supposed author) and linguistic (words, forms, expressions 
belonging to a later stage of language); 
                                                                                                           
declares that she was not personally present when the envelopes 
were progressively opened [31, 182].  
2 The gradual publication of the poems went on, year after year, in 
groups of six poems at a time. 
5) recognition of the sources from which the text seems to derive, 
if these sources are not compatible with either history or nature of 
the text; 
6) contradictions at the content level (themes, ideas, data) with the 
other works of the supposed author. 
Long experience shows that very rarely a forger does not make at 
least one (usually more than one) of these typical missteps. But if 
none of this clues supports the inquiry of the philologists, they 
resign themself to a less certain and conclusive criterion: the 
analysis of style. But it is difficult to draw compelling conclusions 
from a supposed “constant” or “typical” style (usus scribendi) of 
an author: not only because style can considerably change during 
an author‟s life and can depend on the literary genre practiced by 
the author, but mainly because a deliberate forgery (if not too 
ingenuous or rough) is characterized precisely by a scrupulous 
imitation of the individual author style. Therefore, if a stylistic 
analysis can help both in case of unknown or uncertain 
authorship, and in case of plagiarism, the same method is likely to 
be useless or even counterproductive when applied to a case of 
“pseudoepigraphy” (intentional false attribution).  
The Diario postumo attributed to Eugenio Montale is a truly 
representative example of the impasses that are thrown up once 
we try to apply stylistic analysis to a text which is suspected to be 
a forgery. It is significant, in particular, that the high frequency of 
quotations from Montale‟s works (from almost all the previous 
poetical works) could represent an argument both pro and contra 
the authenticity. According to Isella, this is actually the chief 
proof of a forgery, i.e. of a patchwork text composed through an 
artificial and awkward bricolage of authentic Montalian 
expressions, mixed with an incredible amount of oddities and 
literary banalities (many of which find some interesting parallels 
in Annalisa Cima‟s own poetry) ( [30, 7-15], and [42]). On the 
opposite, according to Bettarini and many others, the presence of 
such impressive similarities (sometimes word for word) between 
Diario postumo and Montale‟s previous production demonstrates 
Montale‟s authorship, especially because ironical self-quotations 
were a typical device of the works of his last period. And for those 
who believe in the theory of a “posthumous mockery”, arranged 
by the poet to the detriment of his critics (see section 3), such a 
high degree of similarity becomes a further argument to assert the 
authentic, although ironical, nature of the work (see e.g. [12], 
[56], [48], [50], [10]). 
But does the “self-quotation” practiced, e.g., by the author of 
Satura or Quaderno di quattro anni really agree with the 
quotation technique used by the author of Diario postumo? This is 
the question implicitly asked by Grignani [27]  in an important 
contribution confined in an appendix of the Lugano Proceedings 
[1]. In order to answer this question, we need a preliminary 
taxonomy of phenomena such as repetition of words or words-
series, quotation, self-quotation, etc., at least in the last decade of 
Montale‟s production. Such a taxonomy should provide us with 
distinctions both on the quantitative and the qualitative level, 
depending e.g. on phenomena such as:  
1) number of words involved in a quotation or self-quotation; 
2) linguistic nature of the words involved; 
3) stylistic level of the words involved; 
4) number of words replaced by synonyms; 
5) stylistic level of these synonyms;  
6) stylistic level of the quotation context;  
7) age or period of the work which is the source of the quotation;  
Etc. 
The intersection of these and other criteria can help to draw a real 
“map” of Montalian intertextuality (with a special regard to forms 
and methods of the “internal intertextuality” in Montale‟s works 
dating from his last decade). Such a map is perhaps the best 
starting point for an evaluation of what is typical and what is 
atypical (therefore suspect) in Diario postumo (for other pertinent 
levels of literary analysis see table 1).  
4.2 Mathematics 
Why and how should A.A. (or stylometry, as it is sometimes 
called) be the object of a mathematical study?  
An important point is that whatever is the approach used, 
described in the related work section (either similarity distances 
based on n-grams and compression algorithms, or feature 
extractions combined with machine learning), all these methods 
have been so far almost always applied to very typical and 
scholastic scenarios in A.A.: one or more unknown texts must be 
attributed to one (and only one) author selected from a finite 
number of known authors.  
It is worth mentioning that already the concrete and frequent case 
when one has to decide if a given text have been written by a 
given author or not (the so called Authorship Verification 
problem) presents enormous difficulties and, to the best of our 
knowledge, no quantitative systematic approach exists in literature 
(see [34] for an interesting attempt). 
Of course these limitations restrict the range of applicability, 
excluding several interesting and important real cases met in 
modern philology. This is exactly why we believe that a genuine 
multidisciplinary approach (quantitative, linguistic, philological, 
computational, image analysis) can be quite fruitful and we are 
convinced that the problem of the attribution of the “Diario 
Postumo” by Montale represents an excellent challenge. Here we 
are very far from any traditional scheme, far from classical A.A. 
problems and even far from an Authorship Verification problem 
(already very difficult to approach with mathematical models). 
First of all we face poetry, and any statistical method based on the 
presence of recurring patterns and long correlations cannot be 
applied in a straightforward way. For example the methods and 
the results must be invariant by the shuffling of the poems inside a 
given opera. But – most important – when we try to follow all the 
animated dispute, we can restrict the number of possible and 
realistic solutions to the problem essentially to three: 
1) Annalisa Cima, using some raw material from Montale‟writings 
(authentic and published works, but also voice recordings, 
sketches on paper, etc…), “created” Diario Postumo, often 
emphasizing and hence trivializing Montale‟s style.  
2) Diario Postumo is a genuine creation by Montale, perhaps 
affected by a long time process of mental and physical 
degradation. 
3) It was just a “joke” by Montale to make fun of people after his 
death. 
But one could also argue that the Diario is a genuine small corpus 
stuffed with forgery (2 + 1). 
Of course, if we have any evidence or suspect that (3) is the 
solution to the debate, then there is nothing to do for a 
mathematician (or others), but there are no hints supporting (3), as 
far as we know. Assuming now that this is not the case, (1) and 
(2) raise interesting and challenging problems. For example, 
assuming (2) and knowing the overall  poetic opera of Montale 
along few decades3, detecting, quantifying and measuring a 
degradation in his writing style poses an incredible challenge for 
quantitative methods. At this moment, we do not have any 
experimental results able to support the claim, but we are 
convinced that a mathematical approach to the problem4, possibly 
combined with modern image analysis of the handwriting style 
and its evolution could hopefully shade some light on hypothesis 
(2). 
Finally, if we want to investigate hypothesis (1), we clearly have 
to abandon the safety and prudent realm of typical A.A. problems 
(attribution among a finite number of authors, each one with a 
proper and distinguishable style) and move towards quantitative 
methods for forgery or plagiarism, two sides of the same medal: 
an author trying either to mimic or camouflage another author 
creation (or fragments of it). Also in this case, quantitative 
approaches have been recently introduced and tested [47], often 
inspired by the related A.A. algorithms here briefly discussed, and 
we believe that they might represent a solid starting point for our 
investigation.  
4.3 Quantitative linguistic 
The typical approach of quantitative linguistics to the issues of 
A.A. and identification of forgery is the already mentioned “bag-
of-words” which stems from the traditional statistical analysis of 
words – considered as mere graphical forms (type or token) or 
alternatively as lemmas – through different quantitative methods 
varying on a case-to-case basis. 
One of the first tools developed to test in more global terms the 
lexical similarity between two corpora is the lexical connection 
index which is the ratio between the shared part of vocabulary and 
the two corpora joined together, which measures the portion of 
vocabulary shared by two texts [19, 52-55]. 
Afterwards, many statistical indexes have focused on particular 
aspects such as the lexical richness (e.g. type-token ratio), the 
words‟ length, the repeated segments of words, the position and 
recursion of specific keywords (see [38], [32], [64], [35], [61] ) 
for a recent literature review on the topic; see [54] for a 
presentation and discussion of the different methods as well as the 
related references.). 
Recently, the so-called intertexual distance index (see related 
works) is proving particularly fruitful. This index is not based on 
the simple number of shared occurrences – as in the case of the 
lexical connection index – but on a calculation which compares 
the frequency of each occurrence in the wordlists of the two texts. 
The main advantage of adopting this statistical tool is that it 
allows to compare texts of different sizes, relativizing through a 
                                                                
3 At least concerning publishing, Montale‟s poetic works are quite 
evenly distributed in time:  Ossi di seppia (1925); Le occasioni 
(1939); Finisterre (1943); Quaderno di traduzioni (1948); La 
bufera e altro (1956); Xenia (1966); Auto da fè (1966); Satura 
(1971); Diario del '71 e del '72 (1973); Quaderno di quattro 
anni (1977);  Altri versi (1980). Now we can add the 
posthumous La casa di Olgiate e altre poesie (2006).  
4 Here we think that also some recent approaches to textual data 
based on network analysis could turns out to be quite useful 
[60],[2]. 
mathematical proportion the different number of occurrences [ 
[19, 55-58]. 
Labbé [36], [37] used some threshold values which allow to 
identify, in the case of more than one author, not only the 
different authors or the authorship attribution with various levels 
of possibility, but also the textual genres as well as the topics. 
A further improvement of the index offers a new calculation 
procedure based on repeated observations of intertextual distance 
between pairs of equal-sized text chunks [20]. The above-
mentioned study provides some tests on the thresholds proposed 
by Labbé aimed at considering the specificities of the Italian 
language. 
However, this type of approach does not suit the present case 
study, the Diario Postumo of Eugenio Montale. As a matter of 
fact, in order to test the different hypotheses on such work it is 
necessary to determine if the author is Montale himself and 
consider that the alleged plagiarist attempts to imitate the style of 
the author by means of wise devices that can thwart the usefulness 
of these quantitative tools. 
Nevertheless, the bag-of-words techniques can contribute 
significantly to the authorship attribution. From a methodological 
point of view, a preliminary important issue is the challenge of 
determining the existence of a threshold able to identify the author 
of a work by taking into account the changes related to the 
author‟s stylistic evolution with time. This is strictly connected to 
the study of the stylistic features of an author which remain 
invariable with time and can defeat the attempts of the alleged 
plagiarist. 
The analysis of linguistic and formal features of literary texts are 
dealt with by stylistics through traditional non-quantitative 
approaches such the study of lexical register, key-words, syntactic 
peculiarities, position of POS, punctuation, etc. [43], [18]. 
From an operational point of view, the issue – which has not been 
analyzed comprehensively in the literature on the topic, 
particularly applied to the Italian poetry – can be framed by 
resorting to useful studies: on the one hand, those analyzing 
Montale‟s poetic production certainly attributed5 to the poet, and 
on the other hand those dealing with the poetic production of 
authors subject to stylistic evolution and aiming at determining 
the distinctive features beyond the stylistic changes occurred in 
time. 
In broader terms, a quantitative analysis of the main stylistic 
elements of literary stylistics may contribute significantly, 
although not decisively, to the identification of plagiarism. 
4.4 Image analysis  
Text should be represented also by means of the image of the text 
itself  through, for example, the digital representation of a 
manuscript page. The application of pattern analysis and 
(dis)similarity search techniques, able to characterize the 
handwriting of a page in term of “low-level features”, could help 
in solving the problem of authorship attribution. 
                                                                
5 The groundbreaking statistical-linguistic analysis of the first 
collections of Montale carried out by Luigi Rosiello [52] 
provides valuable insights into the characterisation of Montale‟s 
poetic production and the analysis of the stylistic features of 
each collection of the Italian author. See [19] for an accurate 
discussion of the study conducted by Rosiello. 
The problem therefore is translated in term of “analysis and 
comparison of handwritten pages” with the aim of establishing 
whether a manuscript corpus is authentic or not with respect to a 
specific author. Of course, this implies the need of a pre-
processing phase where the analysis of some handwritten pages of 
authentic writings is executed in order to build a “ground truth” 
reference information for comparing suspicious writings to the 
authentic ones.  
Our data and comparison models are inspired by the Windsurf 
ones [5], where images are composed by elements (i.e. relevant 
parts of the handwritten text). Each element is described by means 
of automatically extracted low level features that represent, in an 
appropriate way, the content of the element itself (e.g. the 
handwritten style of an author with respect to a specific set of 
graphic aspects). We regard such features as a first step of 
automatic low-level annotations of our digital corpora. As for the 
comparison model, given an input (query) manuscript page, 
composed of m relevant elements, and an element distance 
function that measures the dissimilarity of a given pair of elements 
using their features, we want to determine automatically if the 
query manuscript page could be considered authentic with respect 
to a specific author. 
Dissimilarity between manuscript pages is numerically assessed 
by way of a page distance function that somehow “combines” the 
single element distances into an overall value. The efficient 
resolution of comparisons over features is ensured by an index 
structure built on top of elements (e.g. syllables).  
In particular, manuscript pages are first segmented in parts (e.g. 
syllables, words, sentences, etc.). From each element, visual 
salient characteristics, able to define specific graphic aspects (such 
as shape, module, ductus, writing angle, hatching, and ligatures) 
and thus differentiate the handwriting of an author, are 
automatically extracted. Image elements are compared according 
to their visual features using an ad hoc distance metric. Elements 
scores are then opportunely matched to aggregate distance values 
of matched elements.  
Finally, in order to further enrich data representation, pages are 
also annotated with high level (semantic) descriptors which are 
text labels representing the meaning of syllables, words, 
sentences, etc. Such descriptors are in the form of keywords (or 
tags) and are semi-automatically assigned at both the whole image 
and elements levels by means of a semi-automatic annotator.  
Note that our rich data characterization ensures to capture the 
appearance and the layout of the whole manuscript page, thus 
guaranteeing an effective and efficient representation of our 
corpora. 
5. THE ANNOTATION MODEL 
A.A. generally does not consider annotations as a method useful 
for deducing attribution because stylometry, that is a 
statistical/numerical approach, is the most attested practice. At the 
same time annotation has been used as a tool for the 
lemmatization or for the creation of semantic or syntactic treebank 
[4]. The POS (Part Of Speech) annotation could help in some 
NLP (Natural Language Processing) problems. 
Given that the quantitative approach help us in counting n-grams 
(see section 4.2), the above mentioned phenomena (see all section 
4) could be formally described through semantic tags. The aim of 
the annotation model we want to define here is to take into 
account all the approaches, trying to define a possible taxonomy 
starting from the vocabulary of the TEI schema [62]. Some 
experiment in “forensic philology” will be useful in order to 
verify whether TEI is sufficient in order to describe all the 
features [57]. 
The macro-levels of annotation, emerged from our first analysis 
and considered here as points of view on the source (philological, 
mathematical, linguistics, image analysis), will be:  
- characters;  
- words and segments;  
- linguistic features; 
- literary phenomena; 
- lexical data; 
- image pattern.  
These levels are the highest concepts of a classification scheme 
intended to define categories and subcategories of phenomena 
related to forgery. The taxonomy could be described at a more 
granular level as shown in table 1. Levels are the categories, 
features are the subcategories of the classification scheme and TEI 
elements/attributes are the formal way used in order to declare 
properties. 
Table 1. A taxonomy of forgery 
Level Features TEI 
elements/attribut
es 
Characters 
 
 <c> 
Punctuation 
 
 <pc> 
Words  
 
nouns, adjectives, 
verbs, adverbs, 
function 
words/lexical words 
<w>, @lemma 
Segmentation sentences, phrases, 
clause and syntactic 
aspects; 
verse (rhyme and 
metrical patterns) 
<s>, <phr>, <cl>, 
@function; 
 
<l>, @met, 
@rhyme 
Linguistic 
features (at the 
level of word, 
sentence, phrase, 
clause and verse) 
fine-grained 
grammatical 
categories and 
morphological 
aspects (POS: NN, 
PP, NP, VP, etc.) 
@type/@ana 
Literary 
phenomena  
rhetorical aspects 
(sound/meaning); 
quotation,  
self-quotation 
<span>, <interp>; 
<q>, <cit> 
@when, @type 
Lexical data  archaisms, 
neologisms, 
<foreign>, 
<distinct>, 
 foreignisms, 
keywords, 
borrowings,   
hapax legomena  
<term>, @type, 
@ref=”URI” 
Image pattern (at 
the level of single 
character, 
syllabi, word, 
segment) 
character/glyph, 
ligatures, 
dimensions,  
shape,  
module 
<g>, <gliph>, 
<char>, <desc> 
As a result, such a collection of elements/attributes will be 
attached to the source (both text and image) in order to describe 
each phenomenon and associate features to non interpreted 
strings/portion of image.  
The annotation elements will be used in order to 1) count all the 
single phenomena both in Diario and in the rest of the corpus for 
detecting forgery (also on the basis of an excess of similarity); 2) 
compare the suspected (annotated) forgery text with the rest of the 
poetical (annotated) corpus in order to understand what is a 
typical, or atypical, Montalian way of writing with special regard 
to the Diario; 3) compare the suspected (annotated) forgery text 
with other texts, first of all Annalisa Cima‟s poems. 
The process, that will be firstly managed manually, will surely 
reveal that embedded markup is complex (because of the 
overlapping of descriptive elements) and a stand-off approach will 
be adopted [for a recent discussion see 58].  
The final aim of the process is to deduce a data model from the 
annotation, in order to specify classes and predicates of forgery 
elements. The taxonomy will be used as the first tool for defining 
concepts and establishing relationships between the defined 
concepts. Macro-levels (categories) will be the classes of the data 
model and the relationships between classes and subclasses will 
be managed as predicates in order to create a domain ontology 
(through OWL/RDF). 
If this process will produce, on this specific case, some worth 
results it will be obviously used in order to verify the degree of 
reliability on other different kind (genre) of texts (other poems,  
prose and drama). 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research aimed to lead to these results has received funding 
from the University of Bologna in 2013 for the project 
“Authorship, varianti, stile: frontiere dell‟analisi testuale tra 
filologia, linguistica, matematica e computer science” 
(“Authorship, variants, style: textual analysis between philology, 
linguistics, mathematics and computer science”) under grant 
agreement FARB (“Finanziamento di Ateneo alla Ricerca di 
Base” – Local grant for research). 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] AA.VV. 1998. Atti del seminario sul Diario postumo di 
Eugenio Montale. Lugano (24-26 ottobre 1997). 
Milano, Scheiwiller.  
[2] Amancio, D.R., Oliveira, O.N., Jr and da F. Costa, L. 
2012. Identification of Literary Movements Using 
Complex Networks to Represent Texts. New Journal of 
Physics 14 (April 2012 – 043029). arXiv:1302.4099. 
[3] Argamon, S. and Olsen, M. 2009. Words, Patterns and 
Documents: Experiments in Machine Learning and Text 
Analysis. Digital Humanities Quarterly 3, 2 (Spring 
2009). 
[4] Bamman, D. and Crane G. 2011. The Ancient Greek 
and Latin Dependency Treebanks. In Language 
Technology for Cultural Heritage,  C. Sporleder, A. van 
den Bosch and K. Zervanou, Eds. Springer, Berlin. 
[5] Bartolini, I., Patella, M., and Stromei, G. 2011. The 
Windsurf library for the efficient retrieval of multimedia 
hierarchical data. In Proceeding of the International 
Conference on Signal Processing and Multimedia 
Applications (Seville, Spain, July, 2011). 
[6] Basile, C., Benedetto, D., Caglioti, E., Degli Esposti, M. 
2008. An example of mathematical authorship 
attribution. Journal of Mathematical Physics 49, 
125211. DOI=10.1063/1.2996507 
[7] Benedetto, D., Caglioti, E., and Loreto, V. 2002.  
Language Trees and Zipping. Physsical Review Letters 
88, 048702. DOI=10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.048702. 
[8] Benedetto, D., Degli Esposti. M., Maspero, G. 2013. 
Authorship Attribution and Small Scales Analysis 
Applied to a Real Philological Problem in Greek 
Patristics,  QuaLiCo 2012 proceedings (Belgrade, 
Serbia, April 26-29, 2012) (in press). 
[9] Benedetto, D., Degli Esposti. M., Maspero, G. 2013. 
The puzzle of Basil‟s Epistula 38: a mathematical 
approach to a philological problem. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics (in press). 
[10] Benevento, A. 2000. Il parapiglia del Montale postumo.  
Rivista di Letteratura Italiana, 1, 113-124. 
[11] Bettarini, R. 1996. Apparato critico. In [46], 87-117.  
[12] Bettarini, R. 1998. Il bello viene dopo. In [1], 7-12.  
[13] Brunet, E. 1988. Une mesure de la distance 
intertextuelle: la connexion lexicale. Revue 
informatique et statistique dans les sciences humaines, 
Centre Informatique de Philosophie et Lettres, 
Université de Liège. 
[14] Bunke, H. and Wang, M.S.P. 1997. Handbook of 
character recognition and document image analysis. 
World Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore. 
[15] Cima, A. 1998. Montale postumo e l‟accademico 
spregiudicato. In [1], 13-18.  
[16] Ciula, A. 2005. Digital paleography: using the digital 
representation of medieval script to support 
paleographic analysis. Digital Medievalist 1 (Spring 
2005).  
[17] Clement, R. and Sharp, D. 2003. Ngram and Bayesian 
classification of documents for topic and authorship. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing 18, 4, 423-447. 
[18] Colella, G. 2010, Che cos’è la stilistica. Carocci, Roma. 
[19] Cortelazzo, M. and Tuzzi, A. 2008, Metodi statistici 
applicati all’italiano. Zanichelli, Bologna. 
[20] Cortelazzo, M.A., Nadalutti, P. and Tuzzi, A. 2013. 
Improving Labbé‟s Intertextual Distance: Testing a 
Revised Version on a Large Corpus of Italian Literature. 
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 20, 2, 125-152. 
[21] Corti, M. 1998. La storia lontana del Diario postumo. In 
[1], 42-45.  
[22] Craig, H. 2004. Stylistic Analysis and Authorship 
Studies. In A companion to Digital Humanities, S. 
Schreibman, R. Siemens and J. Unsworth, Eds. 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Malden, MA, USA. 
DOI=10.1002/9780470999875.ch20. 
[23] De Morgan, A. 1851. Memoirs of Augustus de Morgan 
by His Wife Sophia Elizabeth de Morgan with 
Selections from His Letters. Longmans, Green, London. 
[24] Eco, U. 1990. Falsi e contraffazioni. In I limiti 
dell’interpretazione, Id. Bompiani, Milano, 162-192. 
[25] Eco, U. 2012. La falsificazione nel Medioevo. In Scritti 
sul pensiero medievale, Id. Bompiani, Milano, 731-774.  
[26] Grafton, A. 1990. Forgers and critics. Creativity and 
duplicity in western scholarship. Princeton UP, 
Princeton. 
[27] Grignani, M.A. 1998. Intervento dal pubblico. In [1], 
163-166.  
[28] Holmes, D. 1994. Authorship Attribution. Computers 
and the Humanities 28, 87-106.  
[29] Hoover, D.L. 2008. Quantitative Analysis and Literary 
Studies. In A companion to Digital Literary Studies, S. 
Schreibman, R. Siemens and J. Unsworth, Eds. 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Malden, MA, USA.  
[30] Isella, D. 1997. Dovuto a Montale. Archinto, Milano. 
[31] Italia, P. 2013. Editing Novecento. Salerno Editrice, 
Roma. 
[32] Juola, P. 2006. Authorship attribution. Foundations and 
Trends in Information Retrieval 1, 3, 233–334. 
[33] Khmelev, D.V. and Tweedie, F.J.  2001. Using Markov 
chains for identification of writers. Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 16, 3, 299-307. 
DOI=10.1093/llc/16.3.299. 
[34] Koppel, M. and Schler, J. 2004. Authorship verification 
as a one-class classification problem. In Proceedings of 
the twenty-first international conference on Machine 
learning (Banff, Canada, July, 2004), 489-495. 
[35] Koppel, M., Schler, J., and Argamon, S. 2009. 
Computational methods in authorship attribution. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science & Technology 60, 1, 9-26. 
[36] Labbé, C. and Labbé, D. 2001. Inter-Textual Distance 
and Authorship Attribution Corneille and Molière. 
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 8, 3, 213-231. 
[37] Labbé, D. 2007. Experiments on authorship attribution 
by intertextual distance in english. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics 14, 1, 33-80. 
[38] Love, H. 2002. Attributing Authorship: An 
Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
[39] Markov, A.A. 1913. Primer statisticheskogo 
issledovanija nad tekstom `Evgenija Onegina' 
illjustrirujuschij svjaz' ispytanij v tsep (An example of 
statistical study on the text of `Eugene Onegin' 
illustrating the linking of events to a chain). Izvestija 
Imp. Akademii nauk 6, 3, 153-162.  
[40] Markov, A.A. 1916. Ob odnom primenenii 
statisticheskogo metoda (On some application of 
statistical method). Izvestija Imp. Akademii nauk 6, 4, 
239-242. 
[41] Mendenhall, T.C. 1887. The Characteristic Curves of 
Composition. Science ns-9, 237-246. DOI= 
10.1126/science.ns-9.214S.237. 
[42] Mengaldo, P.V. 1998. Ma com‟è goffo il Montale 
postumo. Corriere della Sera (12 marzo 1998).  
[43] Mengaldo, P.V. 2007. Prima lezione di stilistica. 
Laterza, Roma-Bari. 
[44] Meredith, M., Ainsworth, P. 2010. Digging into image 
data to answer authorship-related questions. UK All 
Hands eScience meeting (Cardiff, Wales, September 
2010).  
[45] Merriam, T. 2002. Intertextual Distances Between 
Shakespeare Plays, with Special Reference to Henry V 
(verse). Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 9, 3, 261-
273. 
[46] Montale, E. 1996. Diario postumo. 66 poesie e altre. 
Mondadori, Milano.  
[47] PAN Conferences: international workshop on 
uncovering plagiarism, authorship, and social software 
misuse (2010, 2011, 2012). 
[48] Parronchi, A. 1998. “Diario postumo”: echi montaliani 
da sé e da altri. In [1], 118-126.  
[49] Raboni, G. 1997. Quegli apocrifi? L‟avevo detto dieci 
anni fa, ma la querela non arrivò. Corriere della Sera 
(25 luglio 1997).  
[50] Ramat, S. 1998. Su un frammento del Diario postumo 
(“Tornerà la musica”). In [1], 130-139.  
[51] Rockwell, G. 2003. What Is Text Analysis Really? 
Literary and Linguistic Computing 18, 2, 209-19. 
DOI=10.1093/llc/18.2.209. 
[52] Rosiello, L. 1965. Analisi statistica della funzione 
poetica nella poesia montaliana. In Struttura, uso e 
funzioni della lingua, L. Rosiello, Ed. Vallecchi 
Editore, Firenze. 
[53] Savoca, G. 1997. Concordanza del «Diario postumo» di 
Eugenio Montale. Facsimile dei manoscritti. Testo, 
Concordanza. Olschki, Firenze.  
[54] Savoy, J. 2012. Authorship Attribution: A Comparative 
Study of Three Text Corpora and Three Languages. 
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 19, 2, 132-161. 
[55] Scaffai, N. 2007. Un “apocrifo d‟autore”: argomenti per 
il “Diario postumo” di Montale. In La regola e 
l’eccezione. Saggi sulla letteratura italiana del 
Novecento, Id. Ed. Le Monnier, Firenze, 120-139.  
[56] Scheiwiller, V. 1998. Eugenio Montale, una burla 
riuscita. In [1], 19-21.  
[57] Schlitz, S.A. 2009. The TEI as luminol: Forensic 
philology in a digital age. Literary and Linguist 
Computing 24, 2, 173-185. DOI=10.1093/llc/fqp001. 
[58] Schmidt, D. 2010. The inadequacy of embedded markup 
for cultural heritage texts. Literary and Linguist 
Computing 25, 3, 337-356. DOI=10.1093/llc/fqq007. 
[59] Shannon, C.E. 1948. A mathematical theory of 
communication. Bell System Technical Journal 27, 379-
423 and 623-656. 
[60] Solé, R.V., Corominas Murtra, B., Valverde, S. and 
Steels, L. 2010. Language networks: Their structure, 
function, and evolution. Complexity 15, 20–26.  
[61] Stamatatos, E. 2009. A survey of modern authorship 
attribution methods. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology 60, 3, 538-556. 
[62] Text Encoding Initiative. 2008. TEI P5: Guidelines for 
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 
http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/. 
[63] Weiss, S.M., Indurkhya, N. and Zhang, T. 2010. 
Fundamentals of Predictive Text Mining. Springer-
Verlag, London-New York. 
[64] Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H. and Huang, Z. 2006. A 
framework for authorship identification of online 
messages: Writing-style features and classification 
techniques. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science & Technology 57, 3, 378–393. 
 
