-192- 
 
The use of sequences of linguistic categories in forensic written text 
comparison revisited 
 
Núria Bel
1
, Sheila Queralt Estevez
2
, Maria S. Spassova
3
 and M. Teresa Turell
4
 
1
IULA (Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Spain 
234
ForensicLab, IULA (Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Spain 
3
New Bulgarian University 
1
nuria.bel@upf.edu 
2
sheila.queralt@upf.edu 
3ma.spassova@abv.bg 
4teresa.turell@upf.edu 
 
Abstract 
 
In recent years, the possibility of studying syntax use through computer-aided queries of 
annotated corpora has led researchers working in the field of forensic written text comparison 
to explore a new possible marker of authorship, namely, tag sequences as representation of 
combinations of linguistic categories. A series of studies carried out during the first research 
stage at ForensicLab using Spanish language data have shown that tag sequences exhibit a 
significant discriminatory capacity and can be applied to authorship attribution tasks more 
effectively. In the second research stage reported in this paper, the analysis aims to identify 
specific traits of each linguistic category implemented in those tags within the exploited tag 
set which play a major role in the correct classification of texts and those which do not, 
without losing sight of the fact that either their exclusion or inclusion in tag composition can 
help to improve this forensic linguistic comparison method. This paper reports on the 
findings from the statistical testing of several variants of the Institut Universitari de 
Lingüística Aplicada’s (IULA) tag set system and their evaluation in the context of 
authorship analysis. For testing purposes, a corpus of two types of written texts (novel 
fragments and newspaper articles), from six contemporary Spanish speaking novelists, was 
compiled. Furthermore, a subcorpus was used of texts written by one of the writers included 
in this study, whose authorship was anonymised. Preliminary studies show that, in both types 
of written texts, the use of trigrams produces more statistically significant results than the use 
of bigrams, especially trigrams consisting of prepositional phrases and, to a lesser extent, 
verbal and compound adjective phrases. 
 
Keywords:  MORPHO-SYNTACTICALLY ANNOTATED TAG SEQUENCES; N-GRAMS; 
DISCRIMINANT FUNCTION ANALYSIS; FORENSIC WRITTEN TEXT COMPARISON; 
AUTHORSHIP ATTRIBUTION; SPANISH 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Modern Forensic Linguistics, particularly in the area of language as evidence, faces the 
fundamental challenge of undertaking forensic voice and text comparison analyses by using 
data from real world texts, reference corpora material and real case documents, which could 
ultimately lead to more reliable and robust reports in forensic speaker identification and 
authorship attribution contexts.  
This paper takes the view that forensic voice and written text comparison 
methodology should be based upon both qualitative approaches, derived from the forensic 
linguist’s knowledge (auditive methods in forensic phonetics and acoustics; diverse 
qualitative techniques in written authorship attribution), and semi-automatic and quantitative 
-193- 
 
approaches to real-world and real-case texts, based on multidimensional voice analysis 
methods, Linear (or Function) Discriminant Analysis, LR Bayesian methods applied to both 
oral and written texts, use of reference corpora, and analysis of lexical richness, amongst 
others). 
 The analysis described in this paper presents experimental research in progress 
conducted at our forensic linguistics laboratory on the establishment of sequences of 
linguistic categories (Morpho-syntactic Annotated Tag Sequences (MATS), or n-grams) as 
potential discriminatory markers of authorship. Table 1 illustrates the variable under 
consideration.  
 
Table 1: Morpho-syntactically Annotated Tag Sequences (MATS) 
Source: Turell (2010:233)                                                                                                                                                  
 
                                                            
<s> 
El comercial de la empresa vendía los mejores hoteles </s> 
… AMS N5-MS P AFS N5-FS VDA6S AMP ADJ N5-MP … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         bigram       trigram 
 
In this table it can be observed that once tagged, the sentence: ‘el comercial de la empresa 
vendía los mejores hoteles’ (‘the firm's salesperson was selling the best hotels’) is projected 
and represented. Two examples of MATS are marked, namely, ‘el comercial’ (AMS N5-MS), 
which is a bigram and ‘el comercial de’, (AMSN5-MS P), which is a trigram, and where A 
stands for article, M for masculine, S for singular, N5-MS for singular masculine common 
noun, and P for preposition.  
 This approach is not new in non-forensic contexts. Recent (Feiguina and Hirst 2007; 
Nazar and Sánchez Pol, 2007; Spassova, 2007; Spassova and Turell, 2007) and less recent 
(Baayen, van Halteren et al., 1996; Statamatos, 2000) studies have shown the discriminatory 
potential quality of these markers across genres and authors, establishing that the 
discriminatory efficiency of these sequences is higher with long text samples and with a large 
number of reference control texts (Grant, 2007) and that bigrams (combination of two 
categories, also known as tag pairs) and trigrams (combination of three categories, or triplets) 
are more discriminatory than longer sequences of linguistic categories. Our laboratory has 
been one of the first to apply this method to real forensic cases.  
 
2. Method 
 
The method used to explore the discriminatory potential of this marker of authorship, namely, 
tag sequences as representation of combinations of linguistic categories, is structured around 
the following activities: 
 
1. A pre-processing phase, in which texts are segmented into their basic components:  
title, paragraphs, sentences, and paragraph beginnings and ends are marked (< =s 
>< =p >). 
2. A morpho-syntactic tagging phase, during which the text is converted into a row 
of token types and tags. 
-194- 
 
3.  A disambiguation stage, through which texts are disambiguated and errors are 
corrected. 
4.  A tag extraction phase—making use of LEGOLAS 2.0
1
—during which the 
information obtained refers to the number of MATS types and tokens and on the 
MATS frequency values to be used in the subsequent statistical analysis. 
5.  Once the tags have been extracted, a last stage involves the application of Linear 
Discriminant Analysis (LDA), in order to classify the different text sets, and the 
projection of results onto graphs. 
 
During the pre-processing and processing phases several processing and disambiguation tools 
from the IULA’s technical corpus were used
2
.   
 
3. Research stages 
 
So far, this on-going research work has involved two stages, whose main tasks are 
summarized in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1: Research stages 
 
Stage 1 
 
During Stage 1, by drawing from results derived from Spassova (2009), the discriminatory 
potential of n-grams was evaluated vis-à-vis a real-world corpus of Spanish Novels (N)—17 
(8 women; 9 men) and Newspaper Articles (NA)—10 (4 women; 6 men) and a corpus of real 
forensic cases. Table 2 shows the distribution of writers considered by sub-corpus, gender 
and linguistic variety (P stands for Peninsular Spanish; A stands for American Spanish) 
during this stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1
LEGOLAS 2.0 is a tool that has been developed by ForensicLab for the automatic extraction of linguistic tags. 
A new version of this extraction tool, LEGOLAS 2.1, is being programmed and will soon be commercialized. 
2
 http://brangaene.upf.es/plncorpus/index2.htm ; http://brangaene.upf.es/plncorpus/faq.html 
-195- 
 
Table 2: Distribution of writers by sub-corpus, gender and linguistic variety in Stage 1  
 
Sub-
corpora 
Total N writers Gender Variety W M 
 
N 
 
17 
 
W 
 
8 
 
P 
 
4 
 
6 
 
M 
 
9 
 
A 
 
4 
 
3 
 
NA 
 
10 
 
W 
 
4 
 
P 
 
1 
 
2 
 
 
M 
 
6 
 
A 
 
3 
 
4 
 
 
 
This evaluation also involved the consideration of the effect of several factors linked with the 
characteristics of the text such as length, textual genre and time of text production, with 
samples in one measurement time (MT1) and a second measurement time (MT2, 6-10 years 
later). The series of experiments carried out during this first research stage using Spanish 
written data confirmed that tag sequences of linguistic categories show a significant 
discriminatory capacity and that this variable can be applied to authorship attribution tasks 
reliably and effectively.  
 
Stage 2 
 
Objectives 
 
The motivation behind the implementation of Stage 2 is that the analyses would be 
optimitized and the discriminatory potential of MATS further confirmed. The experimental 
studies involved in Stage 2 aim to identify the specific traits of each linguistic category 
implemented in those tags (within the exploited tag set), which play a major role in the 
correct classification of texts and those which do not, without losing sight of the fact that 
either their exclusion or inclusion in tag composition can help to improve this forensic 
linguistic comparison method.  
 
The variable 
 
In Stage 2, two types of MATS (n-grams) were used: bigrams (sequences of two 
grammatical categories) and trigrams (sequences of three grammatical categories). Bigrams 
and trigrams were chosen because preliminary studies showed that they were the most 
significant and discriminatory n-grams (see Spassova, 2007; 2009 and Turell, 2007). In this 
stage, 19 different tag sets from the IULA’s tag set were extracted on the basis of research 
experimentation. These tag sets were designed with the combination of the different 
linguistic characteristics of a grammatical category. After conducting many experiments, the 
most robust results during this stage were obtained with tag set No. 13, illustrated in Figure 
2, which was chosen as the tag set to apply in Stage 2. 
 
 
 
-196- 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Linguistic characterisation of the 19 tag sets 
 
Table 3 shows a more specific and detailed linguistic characterization of tag set No. 13. 
 
Table 3: Linguistic characterisation of tag set No. 13 
 
IULA’s tag set Tag set No.13 Key 
 
AFP 
 
 
AP     
 
Article-Plural 
 
EP12MS 
 
 
ES     
 
Specifier-Singular 
 
JQ—FP 
 
 
JP       
 
Adjective-Plural 
 
N5-MS 
 
 
NS     
 
Noun-Singular 
 
REO-1MP 
 
 
RP     
 
Pronoun-Plural 
 
VDP2S- 
 
 
V2S    
Verb 2nd Person- 
Singular 
 
Hypotheses 
 
In order to show the discriminatory potential quality of MATS (n-grams), three of the most 
common hypotheses used in forensic and non-forensic authorship attribution studies were 
tested, namely, a) that there seems to be more inter than intra-writer variation; b) that the 
written idiolectal style of an individual does seem to vary substantially throughout time, and 
c) that this style seems to remain quite stable across genres. The corpus used in Stage 2 to test 
these hypotheses is presented in Table 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-197- 
 
Table 4: Corpus distribution by writer’s gender, genre and production time (Stage 2) 
 
 
 
 
Writers 
 
 
 
 
Biological 
gender 
Text information 
MT1 N 
800 words 
MT2 N 
800 words 
MT1 NA 
300 words 
MT2 NA 
300 
words3 
AP M 10 10 9 7 
JM M 10 10 7 -- 
XM M 10 10 7 6 
EL F 10 10 7 -- 
RM F 10 10 3 8 
LE F 10 10 8 -- 
Anonymised -- 1 1 1 1 
 
Table 4 presents the overall distribution of the two types of written texts—Novel fragments 
(N) and Newspaper Articles (NA)—analysed from the point of view of the MATS behaviour 
and  produced in two differents times (MT1 and MT2 (6—10 years later)—from six 
contemporary Peninsular Spanish novelists. This table illustrates that in the case of the NA 
sample it was only possible to collect data in MT1 for only three (2 men and 1 woman) out of 
these six writers, something which explains the different nature of the experiments conducted 
and reported in the next sections of the paper. For control purposes, we also used a small 
corpus of four texts written by one of the novelists included in this study, whose authorship 
was anonymised. The statistical framework used involved Linear Discriminant Analysis 
(LDA)—with classification and cross-validation methods—and ANOVA (analysis of 
variance).  
 
4. Results and discussion 
 
Inter-writer variation 
 
Firstly, results on inter-writer variation for both bigrams and trigrams, in both genres (N and 
NA) and two times of measurement (MT1 and MT2) are presented. Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 
present results for bigrams and trigrams in Novels written in MT1 and MT2. These figures 
illustrate inter-writer variation between the 6 novelists considered and show that both bigrams 
                                                 
3
 Linguistic variables can sometimes show significant variation between authors by text length; however, in the 
case of MATS, Spassova’s (2009) study proved that a difference in text length between Novels (800 words) and 
Newspaper Articles (300 words) did not have an effect on the significance and reliability of results.  
-198- 
 
and trigrams discriminate well between authors, although trigrams appear to be more 
discriminatory than bigrams, both in MT1 and MT2. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Inter-writer variation—Novels—MT1—Bigrams 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Inter-writer variation—Novel —MT2—Bigrams 
-199- 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Inter-writer variation—Novels—MT1—Trigrams 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Inter-writer variation—Novels—MT2—Trigrams 
-200- 
 
Figures 7, 8, 9 and 10 present results for bigrams and trigrams in Newspaper Articles (NA) 
written in MT1 and MT2 by 3 writers. These figures illustrate inter-writer variation and also 
show that both bigrams and trigrams discriminate well between authors, both in MT1 and 
MT2. 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Inter-writer variation—Newspaper Articles—MT1—Bigrams 
 
Figure 8: Inter-writer variation—Newspaper Articles—MT2—Bigrams 
-201- 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Inter-writer variation—Newspaper Articles—MT1—Trigrams 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Inter-writer variation—Newspaper Articles—MT2—Trigrams 
-202- 
 
The just mentioned patterns are confirmed when the LDA methods of classification and 
cross-validation are compared in Figures 11 and 12. In this case, the data considered involve 
only Novels (N) and Newspaper Articles (NA) from 3 Peninsular Spanish authors in MT1 
and MT2, since it was only possible to obtain NA in MT2 from 3 authors. 
 
 
Figure 11: Correct classification of texts in N and NA (bigrams and trigrams) in MT1  
 
 
Figure 12: Correct classification of texts in N and NA (bigrams and trigrams) in MT2  
 
In order to illustrate experimental control, results on one of the control experiments carried 
out using an anonymised text from one of the sample authors are presented in Figures 13 and 
14, where the projection in MT1 of bigrams and trigrams, respectively, in Newspaper Articles 
(NA) from six writers can be observed. These figures show that the anonymised text is 
correctly attributed to writer AP. 
 
 
 
 
-203- 
 
 
Figure 13: Bigrams—MT1—6 NA writers + anonymised text  
 
 
 
Figure 14: Trigrams—MT1—6 NA writers + anonymised text 
 
 
-204- 
 
Intra-writer variation 
 
Secondly, results on intra-writer variation for both bigrams and trigrams are presented, taking 
into consideration the effect of time (MT1 and MT2). Results obtained for the Novel corpus 
are shown in Figure 15, which illustrates that the behaviour of bigrams and trigrams does not 
vary very much thoughout time, thus confirming hypotheses 2, and also hypotheses 1, since 
evidence is provided that there is much more inter-writer than intra-writer variation. In any 
case, for most writers, trigrams exhibit a much more constant behaviour along time, showing 
lower intra-writer values, than bigrams.  
 
 
 
Figure 15: Intra-writer variation in Novels according to time (bigrams and trigrams)  
 
Another dimension of intra-writer variation has to do with textual genre. As Figure 16 
illustrates intra-author variation according to textual genre in MT1 is smaller when trigrams 
are considered in the analysis, but the values are higher than in the case of the variable of 
time. Thus, hypotheses 3, on the effect on genre, is only partially confirmed, something that 
was expected since Novel and Newspaper Article are genres substantially and structurally 
divergent
4
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
4
 Experiments have also been conducted about the effect of gender on the specific behavior of MATS. 
Preliminary and so still inconclusive results show similar patterns to those found by Spassova and Grant (2008). 
   
 
-205- 
 
 
 
Figure 16: Intra-author variation according to genre in MT1 (bigrams and trigrams 
 
Most frequently used MATS 
 
Having shown that Morpho-syntactically Annotated Tag Sequences (MATS), in particular 
bigrams and trigrams, exhibit a discriminatory potential in Spanish written literary texts, it is 
considered that in order to evaluate this potential further, one relevant issue would be to 
specify the nature of the most frequently used MATS, results which could involve direct 
applications to real forensic cases involving written Spanish texts and also contribute to the 
long-needed base rate knowledge distribution of morpho-syntactic markers. 
 Figures 17, 18, 19 and 20 illustrate this distribution for novels written by six writers in 
Peninsular Spanish. Results show that: 
 
a. The distribution by writer of the most discriminant bigrams and trigrams in Peninsular 
Spanish for the six writers analyzed in MT1 and MT2 includes Noun Phrases (NP) of 
the type (Specifier + Noun; Article + Noun), Adjective Phrases (AdjP), Prepositional 
Noun Phrases (PNP) and, to a lesser extent, Verb Phrases (VP). 
b. There is more inter-writer than intra-writer variation. 
c. For those bigrams and trigrams that are equally used in MT1 and MT2 by the same 
speaker (for example, trigram AS-NS-P), their discriminatory quality potential 
remains quite stable throughout time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-206- 
 
 
Figure 17: Most frequently used MATS—Novels—Bigrams—MT1 
 
 
 
Figure 18: Most frequently used MATS—Novels—Bigrams—MT2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-207- 
 
 
 
Figure 19: Most frequently used MATS—Novels—Trigrams—MT1 
 
 
Figure 20: Most frequently used MATS—Novels—Trigrams—MT2 
 
5. Conclusions  
 
It is hoped that this paper has shown that: 
 
a. The new tag system adopted in Stage 2 has optimitized the categorization of Morpho-
syntactically Annotated Tag Sequences (in particular, bigrams and trigrams) and their 
measurement as potential markers of authorship. 
-208- 
 
b. Most frequently produced bigrams and trigrams can be used to establish that there is 
more inter-writer than intra-writer variation as to the specific behaviour of these 
markers. 
c. Most frequently used bigrams and trigrams can characterize an individual writer’s 
idiolectal style, which does not seem to vary substantially throughout time but can 
vary slightly according to textual genre. 
 
6. Final remarks 
 
The results presented in this paper also illustrate that there is a need to conduct further 
research along several directions. On the one hand, more experiments need to be carried out 
with bigger samples of speakers and more extensive corpora; on the other, the methods used 
to establish the discriminatory potential of Morpho-syntactically Annoated Tag Sequences 
(MATS) need to be extended to real forensic texts, in order to establish this measurement 
applicabilty as a more conclusive method for the purposes of forensic linguistic profiling. 
 
References 
   
Baayen, R.H., van Halteren, H. and Tweedie, F. J. (1996) Outside the cave of shadows: 
Using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing 11(3): 121—131. 
 
Feiguina, O. and Hirst, G. (2007) Authorship attribution for small texts: Literary and 
forensic experiments. Paper presented to the International Workshop on Plagiarism 
Analysis, Authorship Identification and Near-Duplicate Detection. 30th Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference (SIGIR '07). 
 
Grant, T. (2007) Quantifying evidence in forensic authorship analysis. The International 
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 14(1): 1—25.  
 
Nazar, R. and Sanchez Pol, M. (2007) An extremely simple authorship attribution system. 
In M. T. Turell, M. S. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second 
European IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law 197—
203. Barcelona: Publicacions de l’IULA. 
 
Spassova, M. S. (2007) The relevance of inter and intra authorial variation in 
authorship  attribution. Some findings on syntactic identification markers. Paper 
presented at the 8th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the 
Law. University  of Washington, Seattle. 
 
Spassova, M. S. (2009) El potencial discriminatorio de las secuencias de categorías 
gramaticales en la atribución forense de autoría de textos en español. 
Unpublished  PhD thesis, Universitat Pompeu Fabra. 
 
Spassova, M. S. and Grant, T. (2008) Categorizing Spanish written texts by author gender 
and origin by means of Morpho-Syntactic Trigrams: some observations on method’s 
feasibility of application for linguistic profiling. Paper presented at the Curriculum, 
language and the law Inter-University Centre, University of Zagreb, Dubrovnik, 
Croatia. 
-209- 
 
Spassova, M. S and Turell, M. Teresa. (2007) The use of morpho-syntactically annotated 
tag sequences as forensic markers of authorship attribution. In M. T. Turell, M. S. 
Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference 
on Forensic 456 Linguistics/Language and the Law. 229—237. Barcelona: 
Publicacions de l’IULA. 
 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N. and Kokkinakis, G. (2000) Automatic text categorization in 
terms of genre and author. Computational Linguistics 26 (4): 471—495. 
 
Turell, M. Teresa. (2010) The use of textual, grammatical and sociolinguistic evidence in 
forensic text comparison. The International Journal of Speech, Language and 
the  Law 17 (2): 211—250. 
