ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 04 March 2014
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00157
Investigating pianists’ individuality in the performance of
five timbral nuances through patterns of articulation, touch,
dynamics, and pedaling
Michel Bernays1* and Caroline Traube2
1 IDMIL/SPCL, Schulich School of Music, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
2 LRGM, OICRM, Faculté de musique, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada
Edited by:
Bruno Gingras, University of Vienna,
Austria
Reviewed by:
Werner Goebl, University of Music
and Performing Arts Vienna, Austria
Steven R. Livingstone, Ryerson
University, Canada
*Correspondence:
Michel Bernays, IDMIL/SPCL,
Schulich School of Music, McGill
University, 555 Sherbrooke Street
West, Montreal, QC H3A 1E3,
Canada
e-mail: michel.bernays@
mail.mcgill.ca
Timbre is an essential expressive feature in piano performance. Concert pianists use
a vast palette of timbral nuances to color their performances at the microstructural
level. Although timbre is generally envisioned in the pianistic community as an abstract
concept carried through an imaged vocabulary, performers may share some common
strategies of timbral expression in piano performance. Yet there may remain further
leeway for idiosyncratic processes in the production of piano timbre nuances. In this
study, we examined the patterns of timbral expression in performances by four expert
pianists. Each pianist performed four short pieces, each with five different timbral
intentions (bright, dark, dry, round, and velvety). The performances were recorded with
the high-accuracy Bösendorfer CEUS system. Fine-grained performance features of
dynamics, touch, articulation and pedaling were extracted. Reduced PCA performance
spaces and descriptive performance portraits confirmed that pianists exhibited unique,
specific profiles for different timbral intentions, derived from underlying traits of general
individuality, while sharing some broad commonalities of dynamics and articulation for
each timbral intention. These results confirm that pianists’ abstract notions of timbre
correspond to reliable patterns of performance technique. Furthermore, these effects
suggest that pianists can express individual styles while complying with specific timbral
intentions.
Keywords: piano, performance, timbre, individuality, expression, articulation, touch, Bösendorfer CEUS
1. INTRODUCTION
Musical performance holds a crucial role in the art and experi-
ence of music. Classical performers in particular can shine their
own light upon the composed work and express their creativity.
Accordingly, an extensive, empirical body of knowledge has been
developed amongst musicians with respect to the art and tech-
nique of performance. Notably, it has been so for the piano in the
few centuries since the instruments’ inception. Guidelines about
technique, gesture, touch, and mental approach were provided by
teachers and pedagogues in the aim of helping pianists develop
their own “sound” and musical expression (Hofmann, 1920;
Neuhaus, 1973; Fink, 1992). Individual pianist development is
then shaped and oriented by the teacher and the piano school
(e.g., Russian, German or French) he/she abides by Lourenço
(2010).
A large body of research has been devoted to exploring expres-
sive piano performance, by examining the general performance
parameters (in opposition to the musical parameters of pitch,
harmony or rhythm Rink et al., 2011) that pianists can use
as expressive devices. Expressive control parameters of timing
and amplitude have been the most explored by far, for their
salience among the performance parameters that pianists can
vary and their effect on the perception of emotional expression
(Bhatara et al., 2011), and for the relative accessibility of their
measurement (e.g., with MIDI digital recording pianos or with
acoustical analysis Goebl et al., 2008). They were revealed to fol-
low broad, common expressive strategies that depend on other
musical factors. In particular, expressive deviations from the score
in timing and dynamics were shown to follow common pat-
terns related to the musical structure (phrasing and local accents)
(Repp, 1992; Shaffer, 1995; Parncutt, 2003). Moreover, overlap
durations in legato articulation were shown to depend on reg-
ister, tempo, interval size and consonance, and position in an
arpeggio (Repp, 1996b), while the melody lead effect (i.e., the
melody note in a chord played slightly earlier) was shown as an
artifact of the dynamic accentuation of the melodic voice, thus
correlated to amplitude (Goebl, 2001). Different computational
models of expressive performance were developed (Widmer and
Goebl, 2004), based on structurally guided rules of expressive
timing and dynamics (MIDI parameters). These rules could be
defined in different ways (De Poli, 2004): explicitly (as heuristics),
through analysis-by-measurement (Todd, 1992, e.g.,) or analysis-
by-synthesis (Friberg et al., 2006); or implicitly, by machine learn-
ing, from an input learning set of recorded human performances
(Widmer et al., 2009).
However, within the constraints imposed by these structural
rules of timing and dynamics, there remains enough space for
pianists to bring out their individual expression in performing a
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 1
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
piece, as advocated in piano pedagogy and performance. Indeed,
idiosyncratic patterns, that would differ between pianists yet
remain consistent for each one, were identified below general
rules, in the following expressive techniques: in chord asyn-
chronies and melody lead (Palmer, 1996); in temporal deviations
around the frame defined by the musical structure (so long as
these deviations remain within an “acceptable” range) (Repp,
1990, 1992, 1998); in articulation, for which the general, common
trends in overlap durations were obscured by considerable inter-
individual variations (Bresin and Battel, 2000); and also in sustain
pedal timing (Heinlein, 1929; Repp, 1996c, 1997). On the other
hand, in Repp’s (1996a) study of 30 performances by 10 gradu-
ate students of Schumann’s “Träumerei,” the expressive dynamics
(MIDI velocities) did not appear as a clear bearer of individ-
ual differences, yet tended to be more consistent in the repeated
performances by each pianist than between performers.
Expressive features of both timing and loudness were used
successfully for automatic identification, with machine learning
models, of the performer in MIDI (Stamatatos and Widmer,
2005) or audio (Saunders et al., 2008; Wang, 2013) recordings of
piano performances. Meanwhile, temporal deviations were iden-
tified as individual fingerprints in non-expressive scale playing,
yet could not be perceived by human listeners (Van Vugt et al.,
2013), indicating that a fine-grained level of individuality in piano
performance resides below the level of expressive timing.
More generally, in a review paper, Sloboda (2000) exam-
ined the performers’ abilities to generate expressively different
performances of the same piece of music according to the
nature of intended structural and emotional communication,
and described how some of these abilities have been shown to
have lawful relationships to objective musical and extra-musical
parameters. With respect to other keyboard instruments, it was
also shown that local tempo variations, onset asynchronies, and
especially articulation (overlaps) were highly individual parame-
ters of expressive performance in Baroque organ music (Gingras
et al., 2011). How these findings relate to piano performance,
however, is a non-trivial issue.
Individuality in expressive piano performance was also exam-
ined in light of musical gestures, i.e., timing and dynamic
patterns, whose occurrences, distribution and diversity could
characterize the individual expressive strategies in 29 case-study
performances of Chopin’s Mazurka, op.24 no.2 (Rink et al., 2011).
Conversely, literal pianists’ gestures (body motion, finger move-
ments) in expressive piano performance were shown as highly
idiosyncratic, although related to the musical and rhythmic struc-
ture of the piece (MacRitchie, 2011; MacRitchie et al., 2013).
Likewise, finger kinematics were shown as idiosyncratic enough
for performers to be accurately identified, with neural network
classifiers, from their finger movements and accelerations during
attacks and key presses (Dalla Bella and Palmer, 2011).
However, such pianistic gestures hold other functions (ancil-
lary, figurative) than the actual, effective sound production
(Cadoz and Wanderley, 2000). Consequently, their idiosyncratic
nature does not necessarily translate into an idiosyncratic expres-
sive sound production—the main concern of this article. Thus,
this study only considers the effective gestures applied by pianists
to the keyboard and pedals.
Among the expressive musical attributes available to pianists
other than sheer timing and loudness, timbre holds a crucial
expressive role (Holmes, 2012), which has been widely acknowl-
edged within the pianistic community (Bernays, 2012). Usually
envisioned as the inherent characteristic of a sound source or
instrument, timbre is also considered by pianists as the subtle
quality of sound that they can control through the expressive
nuances of their performances. However, it has long been debated
whether pianists can actually control timbre as a sound quality of
performance. Scientific studies concluded long ago that control-
ling piano timbre on a single key was limited by the mechanical
constraints of the action to sheer keystroke velocity, and thus
inseparable from intensity (Hart et al., 1934). The influence of
contact noises however (especially finger-key contact) on the tim-
bre of a single piano tone was demonstrated (Goebl and Fujinaga,
2008), suggesting that the type of touch can bear an influence
on the timbre of a single tone (Goebl et al., 2005). Yet even so,
keyboard control over the timbre of a single tone remains quite
limited.
But in a polyphonic, musical context, the expressive perfor-
mance features of articulation, touch and pedaling can govern
subtle tone combinations, in the timing and dynamic balance
(polyphonic touch) of notes in a chord and in melodic lines
(Parncutt and Troup, 2002). Composite timbres thus arise which
are, in essence, performer-controlled (Bernays, 2013). Pianists’
expressive intentions can thus be conveyed through specific tim-
bral nuances (Sándor, 1995), to the vast palette of which an
extensive vocabulary, including numerous adjectival descriptors,
has been associated (Bellemare and Traube, 2005; Cheminée,
2006). However, the precise technique and ways of production of
piano timbre nuances have generally been subdued to abstraction,
mental conception, imitation and aural modeling (Woody, 1999)
in piano pedagogy and treatises (Kochevitsky, 1967; Neuhaus,
1973). This abstract approach to teaching the production of piano
timbre, in combination with the focus on personal expression,
thus suggest that pianists may employ individual, idiosyncratic
expressive performance strategies toward producing a specific
timbral nuance—whose understanding according to its verbal
descriptor may also vary slightly between pianists.
In order to explore pianists’ individuality in the production
of timbral nuances, piano performance has to be measured and
quantified with the high precision required for identifying the
subtleties of expressive performance employed in controlling tim-
bre. In the absence or rarity of high-precision measurement tools
for piano performance, the intricacies of timbre production have
essentially remained out of the reach and/or concern of piano
performance studies—with the exception of Ortmann’s (1929)
investigation, with the help of cumbersome mechanical appara-
tus, of the relations between piano touch and timbre on a single
tone. Going further, with the high-accuracy Bösendorfer CEUS
digital piano performance-recording system, this study explores
pianists’ individuality in the production of piano timbre in a
polyphonic, ecologically valid musical context.
Furthermore, the verbalization of piano timbre was studied
quantitatively (Bernays and Traube, 2011), according to judge-
ments of semantic similarity between the 14 descriptors of piano
timbre most cited by pianists in Bellemare and Traube (2005).
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 2
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
These evaluations were mapped into a semantic space, whose first
two, most salient dimensions formed a plan in which descriptors
were grouped in five distinct clusters—which was confirmed by
hierarchical cluster analysis. In each cluster, the descriptor judged
the most familiar was selected. The five most familiar, diverse and
representative timbre descriptors thus highlighted—dry, bright,
round, velvety, and dark—appear (in that order) along a circu-
lar arc in the semantic plan. These five descriptors defined the
timbres for which to seek out individual patterns of production
between several pianists.
This method of searching for production patterns in perfor-
mances driven by verbal descriptors has been employed in studies
of emotions in music performance. Verbal descriptors of emotion
in music were first categorized by Hevner (1936), in eight groups
arranged by similarity in a circular pattern. Studies of emotional
expression in music performance have used a subset of emotional
descriptors—taken either from Hevner’s categories or from the
verbal descriptors of basic emotions in a general context (Ekman,
1992)—in order to drive the performers’ intentions. Emotional
descriptors among “happiness,” “anger,” “sadness,” “tenderness,”
“fear,” “solemnity,” as well as emotionally “neutral” (for compar-
ison), were for instance used as emotional instructions to several
performers playing various instruments in Gabrielsson and Juslin
(1996), Juslin (1997), Juslin and Laukka (2003) (a meta-study),
and Quinto et al. (2013). Among other goals, correlations were
identified between these emotional expressions and performance
parameters of dynamics, tempo, timing, articulation, as well as
acoustical features of tone and timbre. In more details, both inten-
sity and tempo were positively correlated with arousal (sadness,
tenderness vs. anger, happiness), and high variability in inten-
sity was associated with fear. Legato articulation was found to
reflect the expression of tenderness or sadness, while a staccato
articulation expressed happiness. Individual differences between
performers in encoding each emotion were also mentioned, yet
hardly detailed. In particular, Gabrielsson and Juslin (1996) con-
cluded that the performance rules for communicating emotions
depend on the instrument, the musical style, and the performer,
as well as on the listener. Meanwhile, Canazza et al. (1997) used
sensorial-type adjectives (bright, dark, hard, soft, heavy, light, and
normal) as instructions for expressive clarinet performances of
the same musical piece, and identified sonological characteristics
of these emotions.
Regarding the piano, Madison (2000) explored the expres-
sion of happy, sad, angry, and fearful emotions in performances
by three pianists, and identified correlations between emotional
expression and the degree of variability in patterns of timing,
articulation and loudness.
Furthermore, Ben Asher (2013) developed and trained a
machine learning algorithm to automatically retrieve in real time
the musical expression and emotional intentions in piano perfor-
mance from the gestures of pianists. The training set used verbal
descriptors of basic emotions to drive the performances, and the
pianists’ high-level gestures were automatically identified from
kinaesthetic data.
However, we may argue that the verbal descriptors of basic
emotions used in such studies are not comparable, in the context
of music performance and pedagogy, with the verbal descriptors
of piano timbre nuances we are using in this article. Indeed, the
vocabulary that is used by musicians and music teachers to ver-
bally define and communicate the emotional qualities of music in
performance is based on more complex or indirect metaphors and
analogies, most often attempting to connect emotions and music
performance through their shared motor-affective elements and
motional aspects, for instance with reference to bodily gesture
or vocal intonations (Woody, 2002). Those may be more effec-
tive in triggering appropriate actions from the performer, whereas
the vocabulary of basic emotions may be comparatively better
suited to music perception. On the other hand, the vocabulary
describing musical timbre was demonstrated as consensual and
meaningful (Faure, 2000). In particular, the vocabulary of ver-
bal description of piano timbre forms a specialized lexicon that
holds a distinctive meaning within the context of piano perfor-
mance (Cheminée, 2006), and was shown as familiar to pianists
in a musical context, and largely shared among them (Bellemare
and Traube, 2005).
The first research question explored in this study is whether
individuality in piano performance manifests itself in the gestures
applied by pianists on the keyboard, and if so, which descriptive
performance features of dynamics, touch, articulation, and ped-
aling determined from high-resolution key/pedal position and
hammer velocity tracking can reveal individual piano perfor-
mance patterns. Yet the main research question that we wish
to investigate is whether individuality in piano performance, if
highlighted by specific performance features, arises in different
patterns between performances of different timbral nuances, i.e.,
whether the characteristics of piano performance that would
prove idiosyncratic in comparing different pianists vary depend-
ing on the timbral nuance performed.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
In order to explore pianists’ individuality in the expressive pro-
duction of piano timbre nuances in a musically relevant frame-
work that could mirror a genuine musical experience, the study
was designed with respect to the following steps: selection of the
five verbal descriptors dry, bright, round, velvety and dark as
timbral instructions for which to explore performance idiosyn-
crasies; conception of musical pieces to be expressively performed
according to these different timbral nuances; use of non-invasive,
high-accuracy piano performance-recording equipment; record-
ing of timbre-colored performances; and extraction therein of
meaningful piano performance, articulation, touch and pedaling
descriptors.
2.1. MUSICAL PIECES
In order to set a musical context adequate to expressive timbre
production in performances, four short solo piano pieces were
selected, among 15 specially composed for the study following
instructions on the timbral nuances to be expressed (cf. Figure 1).
Each selected piece could allow for a meaningful, consistent-
throughout expression of each of the five timbral nuances, and
featured many aspects of piano technique that we wanted to
explore. Each just a few bars long (from 4 to 7, with differ-
ent meters), their duration at score tempo ranged between 12
and 15 s.
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 3
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
FIGURE 1 | Scores of the four pieces composed and selected for the
study.
2.2. EQUIPMENT
To investigate the fine-grained nuances of pianists’ performance
control and touch that let them express different timbral nuances
and could reveal idiosyncratic approaches, highly precise data
were required from which to thoroughly assess the intricacies
of key strokes. In this aim, we had the opportunity to use the
Bösendorfer CEUS piano digital recording and reproducing sys-
tem. Vastly improving upon the MIDI-based SE reproducing
piano, the CEUS system is designed to both record with high
accuracy the actions of a pianist on the keyboard, and to repro-
duce the performance faithfully, with solenoids that activate each
key and pedal to mirror the original, recorded performance.
In this study, the CEUS system was only used for its record-
ing abilities. Equipped with optical sensors behind the keys,
hammers and pedals, microprocessors, electronic boards, and a
computer system, it can indeed track key and pedal positions
and hammer velocities at high resolution (8-bit) and high sam-
pling rate (500 Hz). The system we used was embedded in the
Imperial Bösendorfer Model 290 grand piano installed at BRAMS
(International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research,
Montreal, Canada) in a dedicated recording studio.
2.3. PARTICIPANTS
Four pianists participated in the study. They are further referred
as pianists A, B, C and D. All four had extensive professional expe-
rience and advanced-level piano performance diploma. Pianist
A is a 30-year old French female. She studied piano and played
professionally in France and Belgium. Pianist B is an 54-year old
Italian male. He studied piano in Switzerland and Italy, and played
professionally in several countries. Pianist C is a 46 year-old
French-Canadian male. He studied piano and played profession-
ally in the Quebec province, Canada. Pianist D is a 22-year
old French male. He studied piano and played professionally in
France and Canada.
2.4. PROCEDURE
Each participant had received in advance the scores of the pieces
and the timbral instructions, and was given time to practice.
Rehearsal sessions were allotted on the Bösendorfer piano, to
allow for familiarization with the instrument and the room. The
timbral instructions were provided with only the five adjecti-
val descriptors. The participants confirmed their familiarity with
each descriptor as a piano timbre nuance. They were asked to per-
form each of the four pieces, with each of the five timbres. Three
such runs of 20 performances were conducted successively—twice
in an order of pieces and timbres chosen by the participant,
and once in randomized forced order—so as to get three per-
formances for each condition (piece × timbre). The participants
were allowed to immediately replay a performance if they consid-
ered the previous try unsatisfactory. Each of the 60 performances
per participant was recorded through the CEUS system. We
thus collected 240 CEUS boe-format recordings of 4 pianists
performing 4 pieces with 5 different timbres, 3 times each.
2.5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND EXTRACTION OF PERFORMANCE
FEATURES
In order to extract meaningful piano performance and touch
features from CEUS-acquired data, the PianoTouch Matlab
toolbox was specifically developed (Bernays and Traube, 2012).
From the high-frequency, high-resolution key/pedal positions
and hammer velocities, note and chord structures were retrieved,
and an exhaustive set of quantified features spanning several
broad areas of piano performance and touch were computed:
• Dynamics and attack: maximum hammer velocity (MHV),
maximum key depression depth (Amax) and their relations
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 4
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
(ratio of their values, respective timing); attack durations
(related to instants of both MHV and Amax), speeds (ratio
of MHV or Amax to duration) and percussiveness (pressed vs.
struck touch) (Goebl et al., 2005; McPherson and Kim, 2011)
• Articulation: sustain and release durations, synchrony of notes
within chords (melody lead; duration, rate and amount of
asynchrony at onset and offset), intervals and overlaps between
chords (inter-onset and offset-to-onset, overlap durations,
number and corresponding amount of depression, with respect
to all chords, same-hand chords and other-hand chords)
• Detailed use of the soft and sustain pedals during each chord:
duration of use, of full depression and of part-pedaling, timing
with regard to chord onsets and offsets, depression (average,
maximum, depth at chord onset, offset and MHV).
Each note was thus described by 46 features. Averages and stan-
dard deviations of these note features per chord were calculated
as chord features. With the addition of 76 chord-specific features,
each chord was described by 168 features.
For each performance, averages and standard deviations of
chord features were calculated over all the chords in the perfor-
mance. Only the chord features whose averaging could provide
a meaningful description of a performance were conserved. For
instance, the absolute instants of chord onsets, while useful in
describing a chord, are meaningless in and of itself when aver-
aged over a performance. However, such chord features were
indispensable as building blocks for calculating other chord fea-
tures (e.g., synchrony or attack speed) that can be meaningfully
averaged as performance features and compared between differ-
ent performances. Performance features were thus given by the
averages and standard deviations per performance calculated for
100 relevant chord features (out of 168). With the addition of
the number of chords and total number of notes per perfor-
mance, each performance was thus described by 202 performance
features.
Moreover, performances features were also calculated over
only the chords played with the left hand and over only the
chords played with the right hand, and differences in aver-
age performance feature values between hands were determined.
The 32 pedaling features per chord were not considered in this
context. Excluding their averages and standard deviations per
performance (64 performance features), there remained 138 per-
formance features to describe each performance with regard to
left-hand chords only, to right-hand chords only, and to the
differences between hands.
In total, over the four different chord groupings per per-
formance (all chords, left-hand chords only, right-hand chords
only, and differences between hands), 202 + 138 × 3 = 616 per-
formance features were calculated to characterize each of the 240
recorded performances.
3. RESULTS
3.1. PIANISTS’ OVERALL INDIVIDUALITY
First, in order to obtain an overall picture of each pianist’s indi-
vidual and idiosyncratic patterns of articulation, touch, dynamics
and pedaling in all the performances whose key and pedal depres-
sions and hammer velocities were recorded, the performance
features that could prove characteristic of one pianist’s perfor-
mances in contrast with the others’ were sought out over the
whole dataset of 240 performances of four different pieces by four
pianists highlighting five different timbral nuances.
3.1.1. Statistical method
Statistical analysis of variance was conducted, with regard to
the 616 performance features describing each performance,
over the 240-performance dataset. Three-Way repeated-measures
ANOVAs were performed for each performance feature (as
dependent variable), with the performer as random factor, and
timbre, piece, and repetition (of the same experimental con-
dition) as fixed-effect factors. Two factors were considered for
assessing pianists’ overall individuality in performance: the ran-
dom factor of performer, and the fixed-effect repetitions. Indeed,
for a performance feature to reveal pianists’ individuality, the
effect of the performer has to be significant (i.e., rejecting with
at least 95% confidence the null hypothesis of equal variance
between pianists), but the feature must also remain consistent
between repetitions (i.e., no significant differences between repe-
titions at the 5% level).
For these two factors, the assumptions required by the
ANOVA were tested. For the between-subject factor, assump-
tions of normal distributions (Kolgomorov–Smirnov test) and
homoscedasticity (Levene’s test) were tested. In the cases where
the ANOVA was significant at the 5% level in rejecting the
null hypothesis of equal variance between performers but
the assumptions were not met, the non-parametric, one-way
Kruskal–Wallis rank analysis of variance was also run, to control
for possible type I errors (i.e., to confirm or invalidate signif-
icance, depending of the significance at the 5% level of the
Kruskal–Wallis test). Effect sizes and statistical power were also
calculated. For the repetition, within-subject factor, the Huynh–
Feldt correction was applied to the degrees of freedom in order to
compensate for possible violations of sphericity (as assessed with
Mauchly’s test).
With this method, 159 performance features were revealed as
both consistent (i.e., not significantly different at the 5% level)
between repetitions, and different between the four pianists (i.e.,
significant at the 5% level in rejecting the null hypothesis of equal
variance between them).
3.1.2. Reduced performance space
Principal Component Analysis was applied over the dataset of
240 performances to those 159 selected performance features.
Indeed, those are the performance features that were shown
to highlight consistent, significant difference between the four
performers (within the limits of statistical accuracy, as will be dis-
cussed in Section 4); the excluded performance features would
only impede the visualization of differences between performers.
The values of the selected performance features were normal-
ized (Z-scores per feature over the 240 performances), in order to
assess their relative values, so as to enable comparisons between
features on an equivalent scale, and so that each pianist’s indi-
viduality according to each feature could be expressed as a rel-
ative deviation from the overall average (Wöllner, 2013). The
PCA procedure aimed at defining reduced performance spaces
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 5
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
whose dimensions would correspond to the first few principal
components and that would illustrate the aspects and features
of performances most relevant in highlighting the performers’
individuality. The number of principal components required to
explain a sufficient part of the variance in the input dataset
determined the number of dimensions of each reduced per-
formance space, and the meaning of each dimension in terms
of the performance features it represents most saliently was
explored in its loadings (i.e., the weights associated to each
feature in the linear combination which forms the principal
component).
The first three principal components of the PCA applied to
the 159 selected performance features over the 240-performance
dataset account for 61.4% (31.97, 15.56, and 13.87% respec-
tively) of the input variance. Varimax factor rotation (Kaiser,
1958) was then applied to these first three PCA loadings, in
order to optimize the weightings of performance features between
the loadings. The average positions (over the three repetitions)
of same-condition (pianist, piece and timbre) performances,
according to their coordinates in these three rotated dimensions,
are presented in Figure 2.
According to the varimax-rotated loadings, the first dimen-
sion corresponds to performance features of attack and dynamics:
hammer velocity and its variations between chords, attack speed,
duration, and percussiveness, and key depression depth. For the
second dimension, the loadings are principally attributed to per-
formance features of chord, note, sustain, and overlap durations,
as well as right-hand note offset timing in chords, and inter-
onset intervals. Finally, the third dimension essentially accounts
for performance features of articulation: number of overlapping
chords, legato vs. staccato articulation, interval between chords,
and melody lead.
In the performance space thus defined, some idiosyncratic,
consistent performance tendencies of the four pianists are
revealed. Pianist A shows the lowest dynamics and longest/slowest
attacks, and the most legato articulation. On the other hand,
Pianist C uses the highest dynamics and fastest/shortest attacks,
while employing rather short notes and detached articulation. As
for Pianist B, he tends to employ short notes with the most stac-
cato articulation. Finally, Pianist D tends to let keys depressed the
longest, with a legato articulation.
3.1.3. Descriptive performance portrait
Now, in order to obtain a more precise account of the
four performers’ idiosyncrasies as reflected by specific per-
formance features, the most salient, relevant, meaningful and
FIGURE 2 | Reduced 3-dimension performance space by PCA and
varimax factor rotation applied to 159 significant performance features
over the 240-performance dataset: planar projections. For a clearer
representation, only the averages of the three repetitions of same-condition
performances are plotted. Averages per pianist are indicated by colored
crosses, and ±1 SE with ellipses.
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 6
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
non-redundant features among those significant between per-
formers (and consistent between performers’ repetitions) were
sought out. For this aim, the significant performance features
were first divided into the four broad, technically indepen-
dent categories of: (1) dynamics and attack, (2) articulation,
(3) soft pedal, and (4) sustain pedal. Correlations were cal-
culated between all the significant performance features per-
taining to the same category, and hierarchical clustering was
used to regroup the most correlated (thus redundant) features
into a same cluster. For each cluster identified in each cate-
gory, the most significant, meaningful and interpretable perfor-
mance features could then be selected, while minimizing the
loss of information from the other discarded features. This
process allowed for selecting a minimal number of perfor-
mance features to highlight the differences between the four
pianists and draw a unique portrait of each pianist’s performing
individuality.
Following this method, 16 performance features were selected
among the 159 previously identified as significantly differing
between performers and consistent between repetitions. With
these 16 selected performance features, a minimal, unique and
meaningful description of each pianist’s individuality in the 240
recorded performances is obtained. The overall performance
portraits of each pianist according to these 16 performance fea-
tures are presented in Figure 3.
The 16 selected performance features are described below, and
the corresponding statistical scores (ANOVA F-ratio, p-value and
effect size) are provided.
• Hammer velocity [F(3, 19.66) = 13.141, p < 10−4,
η2 = 0.354]: maximum hammer velocity for each note,
as directly measured by the piano sensors; as a direct
correlate to intensity, it makes for a descriptor of
dynamic level. Values are indicated in 8-bit steps (from 0
to 250).
• Difference in hammer velocity between hands [F(3, 15.79) =
3.611, p = 0.037, η2 = 0.234]: compares hammer velocity
between notes played with the right hand and notes played with
the left hand, and can thus underline a dynamic emphasis with
one hand.
• Variations in hammer velocity [F(3, 17.01) = 16.603, p <
10−4, η2 = 0.570]: describes the range of hammer velocities
reached in each performance; values are indicated as ratios of
deviation from the average hammer velocity.
FIGURE 3 | Kiviat chart of the 16 performance features giving a minimal
and unique description of four pianists’ individual performance patterns.
Z-scores per pianist are plotted for each feature with colored dots, with the
corresponding unnormalied values indicated alongside. The four colored,
dot-linking closed lines portray each pianist’s performing style. Shades around
each closed line show the ±1.96 SE. intervals (95% confidence interval).
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 7
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
• Attack speed [F(3, 19.48) = 15.413, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.420]:
mean attack speed (in 8-bit steps per ms) from the begin-
ning of key depression to the maximum depression reached in
the note; although this feature is highly correlated with ham-
mer velocity, some differences can occur, as hammer velocity is
defined by the instant key speed at hammer launch instead of
the mean attack speed over the keystroke.
• Attack percussiveness [F(3, 2.38) = 15.496, p = 0.043, η2 =
0.226]: an evaluation of keystroke acceleration during attack,
this feature indicates the convexity of the keystroke curve:
the higher the early key acceleration, the more concave the
keystroke curve, and the more percussive the attack—as it cor-
responds to a key struck rather than pressed (Goebl et al., 2005);
a value of 0.5 would indicate a linear attack (on average), while
values over 0.5 suggest a concave, more percussive touch.
• Attack duration [F(3, 14.61) = 6.836, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.333]:
time interval (in ms) from the start of keystroke to its max-
imum depression; although highly negatively correlated to
attack speed (the faster the attack, the shorter its duration),
it also depends on nuances of articulation and touch at note
onsets, including attack percussiveness and key depression
depth.
• Variations in attack duration [F(3, 11.79) = 4.405, p = 0.027,
η2 = 0.217]: variations of attack durations between chords and
in time; values are indicated as ratios of deviation from the
average attack duration.
• Key depression depth [F(3, 17.69) = 7.945, p = 0.001, η2 =
0.320]: indicates how deep (close to the keybed) each key gets
depressed for each note; values are given in 8-bit steps.
• Melody lead [F(3, 6.38) = 32.003, p = 3.1 · 10−4,
η2 = 0.095]: time interval (in ms) describing the advance of
the first note of a chord on the others; as despite its description
in terms of timing, melody lead is essentially a velocity artifact
of the dynamic accentuation of the melody note (Goebl, 2001),
it is thus a feature of polyphonic, dynamically differentiated
touch. Despite a small effect size, the significance of this feature
is supported a high statistical power (π = 0.969), and it was
found to be independent from other features of attack, touch
and articulation according to hierarchical clustering analysis.
• Duration of sustained key depression [F(3, 11.99) = 4.744,
p = 0.021, η2 = 0.201]: time (in ms) for which a key is held
depressed, after attack and before release; although tempo
can bear an effect on this feature, it is also a descriptor of
articulation strategies.
• Release duration [F(3, 18.41) = 3.545, p = 0.035,
η2 = 0.148]: time (in ms) taken for releasing the key
(from the start of the key moving up to its reaching rest
position); this feature essentially accounts for articulation: a
note released slowly (thus slowed by the finger) may probably
overlap with the next.
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords)
[F(3, 8.84) = 10.929, p = 0.002, η2 = 0.565]: time inter-
val (in ms) from the end of a chord or single note to the start
of the next one played with the same hand; negative values
indicate legato, positive values staccato.
• Inter-onset interval [F(3, 13.28) = 6.151, p = 0.008, η2 =
0.168]: time (in ms) elapsed between the start of two
consecutive chords; this feature essentially serves as a descriptor
of average tempo (Dixon, 2001).
• Soft pedal use [F(3, 14.94) = 6.356, p = 0.005, η2 = 0.316]:
average time (in ms) during which the soft pedal is depressed
while a chord is being played.
• Soft pedal mid-depression [F(3, 6.79) = 16.249, p = 0.002,
η2 = 0.380]: indicates the amount (in 8-bit steps) of part-
pedaling during chords; the higher the value, the more the soft
pedal was kept only partially depressed.
• Sustain pedal use [F(3, 16.59) = 3.297, p = 0.046, η2 =
0.133]: average time (in ms) during which the sustain pedal
is depressed while a chord is being played.
The first eight performance features presented describe dynamics
and attack. They reveal that Pianist A used the lowest dynamics
(hammer velocity), attack speed and percussiveness, while featur-
ing the longest attacks, and rather shallow key depressions. She
also showed the largest variations in intensity between chords.
On the other hand, Pianist C applied the highest intensity, fastest
attacks and deepest key depressions. His attacks were the longest,
but less saliently than his attack speeds could have led to believe.
This may be explained by the rather average percussiveness of
his attacks: with a pressed touch, key depression starts with zero
velocity, which at equal hammer velocity and attack speed may
inflate attack duration compared with a struck touch. Pianist C
also presented the highest variations in attack duration, yet was
the most constant in hammer velocity, which indicates he may
have varied his touch percussiveness while always reaching high
intensities. Pianist B’s attacks are short, deep and the most per-
cussive, as well as the most consistent in duration, yet they are
not very fast, and produce low to average intensity (with aver-
age consistency). As for Pianist D, he played with average-to-high
intensity, attack speed and percussiveness, with equally average-
to-high variations in intensity between chords. His attacks were
consistently short. Yet his key depressions were the shallowest.
Furthermore, all four pianists applied higher intensities with the
right hand, but to varying degrees (the least by Pianist C, the
most by Pianist D). As a side note, these eight features of attacks
and dynamics were significant (in the sense previously indicated)
over the chords played by each hand separately, except for attack
percussiveness and the difference in hammer velocity between
hands (the latter ineligible). Of the six features, all but hammer
velocity were more salient in left-hand chords than in right-hand
chords, meaning that the differences in attack between the four
pianists were more manifest in their left-hand playing than in
their right-hand playing.
The following four performance features represented describe
articulation, polyphonic touch, and tempo. The melody lead
effect was longer on average for Pianist A than for the three oth-
ers. Pianist A shows the most legato articulation and the longest
key releases. On the other hand, the duration of her sustaining key
depressions is about average, and inter-onset intervals are short,
i.e., a fast tempo (actually close to score indications). Likewise,
Pianist C played at a fast average tempo (as indicated on the
scores) given his short inter-onset intervals. Yet his articulation
is non-legato, with the shortest key releases and average durations
of key sustains. Pianist B played extremely staccato compared with
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 8
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
the others. His key releases remained of average duration, but his
key sustains were the shortest, which left enough space for large
intervals between chords despite the slowest tempo he favored.
His preference for staccato articulation matches well with his short
and percussive, yet not very fast, attacks. For Pianist D, key sus-
tains and releases were very long, which may be mostly due to his
long inter-onset intervals (slow tempo), whereas his articulation
remains essentially non-legato.
Finally, the last three performance features describe pedal-
ing. Pianist D used the soft pedal extensively (including part-
pedaling), while Pianist C never used the soft pedal. Pianists A
and B used the soft pedal sparingly, with some part-pedaling from
A but none from B. The sustain pedal was also used extensively by
Pianist D, as well as by Pianist A. Pianists B and C used the sustain
pedal the least, yet still quite a bit.
3.1.4. Timbre-pianist interaction
In complement to this characterization of the four pianists’ gen-
eral individuality over all performances (regardless of the timbral
nuance expressed), we also aimed at determining the idiosyn-
crasies in pianists’ performances that could arise specifically in
the expression of each of the five timbral nuances considered.
Separate statistical analyses (ANOVA) of performance features
were performed to this aim, over each set of performances high-
lighting the same timbral nuance. However, these separate anal-
yses are only valid for the performance features protected by a
significant effect of the timbre-pianist interaction in the general
ANOVA.
The effect of the pianist-timbre interaction, with regard to
the 616 performance features, was thus examined in the general,
three-Way repeated-measures ANOVA (with performer as ran-
dom factor) over all performances. Violations of sphericity were
corrected with the Huynh–Feldt epsilon applied to the degrees of
freedom. The effect of the pianist-timbre interaction was signifi-
cant (at the 5% level for corrected p-values) for 149 performance
features.
Among these 149 performance features, 86 also showed a sig-
nificant effect of the pianist. Yet the features of melody lead
and variations in attack duration, included in the overall perfor-
mance portrait as two of the most relevant descriptors of pianists’
general individuality, were not found significant in the pianist-
timbre interaction. For the variations in attack duration, the
non-significant effect of pianist-timbre interaction is supported
by non-negligible statistical power (π = 0.456), which may allow
to infer that the variations in attack duration characterize gen-
eral idiosyncratic traits that are not influenced by the timbral
nuance performed. However, given the low statistical power of
the non-significant pianist-timbre interaction for melody lead
(π = 0.188), the same inference should not be made.
As for the features significant for the interaction but not for the
effect of pianist, they will be discussed in relation with the timbral
nuance(s) for which they bear a particular idiosyncratic effect.
3.2. PIANISTS’ INDIVIDUALITY IN PERFORMING EACH OF FIVE
TIMBRAL NUANCES
The performance strategies and performance features highlight-
ing pianists’ individuality in the production of five different
timbral nuances were sought out, among the 149 performance
features that showed a significant effect of pianist-timbre interac-
tion in the general ANOVA over all performances.
Statistical analyses of variance were conducted separately over
each set of 48 performances highlighting one of the five timbral
nuances. Five Two-Way repeated measures ANOVAs were per-
formed, with each of the 149 performance features as dependent
variable, with the performer as random factor, and piece and rep-
etition (of the same performer-×-piece condition) as fixed-effect
factors.
Like in the overall case, for each ANOVA, the between-
subject effect of performer was considered. The corresponding
assumptions of normal distributions (Kolgomorov–Smirnov test)
and homoscedasticity (Levene’s test) were tested, and a non-
parametric, one-way Kruskal–Wallis rank analysis of variance was
performed to confirm or reject the significance of an ANOVA
whose assumptions were not met. Effect sizes and statistical power
were also calculated. Moreover, the within-subject effect of repe-
tition was taken into account, with the degrees of freedom of the
ANOVA corrected for violation of sphericity with the Huynh–
Feldt epsilon. A performance feature was then considered as
revealing pianists’ individuality when the effect of performer was
significant at the 5% level (in rejecting the null hypothesis of equal
variance between pianists) while the effect of repetition was not
(i.e., no significant differences between repetitions).
Consequently, for the sets of performances highlighting each
of the bright, dark, dry, round, and velvety timbral nuances,
significant differences between pianists and consistence between
repetitions were identified in 86, 83, 69, 72, and 97 performance
features (respectively).
3.2.1. Reduced performance spaces
For each set of 48 performances highlighting one of the five tim-
bral nuances, Principal Component Analysis was applied to the
corresponding performance features selected, whose values were
normalized (Z-score per feature over 48 performances).
In each of the five cases, the first two principal components
were sufficient to explain a large part of the input variance:
• Bright timbre: 60.6% (41.7 and 18.9% respectively)
• Dark timbre: 60.6% (34.4 and 26.2% respectively)
• Dry timbre: 64.1% (45.1 and 19% respectively)
• Round timbre: 55.5% (39.5 and 16% respectively)
• Velvety timbre: 57.5% (39.9 and 17.6% respectively)
For each of the five timbral nuances, Varimax factor rotation of
the first two PCA loadings was attempted, yet did not notice-
ably improve the clarity of the reduced performance spaces, nor
provided a more optimal/interpretable distribution of loadings
between features along each principal component, and was thus
discarded.
For each of the five timbral nuances, the position of each
same-timbre performance according to its coordinates in the
two dimensions formed by the corresponding first two principal
components is presented in a separate plot in Figure 4.
For all five timbres, the loadings of the first dimensions
primarily account for overall dynamics (hammer velocity) and
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 9
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
FIGURE 4 | Principal Component Analysis of the performance
features highlighting pianists’ individuality over each set of 48
performances corresponding to a different timbral nuance (bright,
dark, dry, round, or velvety): two-dimensional reduced
performance spaces. In each of the five subplots, the colored
lines link the same-piece repeated performances by each pianist.
Averages per pianist are indicated by colored crosses, and ±1 SE
with ellipses.
attack speeds. For all timbres but dark, these features are also
predominant with regard to the left hand, whereas for the dark
timbre these features are more weighted for the right hand
than for the left. Attack durations are also highly weighted,
primarily with regard to the left hand (especially for the
dark timbre). Variations in hammer velocity also largely con-
tribute to the first dimension, overall and with regard to the
left hand (but not the right), and especially for the bright
timbre. Other features of touch and articulation contribute,
to a lesser degree, to the first dimensions: key depression
depth (bright, dry, round), attack percussiveness (dark, velvety),
right-hand overlaps (bright); key release durations (round,
velvety).
The descriptions of second dimensions according to loadings
feature, for all timbres but bright, common trends of articula-
tion, tempo, and pedaling, although in different combinations
and weighting order. From highest to lowest weighted features, for
dark: note and key sustain durations, sustain pedal use, soft pedal
use, and articulation. For dry: sustain pedal use and articulation.
For round: inter-onset intervals, sustain pedal use, note and key
sustain durations, articulation. For velvety: articulation and soft
pedal use. On the other hand, the second dimension for the bright
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 10
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
timbre essentially corresponds to right-hand attack speeds and
durations, then right-hand hammer velocities, and much less so
to articulation.
It must also be mentioned that, in the reduced space of bright-
timbre performances, soft pedal use is also accounted for in both
dimensions (especially the second). However, only Pianist D used
the soft pedal in bright-timbre performances, in the seven perfor-
mances isolated in the upper left of the performance space. For
the other 41 bright-timbre performances, soft pedal features bear
no influence.
On average, Pianists B and C tend to be the most consis-
tent for each timbre, both in same-piece repetitions and between
pieces (with the exception of Pianist B’s round-timbre perfor-
mances). Difference between pianists are more or less salient
depending on timbres and pianists. Pianists A and C are clearly
differentiated for all timbres, as their performances occupy differ-
ent regions of the performance spaces. Pianists A and D differ
the most for timbres dark and velvety. Pianist B’s dry-timbre
performances are clearly singled out, yet for other timbres his per-
formances overlap with different pianists. In particular, Pianists
B and C’s bright-timbre performances are all but indistinguish-
able in the corresponding performance, which means that they
adopted equivalent strategies as regards the performance features
relevant to the individuality-highlighting performance space of
the bright timbre.
Moreover, some idiosyncratic tendencies revealed in the over-
all reduced performance space also appear in the timbre-wise
reduced performance spaces, yet may be nuanced depending on
the timbral nuance. Indeed, although Pianist A generally shows
low dynamics, and slow and long attacks (along the first dimen-
sions), this fact is more salient for dark-timbre performances (and
dry to a lesser degree), while intensity, attack speeds and dura-
tions are more similar between Pianists A, B and D for round
and velvety timbres. Pianists A and D are also quite similar in
intensity, attack speeds and durations for a bright timbre, yet only
along the first dimension. Indeed, the second dimension accounts
for right-hand dynamics/attacks (and with the previously stated
effect of soft pedal use by Pianist D in the seven upper-left per-
formances notwithstanding) and highlights a difference between
Pianist A and Pianist D’s performances of piece no.2. On the other
hand, Pianist C’s high dynamics, and fast and short attacks, are
most salient in velvety-timbre performances, and equivalent to
Pianist B’s for a bright timbre. Meanwhile, as the performance
features associated with the second dimensions differ more largely
between timbres, only timbre-wise tendencies can be brought up.
For a bright timbre, differences between pianists can be explained
by Pianist D’s use of the soft pedal on one hand, and by Pianist
A’s lower right-hand dynamics/attacks on the other hand. For a
dark timbre, Pianist D must have used longer notes and more
sustain pedal, especially for piece no.1. For a dry timbre, Pianist
B is probably set apart by his staccato articulation. For a round
timbre, a conjecture is more complex to establish. Pianists A and
D may be distinguished by tempo (fast vs. slow), while the same
difference in tempo between Pianists B and C may be compen-
sated by their different articulations. Finally, for a velvety timbre,
articulation may suffice to explain the separation between Pianists
A and B, while heavy soft pedal use may largely contribute to
the higher-end coordinates of Pianist D’s performances along
dimension 2.
3.2.2. Descriptive performance portraits
Following the same procedure as in the general case, the per-
formance features most salient, relevant, meaningful, and non-
redundant for highlighting pianists’ individuality were sought
out, for each of the bright, dark, dry, round, and velvety timbral
nuances, among the 86, 83, 69, 72, and 97 (resp.) performance
features selected for their eliciting significant differences between
pianists and consistence between repetitions.
For each timbral nuance, the corresponding selected perfor-
mance features were divided into the four functionally inde-
pendent categories of dynamics/attack, articulation, soft pedal
and sustain pedal. Correlations were calculated between all per-
formance features within each category, and the most corre-
lated/redundant features were grouped by hierarchical clustering.
The most significant, meaningful and interpretable performance
feature in each cluster was then selected.
For each of the bright, dark, dry, round, and velvety tim-
bres, the 9, 9, 9, 12, and 13 (resp.) most relevant performance
features for describing pianists’ individuality were thus selected.
The descriptive performance portraits of pianists’ individuality
for each timbral nuance are presented in Figure 5.
Most of the performance features used in these performance
portraits of pianists’ individuality in the production of each tim-
bral nuance were already featured in the general performance
portrait of pianists’ individuality, and were accordingly described
in Section 3.1.3. However, the following performance features
were not previously introduced. In the performance portrait of
individuality for a dry timbre:
• Variations in key depression depth: ratio of deviation between
chords from the performance average of key depression depth.
• Sustain pedal depression: average depth (in 8-bit steps) of pedal
depression per chord.
In the performance portrait of individuality for a round timbre:
• Difference in attack speed between hands: comparison of mean
attack speed between notes played with the right hand and
notes played with the left hand; values in steps/ms can indi-
cate either faster (> 0) or slower (< 0) attacks with the right
hand than the left.
In the performance portrait of individuality for a velvety timbre:
• Soft pedal depression: average depth (in 8-bit steps) of pedal
depression per chord.
For each of the five performance portraits of the different timbral
nuances, the statistical scores (ANOVA F-ratio, p-value and effect
size) corresponding to each of its descriptive feature are provided
below.
In the descriptive performance portrait of individuality for a
bright timbre (9 features):
• Hammer velocity: F(3, 10.16) = 16.882, p = 2.8 · 10−4, η2 =
0.475
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 11
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
FIGURE 5 | Kiviats charts of the performance features giving a minimal
and unique description of four pianists’ individual performance patterns
in the production of each of five timbral nuances (bright, dark, dry,
round, and velvety). Z-scores per pianist are plotted for each feature with
colored dots, with the corresponding unnormalized values indicated
alongside. The four colored, dot-linking closed lines portray each pianist’s
performing style. Shades around each closed line show the ±1.96 SE.
intervals (95% confidence interval).
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 12
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
• Difference in hammer velocity between hands: F(3, 8.43) =
5.962, p = 0.018, η2 = 0.484
• Variations in hammer velocity: F(3, 10.84) = 16.060, p = 2.6 ·
10−4, η2 = 0.703
• Attack speed: F(3, 10.85) = 24.475, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.660
• Attack duration: F(3, 10.66) = 8.415, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.581
• Key depression depth: F(3, 8.94) = 11.366, p = 0.002, η2 =
0.597
• Duration of sustained key depression: F(3, 9.97) = 5.504, p =
0.017, η2 = 0.221
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords):
F(3, 7.31) = 12.243, p = 0.003, η2 = 0.638
• Inter-onset interval: F(3, 8.03) = 5.463, p = 0.024, η2 =
0.089
In the descriptive performance portrait of individuality for a dark
timbre (9 features):
• Hammer velocity: F(3, 11.74) = 22.588, p < 10−4, η2 =
0.638
• Variations in hammer velocity: F(3, 9.55) = 22.551, p = p =
1.2 · 10−4, η2 = 0.736
• Attack speed: F(3, 6.39) = 18.964, p = 0.001, η2 = 0.600
• Attack duration: F(3, 7.02) = 5.454, p = 0.030, η2 = 0.375
• Duration of sustained key depression: F(3, 9.33) = 10.297,
p = 0.003, η2 = 0.343
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords):
F(3, 9.02) = 8.324, p = 0.006, η2 = 0.541
• Inter-onset interval: F(3, 12.21) = 7.169, p = 0.005, η2 =
0.280
• Soft pedal use: F(3, 8.54) = 5.876, p = 0.018, η2 = 0.516
• Sustain pedal use: F(3, 9.06) = 7.443, p = 0.008, η2 = 0.375
In the descriptive performance portrait of individuality for a dry
timbre (9 features):
• Hammer velocity: F(3, 8.85) = 27.179, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.558
• Variations in hammer velocity: F(3, 3.57) = 28.319, p =
0.006, η2 = 0.634
• Attack speed: F(3, 9.40) = 24.816, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.619
• Attack duration: F(3, 10.43) = 7.148, p = 0.007, η2 = 0.535
• Key depression depth: F(3, 12.08) = 13.489, p = 3.7 · 10−4,
η2 = 0.504
• Variations in key depression depth: F(3, 6.26) = 9.163, p =
0.011, η2 = 0.463
• Release duration: F(3, 10.14) = 7.132, p = 0.007, η2 = 0.433
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords):
F(3, 7.62) = 11.342, p = 0.003, η2 = 0.685
• Sustain pedal depression: F(3, 7.18) = 14.834, p = 0.002,
η2 = 0.676
In the descriptive performance portrait of individuality for a
round timbre (12 features):
• Hammer velocity: F(3, 9.02) = 35.453, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.589
• Difference in hammer velocity between hands: F(3, 8.12) =
9.802, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.548
• Variations in hammer velocity: F(3, 5.52) = 18.583, p =
0.003, η2 = 0.624
• Difference in attack speed between hands: F(3, 8.64) = 4.131,
p = 0.044, η2 = 0.431
• Attack speed: F(3, 8.92) = 53.632, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.686
• Attack duration: F(3, 9.47) = 12.217, p = 0.001, η2 = 0.575
• Key depression depth: F(3, 8.98) = 12.875, p = 0.001, η2 =
0.470
• Duration of sustained key depression: F(3, 9.22) = 7.350, p =
0.008, η2 = 0.211
• Release duration: F(3, 10.60) = 6.136, p = 0.011, η2 = 0.376
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords):
F(3, 9.38) = 9.385, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.569
• Inter-onset interval: F(3, 10.91) = 7.121, p = 0.006, η2 =
0.188
• Sustain pedal use: F(3, 10.40) = 8.627, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.387
Finally, in the descriptive performance portrait of individuality
for a velvety timbre (13 features):
• Hammer velocity: F(3, 5.17) = 92.653, p < 10−4, η2 = 0.606
• Difference in hammer velocity between hands: F(3, 9.34) =
11.909, p = 0.002, η2 = 0.650
• Variations in hammer velocity: F(3, 6.64) = 35.600, p = 1.8 ·
10−4, η2 = 0.789
• Attack speed: F(3, 4.13) = 69.362, p = 5.5 · 10−4, η2 = 0.635
• Attack duration: F(3, 8.76) = 10.662, p = 0.003, η2 = 0.436
• Key depression depth: F(3, 8.11) = 25.073, p = 1.9 · 10−4,
η2 = 0.575
• Release duration: F(3, 5.87) = 14.320, p = 0.004, η2 = 0.489
• Articulation (interval between same-hand chords):
F(3, 7.41) = 12.912, p = 0.003, η2 = 0.624
• Inter-onset interval: F(3, 8.84) = 9.085, p = 0.005, η2 =
0.245
• Soft pedal use: F(3, 8.93) = 11.448, p = 0.002, η2 = 0.613
• Soft pedal depression: F(3, 10.98) = 20.321, p < 10−4, η2 =
0.759
• Soft pedal mid-depression: F(3, 10.00) = 6.684, p = 0.009,
η2 = 0.542
• Sustain pedal use: F(3, 7.53) = 8.579, p = 0.008, η2 = 0.365
The complete list of performance features selected as signifi-
cant, consistent, meaningful and non-redundant in highlighting
pianists’ individuality in the production of at least one tim-
bral nuance and/or overall is presented in Table 1. For each
performance feature and each timbral nuance, the table indi-
cates whether the feature was selected in the descriptive portrait,
or significant but redundant with others, or not protected by
a significant effect of timbre-pianist interaction in the general
ANOVA, or whether non-significance was conclusive (with regard
to statistical power).
Some of the pianists show consistent patterns across timbres
along some of the performance features, which mostly reflect the
general descriptive portrait, and also correspond to what could be
deduced from the reduced performance spaces. Pianist A always
presents the lowest hammer velocities, and the longest and slow-
est attacks. On the other hand, Pianist C always produced the
highest and most regular hammer velocities, as well as fast and
short attacks. In the four timbral nuances (all but dark) for which
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 13
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
Table 1 | Performance features most characteristic of pianists’ individuality, in performing five timbral nuances and overall.
Timbre: Bright Dark Dry Round Velvety All
Performance features
ATTACK AND DYNAMICS
Hammer velocity O O O O O O
Difference in hammer velocity between hands O × – O O O
Variations in hammer velocity O O O O O O
Attack speed O O O O O O
Difference in attack speed between hands S – × O × ×
Attack percussiveness × S – × S O
Attack duration O O O O O O
Variations in attack duration . . . . . O
Key depression depth O – O O O O
Variations in key depression depth S – O × × S
ARTICULATION
Articulation (intervals between chords) O O O O O O
Duration of sustained key depression O O × O × O
Release duration × × O O O O
Inter-onset interval O O × O O O
Melody lead . . . . . O
PEDALS
Soft pedal use S O S X O O
Soft pedal depression S × × X O –
Soft pedal mid-depression S S × S O O
Sustain pedal use × O X O O O
Sustain pedal depression × – O – – –
The following symbols were used for: O, feature included in the descriptive portrait of the timbral nuance; S, feature significant in highlighting pianists’ individuality,
but redundant with others; “.” (dots), feature not protected by the pianist-timbre interaction in the general ANOVA; the other features were not significant with
regard to individuality, “−” (dashes), feature non-significant with regard to individuality, with low statistical power (π<0.2), thus inconclusive; x; id., with average
statistical power (0.2< π <0.8); X: id., with high statistical power (π >0.8), thus conclusive.
key depression depth was selected as a performance significant
for pianists’ individuality, Pianist C always applied very deep key
depressions (close to the keybed), while on the other hand Pianist
D always employed the shallowest key depressions. On average,
for each of the four timbral nuances, maximum key depressions
per note were approximately 10% deeper for Pianist C than for
Pianist D. As for articulation, Pianist A always played with the
most legato, and Pianist B with the most staccato. Key depres-
sion sustains were also consistently the longest for Pianist D, and
the shortest for Pianist B, although this performance feature was
only significant in highlighting individuality for three of the five
timbral nuances (bright, dark, and round). Finally, inter-onset
intervals could significantly portray the pianists’ individuality in
performing four timbral nuances (all but dry), and were larger for
Pianist B (and Pianist D to a lesser degree) than for Pianists A and
C, indicating the same differences in average tempo as previously
described in the general case over all performances.
Yet otherwise, different performance patterns between pianists
arose along performance features in the production of different
timbral nuances. Dynamic balance between hands (in hammer
velocity) was only significant in the production of bright, round
and velvety timbres (although its non-significance for a dry tim-
bre was inconclusive due to low statistical power). Pianist D
always largely emphasized the right hand, while Pianist C always
used the least right-hand emphasis. Pianist B drastically changed
his right-hand dynamic emphasis between timbres, from aver-
age (among the four pianists) for bright and velvety timbres, to
the most of all for round. Balance between hands in attack speed
was also selected as a relevant feature for describing individuality
in the production of a round timbre. In contrast with the cor-
responding dynamic balance between hands, the discrepancy in
attack speed between hands (toward the right) for a round tim-
bre is larger (and largest) for Pianist D than Pianist B, although
the latter shows a more pronounced dynamic emphasis on the
right hand. Dynamic variations within a performance also largely
changed between timbres for Pianists A, B, and D. Pianist A’s
dark performances always featured high dynamic variations, and
by far the most of all pianists. On the other hand, Pianist D
used even more dynamic variations than her for the production
of a bright timbre. Pianist D’s dynamic variations are also high
for dry, round, and velvety timbres, yet below average for dark.
Meanwhile, Pianist B’s dynamic variations range from average
among pianists for bright, dark and dry timbres, to very high for
round performances. Patterns of hammer velocities, attack speeds
and durations also change between timbres for Pianists B and
D. For a bright timbre, Pianist D’s attacks are about average in
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 14
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
intensity, speed and duration, while Pianist B’s attacks are faster,
especially shorter, and brought higher hammer velocities, both
than average and than Pianist D’s. For the dry timbre, Pianists
B and D’s attacks are mostly equivalent in intensity, speed and
duration, yet although their hammer velocities and attack speeds
are average and well below Pianist C’s, their attacks are among
the shortest (with Pianist C’s). For Pianist B, these shortened
attacks (despite average speeds) can be explained by his preferred
staccato articulation, while for Pianist D the same attack charac-
teristics may stem from his shallow key depressions. On the other
hand, for round and velvety timbres, Pianist B’s attacks are slower
and longer than average, while Pianist D’s attacks are faster and
shorter than Pianists B’s and than average (especially for round).
These patterns result for Pianist D in hammer velocities aver-
age for round, yet quite lower for velvety, while for both timbres
Pianist B’s hammer velocities are the lowest along with Pianist A’s.
Finally, for producing a dark timbre, Pianist B remains around
low intensities and slow/long attacks, whereas Pianist D employed
the fastest and shortest attacks, and the (nearly) highest hammer
velocities of all four pianists.
As for key depression depths, besides the consistently deep vs.
shallow key depressions for Pianists C and D (resp.), both applied
slightly shallower key depressions (while still differing from each
other by about 10%.) in performing a velvety timbre than for
the other three nuances (bright, dry and round) for which key
depression depth was a relevant feature of individuality (key
depression depth was inconclusively non-significant in highlight-
ing pianists individuality in dark-timbre performances). While
Pianist A remained fairly constant, and average among pianists, in
average key depression depth per timbral nuance, Pianist B var-
ied the most in key depression depth between timbral nuances,
both in the absolute and with regard to the other pianists, ranging
from the deepest key depressions (in performing a bright tim-
bre) to average ones (in performing a round timbre). Moreover,
variations in key depression depth (within a performance) were
only relevant feature for individuality in the case of a dry timbre.
The pianists with the shallower average key depressions (A and
D) also show the largest variations (and vice versa), which might
be due (at least in part), to a ceiling effect (key depressions can-
not get deeper than the keybed; the deeper the key depressions on
average, the less room there remains for variations).
Articulation patterns also reflect a different picture of pianists’
individuality depending on the timbral nuance expressed.
Key depression sustains were indeed much shorter for Pianist
B (than the three others) in the case of a bright timbre, whereas
their durations were much closer between Pianists B and C (and
Pianist A to a lesser degree) for timbres dark and round.
Key release duration, a significant descriptor of individuality
in the production of the three timbres dry, round and velvety,
highlighted very different patterns between pianists depending on
the timbral nuance. Although Pianist A always featured long key
releases, they were only the longest (or more appropriately, the
least short) with a dry timbre. Pianist B’s key releases were the
shortest for a dry timbre, yet the longest for velvety. Pianist D’s
key releases were also very long (relative to the other pianists)
for velvety and especially round timbres, yet only average (and
much shorter in the absolute) for dry. On the other hand, Pianist
C’s key releases, the shortest for round and velvety timbres, were
only average among pianists for the dry timbre, although they
remained of fairly constant duration in the absolute between tim-
bres (i.e., contrary to the others pianists, Pianist C did not use or
show different key release durations in his performing the three
different timbral nuances dry, round and velvety).
Articulation, as described by the timing intervals between
same-hand chords, presents mostly consistent patterns of indi-
viduality between four of five timbral nuances, yet for a dry
timbre Pianist A’s articulation is not significantly more legato than
Pianists C and (especially) D, as all three feature an articulation
best described as non-legato in performing a dry timbre.
Furthermore, the difference in inter-onset intervals (i.e., aver-
age tempo) between Pianists B/D and A/C was much more salient
for the dark timbre than for round, velvety and (especially) bright.
Lastly, the differences in pedaling strategies between pianists
largely vary depending on the timbral nuance performed. In per-
forming a velvety timbre, the soft pedal was used by Pianists A
(sparingly), D (massively), and B (constantly, in all velvety perfor-
mances). Meanwhile, only Pianists A and D used the soft pedal in
performing a dark timbre (both to the same extent as for velvety).
For the other three timbral nuances, the soft pedal (although it
is not presented in the descriptive portraits) was only used in
some of Pianist D’s performances, and never by the three other
pianists.
Finally, the duration of sustain pedal use with regard to chords
was significant for timbres dark, round, and velvety, and although
idiosyncratic patterns were largely consistent between timbres,
with the most use for Pianist D, the least for Pianist C, and
average relative use for Pianist A, Pianist B tended to use more
sustain pedal (especially with regard to Pianist A) from tim-
bres dark to velvety. Although sustain pedal use was conclusively
non-significant in highlighting pianists’ individuality for a dry
timbre, the amount of sustain pedal depression was significant,
and especially highlighted an higher amount of depression for
Pianist C.
4. DISCUSSION
In summary, individual strategies between four pianists were
successfully revealed, within 240 performances of four pieces
with five different timbral nuances, by the fine-grained perfor-
mance control features extracted from the high-accuracy key,
pedal and hammer-tracking data gathered by the CEUS system.
The four pianists were thus shown to elicit idiosyncratic patterns
of dynamics, attack speed, attack touch (percussiveness, dura-
tion, depth, melody lead), articulation, key sustains and releases,
average tempo, and pedaling.
Among these performance parameters, some would have been
accessible with more rudimentary MIDI (or equivalent) data
acquisition. Yet further subtleties of touch, articulation, and ped-
aling could only be revealed through continuous, high-accuracy
key/pedal position tracking data. Although it cannot be deter-
mined from this study whether such performance subtleties
bear a direct influence on sound production at the piano, they
remain inherent to the process of piano playing, and (at least)
indirectly involved (through mechanical, physiological, or kinaes-
thetic functions) in the actual sound production. These subtle
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 15
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
control features may thus be considered as valid and valuable
descriptors of individuality in piano performance.
In a broad characterization, the individual playing styles of the
four pianists show the following salient traits:
• Pianist A’s performances had characteristically the lowest
dynamics (and high dynamic variability), the longest attacks,
the least percussive touch, the longest melody leads (voice
accentuation), and the most legato articulation—perhaps typi-
cal of a French playing style.
• Pianist B favored a very staccato articulation, short key sus-
tains despite his playing at the slowest average tempo, and the
most percussive touch. This playing style may be related to his
upbringing in an Italian piano school that promotes detached
playing.
• Pianist C’s playing was essentially characterized by the high-
est (and most steady) intensity, the fastest attacks (yet not
as percussive and barely the shortest), and the deepest key
depressions. His articulation remained essentially non-legato,
but with short key releases. He also made a personal choice in
never using the soft pedal.
• Lastly, Pianist D’s playing was mostly idiosyncratic in his heavy
use of both pedals. His playing was also marked by a heavy
dynamic emphasis of the right hand, and by generally shallow
key depressions. His articulation remained non-legato, despite
the longest key depression sustains.
Furthermore, with regard to the main hypothesis explored in this
study, it was found that pianists’ individuality expressed itself dif-
ferently depending of the timbral nuance performed—within the
general frame of their overall performance individuality. In other
words, in addition to the general differences between the four
pianists and the differences between each timbral nuance (com-
mon to all four pianists), the pianists also used some different
performance strategies in order to highlight each timbral nuance.
Indeed, amid significant individual differences overall, dynam-
ics were also changed differently by the four pianists in per-
forming different timbral nuances (most saliently for dark-timbre
performances, as only Pianist D did not lower his dynamics).
Likewise, dynamic variations and balance between hands, as well
as attack speed and depth, were altered differently by each pianist
between timbral nuances. Articulation was also changed dif-
ferently by each pianist between timbral nuances, especially in
dry-timbre performances (in comparison with the four other
timbres), where the tendency toward more staccato playing was
followed to quite different degrees by each pianist. Finally, the
use of the soft pedal was also specific to certain combinations of
pianist and timbre.
On the other hand, some performance patterns that are essen-
tially common to all four pianists in the production of different
timbral nuances bear some similarity to those highlighted in the
expression of different emotions. Given the resembling patterns
of intensity and articulation between the strategies of timbre pro-
duction and those of emotional expression, we may infer that
the descriptors of piano timbre may possess some degree of cor-
respondence with verbal descriptors of basic emotions. Velvety
and dark timbres may thus be related to sad or tender emotions
(low intensity, legato articulation), while a dry timbre may reflect
happiness (high intensity, staccato articulation). This assumption
may be supported by comments from two of the four partic-
ipant pianists, who mentioned that, although undeniably valid
and relevant as timbre descriptors, some of the five terms used
(especially dry and dark) can actually double as descriptors of
musical character—thus closer to reflecting an actual emotional
imprint. However, this suggested correspondence between piano
performances guided by descriptors of timbre and of emotion
only relies on limited (MIDI-accessible) performance parameters.
These are far from encompassing the more elaborated descrip-
tions of the performances of different timbral nuances, which
may pose the problem of a selection bias in picking the param-
eters to compare, and leaves several different ways in which the
production of timbral nuances may stray from their emotional
counterparts.
In conclusion, a novel approach was employed, in which a par-
ticular attention was given to respecting a valid musical context,
with cohesive, original musical pieces composed for the study,
and with timbral expression guided by verbal descriptors shown
to the lexicon of piano timbre nuances of common, consensual
and meaningful use among pianists. The first hypothesis that
pianists’ individuality could be revealed in subtle performance
control features was confirmed. Moreover, the patterns of indi-
vidual strategies and differences between the four pianists were
found to differ, within the general frame of each pianist’s individ-
uality, between the production of different timbral nuances, thus
confirming the second hypothesis.
4.1. STATISTICAL VALIDITY OF THE FINDINGS
Some choices were made in the statistical analysis process.
First, the significance levels of the ANOVAs were not adjusted
for multiple comparisons, despite the 616 dependent variables
tested overall and the 149 dependent variables tested per timbral
nuance. Indeed, the corrections for multiple comparisons such
as Bonferroni-Dunn or Holm-Bonferroni tend to be too conser-
vative, especially when the assumption of independence between
dependent variables is not met (as is the case in this study).
Consequently, the risk of type II errors was reduced by not using
a correction for multiple comparisons. However, we acknowledge
the increased possibility of type I errors. Yet the analytic pro-
cedures used subsequently were designed so as to significantly
reduce (if not eliminate) the risk of misinterpreting the results
due to type I errors. Indeed, the contribution of falsely significant
features to Principal Component Analysis can be considered as
noise (i.e., more or less uniformly distributed between perform-
ers), and do not affect the characteristics of pianists’ individuality
in the corresponding performance spaces—only their legibility.
Moreover, the descriptive performance portraits were obtained
after careful selection of only one feature within each cluster of
highly-correlated features. As the effect size, significance level, and
corresponding statistical power in highlighting pianists’ individu-
ality were all considered for selecting only the best such feature per
cluster, it is improbable that falsely significant features may appear
in the descriptive portraits. Moreover, for some clusters where no
variable could meet minimum thresholds for both effect size and
statistical power (η2 < 0.2,π < 0.2), no feature was selected.
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 16
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
Furthermore, we opted to perform separate ANOVAs for each
timbral nuance, instead of relying on pairwise post-hoc tests of the
pianist-timbre interaction in the general ANOVAs, as the latter
can be too conservative, and especially less informative, as they do
not distinguish the two-dimensional structure of the interaction
effect, i.e, treat all pairs of interaction cases equally (disregarding
whether they correspond to the same pianist or timbre). The solu-
tion we privileged thus allowed for a more exhaustive exploration
and account of the pianist-timbre interaction (i.e., the expression
of pianists’ individuality in the production of different timbral
nuances.
4.2. PERSPECTIVES
The results presented in this article can be set in perspective with
the common performance control strategies adopted by the four
pianists in order to produce and express the five different timbral
nuances, which were explored in Bernays and Traube (2013).
On the other hand, it cannot be determined from this study
whether the observed differences in individual performance
strategies between the five timbral nuances stem from a different
understanding among the four pianists of the timbre descrip-
tors used as performance instructions, or characterize different
ways of reaching a common timbral idea. However, the per-
ception and identification of timbre in the audio recordings of
the performances analyzed in this article has been investigated
(Bernays, 2013). Preliminary results suggest that the different
timbral nuances expressed in the performances can be reliably
identified (significantly above chance level) by other pianists,
which would indicate that, for each of the five timbral nuances,
the differences in performance strategy between the four per-
formers may have yielded, despite possible audible differences in
sound production, the same perceptual effect as regard timbre
identification.
A parallel may be drawn with vocal expression, where non-
verbal affective cues remain consistently identifiable between
different speakers (even in single vowels), despite large acoustic
inter-individual differences, especially in voice quality (i.e., tim-
bre) (Juslin and Scherer, 2005). Likewise, despite inter-individual
differences, the timbral nuances expressed at the piano may
remain identifiable, and may be categorized according to corre-
sponding adjectival descriptors.
Furthermore, the four musical pieces used in this study were
expressly chosen for their different musical characteristics and
the different playing styles they would require. Consequently, the
performances of all four pieces were analyzed conjointly, with
the statistical the effect of the musical piece performed separated
from the effects of performer and timbre, in the aim of high-
lighting individuality in piano performance over an extended,
representative set of musical characteristics. It may be worth-
while then to further disentangle the individual playing styles
of pianists from the influence of pieces and interpretive goals,
as was accomplished by Gingras et al. (2013) in the context of
harpsichord performance, by likewise using the analysis methods
of complete linear mixed models and correlation-based simi-
larity profiles. The relations between pianists’ individuality (as
revealed by characteristic performance features) and the musical
structure of each piece performed may also be investigated with
the software tools included in the PianoTouch toolbox (Bernays
and Traube, 2012), in order to assess pianists’ individuality as a
function of the different musical contexts featured in the pieces.
Finally, the effect of the performance features characteristic of
pianists’ individuality upon the actual sound production may be
explored with acoustical analyses of the audio recordings of the
performances.
In the end, this research may help determine the expressive
boundaries of individual piano performance within which the
same timbral nuance can be produced and perceived.
5. FUNDING
FRQSC (Fonds de Recherche du Québec – Société et Culture);
CIRMMT (Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media
and Technology); OICRM (Observatoire Interdisciplinaire de
Création et de Recherche en Musique).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the four pianists who took part in this study,
and the composers of the pieces, as well as Bernard Bouchard for
his invaluable technical and pianistic help.
REFERENCES
Bellemare, M., and Traube, C. (2005). “Verbal description of piano timbre:
exploring performer-dependent dimensions,” in Digital Proceedings of the
2nd Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology (CIM05), (Montreal, QC:
Observatoire interdisciplinaire de création et de recherche en musique
(OICRM)).
Ben-Asher, M. (2013). Towards an Emotionally Intelligent Piano: Real-Time Emotion
Detection and Performer Feedback via Kinesthetic Sensing in Piano Performance,
Master’s thesis, University of Miami, FL.
Bernays, M. (2012). Expression et production du timbre au piano selon les
traités: conception du timbre instrumental exprimée par les pianistes
et professeurs dans les ouvrages à vocation pédagogique. Recherche
en éducation Musicale 29, 7–27. Available online at: http://www.mus.
ulaval.ca/reem/REEM_29.pdf#page=17
Bernays, M. (2013). The Expression and Production of Piano Timbre: Gestural
Control and Technique, Perception and Verbalisation in the Context of Piano
Performance and Practice, Doctoral dissertation, Université de Montréal,
Canada.
Bernays, M., and Traube, C. (2011). “Verbal expression of piano timbre: mul-
tidimensional semantic space of adjectival descriptors,” in Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Performance Science (ISPS2011), eds A. Williamon,
D. Edwards and L. Bartel (Utrecht, Netherlands: European Association of
Conservatoires (AEC)), 299–304.
Bernays, M., and Traube, C. (2012). “Piano touch analysis: A MATLAB
toolbox for extracting performance descriptors from high-resolution key-
board and pedalling data,” in Proceedings of Journées d’Informatique
Musicale (JIM2012), Gestes, Virtuosité et Nouveaux Medias, eds T. Dutoit,
T. Todoroff and N. d’Alessandro (Mons, Belgium: UMONS/numediart),
55–64.
Bernays, M., and Traube, C. (2013). “Expressive production of piano timbre: touch
and playing techniques for timbre control in piano performance,” in Proceedings
of the 10th Sound and Music Computing Conference (SMC2013), ed R. Bresin
(Stockholm, Sweden: KTH Royal Institute of Technology), 341–346.
Bhatara, A., Tirovolas, A. K., Duan, L. M., Levy, B., and Levitin, D. J. (2011).
Perception of emotional expression in musical performance. J. Exp. Psychol.
Hum. Percept. Perform. 37, 921–934. doi: 10.1037/a0021922
Bresin, R., and Battel, G. U. (2000). Articulation strategies in expressive piano
performance. J. New Music Res. 29, 211–224. doi: 10.1076/jnmr.29.3.211.3092
Cadoz, C., and Wanderley, M. M. (2000). “Gesture–music,” in Trends in Gestural
Control of Music, eds M. M. Wanderley and M. Battier (Paris: IRCAM), 71–94.
Canazza, S., De Poli, G., Rinaldin, S., and Vidolin, A. (1997). Sonological analysis
of clarinet expressivity. Music Gestalt Comput. Stud. Cogn. Syst. Musicol. 1317,
431–440. doi: 10.1007/BFb0034131
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 17
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
Cheminée, P. (2006). “Vous avez dit ‘clair’?” Le lexique des
pianistes, entre sens commun et terminologie. Cahiers du LCPE:
Dénomination, désignation et catégories 7, 39–54. Available online at:
http://www.lam.jussieu.fr/Publications/CahiersLCPE/cahier7.pdf#page=39
Dalla Bella, S., and Palmer, C. (2011). Rate effects on timing, key velocity, and
finger kinematics in piano performance. PLoS ONE 6:e20518. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0020518
De Poli, G. (2004). Methodologies for expressiveness modelling of
and for music performance. J. New Music Res. 33, 189–202. doi:
10.1080/0929821042000317796
Dixon, S. (2001). Automatic extraction of tempo and beat from expressive perfor-
mances. J. New Music Res. 30, 39–58. doi: 10.1076/jnmr.30.1.39.7119
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cogn. Emot. 6, 169–200. doi:
10.1080/02699939208411068
Faure, A. (2000). Des Sons Aux Mots, Comment Parle-t-on du Timbre Musical?,
Doctoral dissertation, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris,
France.
Fink, S. (1992). Mastering Piano Technique: A guide for students, teachers, and
performers, Portland, OR: Amadeus Press.
Friberg, A., Bresin, R., and Sundberg, J. (2006) Overview of the KTH rule system
for musical performance. Adv. Cogn. Psychol. 2, 145–161. doi: 10.2478/v10053-
008-0052-x
Gabrielsson, A., and Juslin, P. N. (1996) Emotional expression in music perfor-
mance: Between the performer’s intention and the listener’s experience, Psychol.
Music 24, 68–91. doi: 10.1177/0305735696241007
Gingras B., Asselin P.-Y., and McAdams, S. (2013). Individuality in harpsichord
performance: disentangling performer- and piece-specific influences on inter-
pretive choices, Front. Psychol. 4:895. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00895
Gingras, B., Lagrandeur-Ponce, T., Giordano, B. L., and McAdams, S. (2011).
Perceiving musical individuality: performer identification is dependent on per-
former expertise and expressiveness, but not on listener expertise. Perception 40,
1206–1220. doi: 10.1068/p6891
Goebl, W. (2001). Melody lead in piano performance: expressive device or artifact?,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 110, 563–572. doi: 10.1121/1.1376133
Goebl, W., Bresin, R., and Galembo, A. (2005). Touch and temporal behavior
of grand piano actions. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 118, 1154–1165. doi: 10.1121/
1.1944648
Goebl, W., Dixon, S., DePoli, G., Friberg, A., Bresin, R., and Widmer, G. (2008).
“‘Sense’ in expressive music performance: Data acquisition, computational
studies, and models,” in Sound to Sense - Sense to Sound: A State of the Art in
Sound and Music Computing, eds P. Polotti and D. Rocchesso (Berlin: Logos),
195–242.
Goebl, W., and Fujinaga, I. (2008) “Do key-bottom sounds distinguish piano
tones?,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Music Perception
and Cognition (ICMPC 10), (Sapporo: Hokkaido University), 292.
Hart, H. C., Fuller, M. W., and Lusby, W. S. (1934). A precision study of piano touch
and tone. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. VI, 80–94. doi: 10.1121/1.1915706
Heinlein, C. P. (1929). A discussion of the nature of pianoforte damper-pedalling
together with an experimental study of some individual differences in pedal
performance. J. Gen. Psychol. 2, 489–508. doi: 10.1080/00221309.1929.9918087
Hevner, K. (1936). Experimental studies of the elements of expression in music.
Am. J. Psychol. 48, 246–268. doi: 10.2307/1415746
Hofmann, J. (1920). Piano Playing with Piano Questions answered. Philadelphia,
PA: Theodore Presser Co.
Holmes, P. A. (2012). An exploration of musical communication through expres-
sive use of timbre: The performer’s perspective. Psychol. Music 40, 301–323. doi:
10.1177/0305735610388898
Juslin, P. N. (1997). Emotional communication in music performance: a
functionalist perspective and some data. Music Percept. 14, 383–418. doi:
10.2307/40285731
Juslin, P. N., and Laukka, P. (2003). Communication of emotions in vocal expres-
sion and music performance: different channels, same code?, Psychol. Bull. 129,
770–814. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.770
Juslin, P. N., and Scherer, K. R. (2005). “Vocal expression of affect,” in The New
Handbook of Methods in Nonverbal Behavior Research, eds J. A. Harrigan, R.
Rosenthal, and K. R. Scherer (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 65–135.
Kaiser, H. F. (1958). The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis.
Psychometrika 23, 187–200. doi: 10.1007/BF02289233
Kochevitsky, G. (1967). The art of piano playing: a scientific approach. (Secaucus,
NJ: Sunny-Brichard).
Lourenço, S. (2010). European Piano Schools: Russian, German and French clas-
sical piano interpretation and technique. J. Sci. Technol. Arts 2, 6–14. doi:
10.7559/citarj.v2i1.7
MacRitchie, J. (2011). Elucidating Musical Structure through Empirical Measurement
of Performance Parameters, Doctoral dissertation, University of Glasgow, UK.
MacRitchie, J., Buck, B., and Bailey, N. J. (2013). Inferring musical
structure through bodily gestures. Musicae Scientiae 17, 86–108. doi:
10.1177/1029864912467632
Madison, G. (2000). Properties of expressive variability patterns in music perfor-
mances. J. New Music Res. 29, 335–356. doi: 10.1080/09298210008565466
McPherson, A., and Kim, Y. (2011). “Multidimensional gesture sensing at the piano
keyboard,” in CHI ’11: Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human fac-
tors in computing systems (Vancouver, BC), New York, NY: ACM, 2789–2798.
doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979355
Neuhaus, H. (1973). The Art of Piano Playing, London, UK: Barrie and Jenkins
(Translated from Russian by K. A. Leibovitch).
Ortmann, O. R. (1929). The Physiological Mechanics of Piano Technique: An
Experimental Study of the Nature of Muscular Action as Used in Piano Playing
and of the Effects Thereof Upon the Piano Key and the Piano Tone, New York, NY:
E.P. Dutton.
Palmer, C. (1996). On the assignment of structure in music performance. Music
Percept. 14, 23–56. doi: 10.2307/40285708
Parncutt, R. (2003). “Accents and expression in piano performance,” in Perspektiven
und Methoden einer Systemischen Musikwissenschaft, eds K. W. Niemöller and B.
Gätjen (Frankfurt: Peter Lang), 163–185.
Parncutt, R., and Troup, M. (2002) “Piano,” in The Science and Psychology of Music
Performance: Creating Strategies for Teaching and Learning, eds R. Parncutt,
and G. McPherson (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 285–302. doi:
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195138108.001.0001
Quinto, L., Thompson, W. F., and Taylor, A. (2013). The contributions of composi-
tional structure and performance expression to the communication of emotion
in music. Psychol. Music. doi: 10.1177/0305735613482023. [Epub ahead of
print].
Repp, B. H. (1990). Patterns of expressive timing in performances of a Beethoven
minuet by nineteen famous pianists. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88, 622–641.
Repp, B. H. (1992) Diversity and commonality in music performance: an analysis of
timing microstructure in Schumanns “Träumerei.” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 92, 2546–
2568. doi: 10.1121/1.399766
Repp, B. H. (1996a) The dynamics of expressive piano performance: Schumann’s
“Träumerei” revisited. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 641–650. doi: 10.1121/1.415889
Repp, B. H. (1996b). Patterns of note onset asynchronies in expressive piano
performance. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 3917–3932. doi: 10.1121/1.417245
Repp, B. H. (1996c). Pedal timing and tempo in expressive piano per-
formance: a preliminary investigation. Psychol. Music 24, 191–221. doi:
10.1177/0305735696242011
Repp, B. H. (1997). Expressive timing in a Debussy Prelude: a comparison of
student and expert pianists. Musicae Scientiae 1, 257–268.
Repp, B. H. (1998). A microcosm of musical expression. I. Quantitative analysis of
pianists’ timing in the initial measures of Chopin’s Etude in E major. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 104, 1085–1100. doi: 10.1121/1.423325
Rink, J., Spiro, N., and Gold, N. (2011). “Motive, gesture, and the analysis of per-
formance,” in New Perspectives on Music and Gesture, eds A. Gritten and E. King
(Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing), 267–292.
Saunders, C., Hardoon, D. R., Shawe-Taylor, J., and Widmer, G. (2008).
Using string kernels to identify famous performers from their
playing style. Intel. Data Anal. 12, 425–440. Available online at:
http://iospress.metapress.com/content/p76205178g37346x/
Shaffer, L. H. (1995). Musical performance as interpretation. Psychol. Music 23,
17–38. doi: 10.1177/0305735695231002
Sloboda, J. A. (2000). Individual differences in music performance. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 4, 397–403. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01531-X
Stamatatos, E., and Widmer, G. (2005). Automatic identification of music
performers with learning ensembles. Artif. Intel. 165, 37–56. doi:
10.1016/j.artint.2005.01.007
Sándor, G. (1995). On Piano Playing, New York, NY: Schirmer Books.
Todd, N. P. M. (1992). The dynamics of dynamics: a model of musical expression.
J. Acous. Soc. Am. 91, 3540–3550. doi: 10.1121/1.402843
Van Vugt, F. T., Jabusch, H. C., and Altenmller, E. (2013). Individuality that is
unheard of: systematic temporal deviations in scale playing leave an inaudible
pianistic fingerprint. Front. Psychol. 4:134. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00134
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 18
Bernays and Traube Pianists’ individuality in timbre-colored performances
Wang, C. I. (2013). Quantifying pianist style – An investigation of performer space
and expressive gestures from audio recordings. Doctoral dissertation, New York
University.
Widmer, G., Flossmann, S., and Grachten, M. (2009). YQX plays Chopin, AI
Magazine 30, 35–48.
Widmer, G., and Goebl, W. (2004). Computational models of expressive music
performance: the state of the art. J. New Music Res. 33, 203–216. doi:
10.1080/0929821042000317804
Woody, R. H. (1999). The relationship between explicit planning and expressive
performance of dynamic variations in an aural modeling task. J. Res. Music Edu.
4, 331–342. doi: 10.2307/3345488
Woody, R. H. (2002). Emotion, imagery and metaphor in the acquisi-
tion of musical performance skill. Music Edu. Res. 4, 213–224. doi:
10.1080/1461380022000011920
Wöllner, C. (2013). How to quantify individuality in music performance? study-
ing artistic expression with averaging procedures. Front. Psychol. 4:361. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00361
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Received: 31 August 2013; accepted: 08 February 2014; published online: 04 March
2014.
Citation: Bernays M and Traube C (2014) Investigating pianists’ individuality in the
performance of five timbral nuances through patterns of articulation, touch, dynamics,
and pedaling. Front. Psychol. 5:157. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00157
This article was submitted to Cognitive Science, a section of the journal Frontiers in
Psychology.
Copyright © 2014 Bernays and Traube. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, dis-
tribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s)
or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these terms.
www.frontiersin.org March 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 157 | 19
