Multilingual Search in Libraries. The case-study of the Free University of
Bozen-Bolzano
R. Bernardi∗, D. Calvanese∗, L. Dini†, V. Di Tomaso†, E. Frasnelli∗, U. Kugler∗, B. Plank∗
∗ Free University of Bozen-Bolzano,
Bolzano, Italy
{bernardi, calvanese, plank}@inf.unibz.it, {Elisabeth.Frasnelli, Ulrike.Kugler}@unibz.it
† CELI s.r.l
Torino, Italy
{dini, ditomaso}@celi.it
Abstract
This paper presents an on-going project aiming at enhancing the OPAC (Online Public Access Catalog) search system of the Library of
the Free University of Bozen-Bolzano with multilingual access. The Multilingual search system (MUSIL), we have developed, integrates
advanced linguistic technologies in a user friendly interface and bridges the gap between the world of free text search and the world of
conceptual librarian search. In this paper we present the architecture of the system, its interface and preliminary evaluations of the
precision of the search results.
1. The problem
In this paper, we present the MUSIL (MUltilingual Search
In Libraries) system developed within an on-going project
on the enhancement of an OPAC (Online Public Access
Catalog) search system with multilingual access. The
project aims at integrating advanced linguistic technologies
in a user friendly interface and bridging the gap between
the world of free text search and the world of conceptual
librarian search.
The need of multilingual access to textual information is
perceived worldwide and is particularly relevant for li-
braries that operate in a multi-cultural context, like the
Library of the Free University of Bozen-Bolzano (FUB),
which is a multilingual (Italian, German, and English)
university offering several international study programs.
Moreover, due to the collaboration with both German and
Italian libraries, FUB librarians use both the Italian and
German subject headings systems (“Soggettario italiano”
and “Schlagwortnormdatei” (SWD)) for cataloging biblio-
graphic items. Additionally the “Library of Congress Sub-
ject Headings” (LCSH) are used to catalog bibliographic
items in English.
The evaluation of the FUB Library OPAC search logs
shows that a considerable portion of the queries are “du-
plicated” in two languages and that many are even repeated
in three languages, namely Italian, German, and English.
This situation is clearly a major barrier in accessing the Li-
brary Catalog: besides wasting the users’ time, this search
method does not guarantee users to find all possibly rele-
vant books either written or cataloged in a language differ-
ent from the one of the query terms.
To address the problem of multilingual search, a possible
approach is to exploit possibly complex mappings between
terms in different languages (Landry, 2004). A comple-
mentary approach is based on Information Retrieval, which
offers well established solutions to this problem (cf., (Pe-
ters et al., 2003)). However, the proposed techniques are
often statistically based and as such do not perform well
enough when information available is scarce. This is pre-
cisely the case in library databases, where documents are
described by means of only few words, typically authors,
title, and subject headings, sometimes also summary and
abstract. Moreover, standard query translation approaches
usually range over a limited domain, but the domain of a
general purpose library such as a university library is by
definition the whole of human knowledge. Therefore, the
present project aims at tailoring standard IR methods, and
in particular CELI’s search engine –DOCDIGGER– to the
library catalogs structure and the library users’ needs.
Currently, MUSIL combines linguistic knowledge, like
stemming, grammars, dictionaries and thesauri, with statis-
tical methods for data retrieval to improve precision and re-
call of the search. It provides automatic translation of query
terms into Italian, German, and English and suggestions of
related terms on the basis of the semantics of the query (the-
saurus look-up). Moreover, it performs a free text search
looking for the words entered by the user in the titles, table
of contents, notes, Subject Headings (SHs)1. By giving a
search term in a language of his/her choice the user is able
to search the library catalogs and find relevant documents
written or cataloged in any one of the three languages. To
enrich the search results, the user can also choose to expand
the query by searching also for related terms (broader, nar-
rower, synonyms, etc.) obtained by means of thesauri (Dini
et al., 2005). This option is of particular relevance when the
input and target languages do not match and thus translation
is required.
We are currently working on optimizing search results,
specifically to improve the ranking of the retrieved doc-
uments. We further plan to work on the improvement
of the search interface, by presenting users relevant por-
tions of a thesaurus which s/he can exploit to refine query
terms (Dongilli et al., 2004). Another priority will be the
development of adaptive systems able to handle the rapid
evolution of library catalogs and addition of new words.
The next Section describes the system architecture and its
1We are currently digitizing the abstracts of the archived doc-
uments and extend MUSIL search to them too.
2287
interface. Section 3. presents the preliminary results of a
laboratory test on a sample of the Library Catalogs, and
Section 4. summarizes the identified needs for further re-
search.
2. System description
This section briefly describes the MUSIL architecture and
illustrates the multilingual search features and its interface.
2.1. Architecture
MUSIL is based on two main components, DOCDIGGER
and OPAC, whose functionalities are briefly described be-
low.
DOCDIGGER2 is an information retrieval and search en-
gine. It extracts an index from sets of given documents
that are first converted into a suitable format by means of
stemming and part of speech tagging3. It searches for the
query terms and their morphological variations, as well as
their translations and expansions.
OPAC provides functionalities for catalog search via bibli-
ographic information (such as author, title, ISBN, etc.) or
via subject headings and classifications. It offers also ser-
vices for the library users (e.g., access to the library ac-
count, ordering an item, etc.).
The goal of MUSIL was to enhance the search functional-
ities of OPAC with the capabilities offered by DOCDIG-
GER, while preserving the additional services of OPAC
not related to search. A further goal was the adaptation
of DOCDIGGER to the specific requirements of the library
domain. In MUSIL, the integration between DOCDIGGER
and OPAC was achieved by developing an interface module
that preserves the existing services of OPAC (e.g., access to
library account, etc.), while offering the multilingual search
functionalities of DOCDIGGER. More specifically, the in-
tegration of the two systems has been carried out along the
following lines:
i) The user accesses the search functionalities via the
OPAC interface, and the query s/he poses is forwarded
to DOCDIGGER. Note that this required extending the
OPAC interface with the functionalities for specifying
the additional parameters related to multi-lingual and
thesaurus-enhanced search.
ii) DOCDIGGER exploits the data in the library database
to compute the answers to queries. More precisely,
DOCDIGGER periodically accesses the library catalog
database and incrementally updates an index of the
data therein. Queries are then answered by accessing
the index only (see Figure 1).
iii) The result of the multi-lingual search is transferred
from DOCDIGGER to the OPAC interface and shown
to the user. Again, this required extending the OPAC
interface, e.g., to allow for grouping the results accord-
ing to the language, and for visualizing the terms ob-
tained by translating and expanding the original query
2http://www.celi.it/motore_ricerca.html
3The current version integrated in MUSIL has the PoS tagging
feature disabled.
terms. An example of the displayed results is given in
Figure 3.
Figure 1: MUSIL architecture
2.2. Language Functionalities
In MUSIL the traditional OPAC search interface has been
extended with the following language related functionali-
ties (see Figure 2). The user must state the search term
language (English, Italian or German) and can choose dif-
ferent search modes:
Translate. The system looks for the search term’s transla-
tions. The user can specify the target language of the
translation (document language), by default “all lan-
guages” is chosen;
Expand. The system looks for the search term and con-
ceptually related terms only in documents of the same
language of the search terms;
Translate and Expand. The system looks for the search
term’s translations and their conceptually related
terms, too.
In the default mode, when both translate and expand are
disabled, the system looks only for the search term and
its linguistic variations (i.e., terms sharing the root of the
search term, e.g “security” and “securities”, “light” and
“lighting”.)
The retrieved documents are clustered per language and
ranked on the base of their relevance, as shown in Figure 3.
When the Translate and/or Expand modes are activated, the
system shows all the terms used for the search. For in-
stance, for the English query term “probability” by click-
ing on “Explanations” the users will be given the follow-
ing translated terms: Wahrscheinlichkeit (German), proba-
bilità, simile, verosimiglianza, accidentalità, casualità (Ital-
ian) (see Figure 3.)
Figure 2: MUSIL user interface: functionalities
2288
Figure 3: MUSIL user interface: output
3. Evaluation
The analysis of OPAC logs shows that users looking for
books by using field search (Subject headings and Au-
thor/Title) are 27%, while the ones using free-text search
are 73%. For the former, the best solution for multilingual
access is probably the use of mappings between different
national Subject Headings (SHs) (which is the aim of the
MACS (Landry, 2004) project). On the other hand, for the
latter group this solution cannot be completely satisfactory
unless integrated with language technology tools for free
text search. (See (S. Michos and Fakotakis, 1999) for an
evaluation with real-life users of multilingual tools to ac-
cess Library Catalogs). Moreover, also at the level of the
output, using language information to cluster documents
helps the user finding the relevant ones more easily. This
would be, for instance, the case of books found by search-
ing for query terms like “computers” that are used in several
languages. Similarly, presenting a ranked list of retrieved
books can help users speed up his/her search. However,
both free text search and ranking techniques must be tai-
lored to the specific application of Library Catalogs, as our
first evaluation experiments show.
Evaluating an OPAC search system presents several chal-
lenges and asks for decisions to be made by the investiga-
tors (Tague-Sutcliffe, 1997). In order to evaluate the cur-
rent version of MUSIL, we have started with a laboratory
test and have postponed the operational one with real-life
users to a later stage. The laboratory test has been set up
following (Wien, 2000) as described below.
Sample DB A sample database has been extracted from
the Library Catalogs, by choosing those subject ar-
eas of the classification system (RVK) with number of
records higher than 300 for each language. Out of the
22 subject areas, we were left with 7 categories, viz.
Psychology and Philosophy (C), Pedagogy (D), Law
and Sociology (M), Law (P), Economics (Q), Math-
ematics and Computer Science (S), Agriculture and
Technology (Z). We extracted 1.099 records per lan-
guage chosen by means of stratified random sampling
to come up with a balanced distribution among cat-
egories (viz. 157 records per category). Finally, we
removed duplicates.
Queries Queries have been generated automatically, by
first selecting as candidate query terms those terms
occurring both in the titles of the sample DB and in
the Controlled Vocabularies of the SHs of the corre-
sponding language. This selection resulted into the
following groups: 1.022 terms for German, 404 terms
for English, 551 for Italian4. Then, these sets of can-
didate terms have been reduced to query terms by se-
lecting only those matching subject headings assigned
to records of the corresponding language contained in
the sample DB resulting into: 473 terms for German,
224 for English and 282 for Italian.
When carrying out an evaluation of a (multilingual) Library
Catalog search system, the first mayor difficulty to face is
to define the set of documents to be considered relevant for
a given query term, and against which to evaluate preci-
sion and recall of search results. Different criteria could be
used. Relevant documents can be considered (a) the ones
containing the query term in the Subject Headings (Wien,
2000), where the document is of the same language of the
query term; (b) the ones containing a linguistic variation of
the query term in the SH; (c) the ones considered as rele-
vant by area experts; (d) the ones that satisfy real-life users
needs, etc. Secondly, when evaluating multilingual access
these criteria have to be extended to the set of documents in
the translation target language. So far, we have based our
evaluation on the criterion (a) in order to compare search
based on controlled vocabulary vs. free text search.
Titles are not always indicative of the topic of the record,
for instance, the query term “God” matches the “Democ-
racy - the God that failed”, but clearly the document cannot
be considered as relevant. The SHs assigned to it (Eco-
nomics / Political aspects Economics / Moral and ethical as-
pects Economics / Moral and ethical aspects Economic pol-
icy Monarchy Democracy Anarchy) would be much more
helpful and significant. This example brings evidence in
favor of the (a) criterion above. On the other hand, a per-
fect matching between the query term and the assigned SHs
4The differences among the candidates query terms per lan-
guage are due to the differences in the controlled vocabularies
at disposal. In particular, the Library has full access to SWD
(German SHs) whereas it has only a limited access to LCSH and
“Soggettario Italiano” (the latter is not available in electronic form
yet hence the available SHs are only the ones used by the FUB li-
brarians).
2289
could be too restrictive as relevance criterion. This is al-
ready an obvious consequence of the fact that SWD uses
mostly singular SHs whereas the LCSH and the “Sogge-
tario Italiano” use plural SHs more often.
Both the classical OPAC search system and MUSIL look
for the query term in the titles, subtitle, notes, and assigned
SHs. Moreover, MUSIL (also in the default mode) looks
also into table of contents and “related terms” (narrower,
broader, . . .) of the Controlled Vocabularies5. Hence, by
assuming the (a) criterion, both system have 100% recall,
while they could differ in their precision. On the one hand,
OPAC retrieves also (i) documents of languages different
from the query term’s language, and as such not relevant;
these documents are not clustered together with the rele-
vant ones by MUSIL. On the other hand, MUSIL, in the
default mode, retrieves also (ii) documents containing lin-
guistic variations of the query terms, as well as (iii) those
documents that have the query term or a linguistic variation
of it in the “related” SHs. Neither of these documents are
found by OPAC. We are currently evaluating the frequen-
cies of these cases, and will then check user judgments on
the relevance of the documents (ii) and (iii). The difference
between (i) and (ii)-(iii) are not well represented in the pre-
cision results summarized in Table 1, which are obtained
on the sample DB as the average of the precision over all
selected query terms (DOCDIGGER has been used in the
default mode).
OPAC MUSIL
German 0,61 0,65
English 0,50 0,49
Italian 0,49 0,49
Table 1: OPAC and MUSIL precision
Notice that both criterion (a) and the generation of query
terms that literally match words in titles and SHs does not
shed light on the added value of search by linguistic varia-
tions used by DOCDIGGER in the default mode.
To evaluate the translation functionality of MUSIL we have
adapted the (a) criterion to this mode. We have started our
analysis from English query terms to retrieve German doc-
uments too. FUB librarians have mapped the 224 English
query terms, mentioned above, into the set of German SHs
assigned to the records contained in the sample DB: 75
English terms didn’t have a counterpart into this subset of
SWD and 16 have been mapped to more than one term. For
each English query term having a mapped German term, we
considered as relevant those German documents containing
the mapped term in the SHs. For all English query terms
the German terms proposed by the librarians were among
the translated terms used by MUSIL. Hence, the relevant
books were all found. We still have to measure the preci-
sion of the search, but it’s already clear that too many non
relevant books are also found. Similar results are obtained
for the Expand mode.
5In the case of the FUB Library, these terms are only available
in the German controlled vocabulary (SWD).
4. Conclusions and Further work
We have presented ongoing work on the MUSIL project,
in which the traditional OPAC of the Free University of
Bozen-Bolzano is extended with multilingual search capa-
bilities. We are currently working on several extensions
of the system, on the one hand aimed at improving search
results, and on the other hand at offering additional func-
tionalities to the user through an improved interface. As
for improving precision of search results, our preliminary
laboratory test has shown the need of using filters to bet-
ter control the translation and expansion functionalities and
suggests that Controlled Vocabularies of SHs can provide
us with these filters. To avoid that such a filtering is too
selective, linguistic variations of the terms should also be
considered. A further improvement will be the treatment of
proper names, in order to distinguish those cases where a
proper name that is ambiguous with a common word should
not be translated across languages from those where the
translation is required. A similar special treatment in trans-
lation and thesaurus expansion is necessary for multi words
and compound names (especially important in German).
Furthermore, different definitions of relevance should be
explored and analyzed and their results should be compared
so as to reach a clearer picture of MUSIL performance.
These experiments will be useful also to calibrate the rank-
ing that is now based on a vector space model. This model
gives good results in the default mode but should be ad-
justed for the results of the translate and expand function-
alities.
5. References
L. Dini, D. Liebwald, L. Mommers, W. Peters,
E. Schweighofer, and W. Voermans. 2005. Cross-lingual
legal information retrieval using a wordnet architecture.
In proceedings of ICAIL ’05, pages 163–167.
Paolo Dongilli, Enrico Franconi, and Sergio Tessaris.
2004. Semantics driven support for query formula-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2004 International Work-
shop on Description Logics (DL 2004). CEUR Elec-
tronic Workshop Proceedings, http://ceur-ws.
org/Vol-104/.
Patrice Landry. 2004. Multilingual subject access: The
linking approach of MACS. Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly, 37(3/4):177–191.
Carol Peters, Martin Braschler, Julio Gonzalo, and Michael
Kluck, editors. 2003. Advances in Cross-Language
Information Retrieval: Third Workshop of the Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF 2002), volume 2785
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer.
E. Stamatatos S. Michos and N. Fakotakis. 1999. Support-
ing multilinguaglity in library automation systems. Ap-
plied Artificial Intelligence, 13(7):679–704.
Jean Tague-Sutcliffe. 1997. The pragmatics of informa-
tion retrieval experimentation, revised. In Karen Spaarck
Jones and Peter Willett, editors, Readings in Information
Retrieval, pages 205–216. Morgan Kaufmann.
Charlotte Wien. 2000. Sample sizes and composition:
Their effect on recall and precision in ir experiments with
opacs. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 29(4).
2290
