 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
A Reassessment of the Authorship of the Cheap Repository Tracts 
 
Anna Maree Blanch, M.A. 
 
Mentor: James E. Barcus, Ph.D 
 
 
This thesis contends that the extent of Hannah More’s contribution to the Cheap 
Repository  has  never  been definitively  established  and  that  there  is  a  need  for 
clarification of the authorship of individual tracts.  This thesis details the current 
state of bibliographical scholarship  for  the Cheap Repository Tracts and  identifies 
which tracts can be attributed conclusively, which can only be made tentatively, 
and  those  for  which  attribution  must  be  reserved  pending  a  non‐traditional 
attribution  study. This  thesis will  also  explore  the  context  in which  the Cheap 
Repository Tracts were published and claims  that ascertaining  the authorship of 
individual tracts contributes productively to future criticism of the tracts within 
their socio‐historical, theological and political context. 
 
Page bearing signatures is kept on file in the Graduate School. 
 
 
 
A Reassessment of the Authorship of the Cheap Repository Tracts 
 
by 
 
Anna Maree Blanch, B.A.(Hons), LLB  
 
A Thesis 
 
Approved by the Department of English 
 
___________________________________ 
Dianna Vitanza, Ph.D., Chairperson 
 
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of  
Baylor University in Partial Fulfillment of the  
Requirements for the Degree 
of 
Master of Arts 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved by the Thesis Committee 
 
___________________________________ 
James E. Barcus, Ph.D., Chairperson 
 
___________________________________ 
Phillip J. Donnelly, Ph.D. 
 
___________________________________ 
David L. Jeffrey, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted by the Graduate School 
August 2009 
 
___________________________________ 
J. Larry Lyon, Ph.D., Dean                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2009 by Anna M. Blanch  
 
All rights reserved 
 
 
iii 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  vi 
   
DEDICATION  vii 
   
CHAPTER ONE  1 
 Hannah More’s Cheap Repository?: Authorship, 
Bibliographical Scholarship, and the Reassessment 
of Accepted Wisdom 
 1 
    
  Defining the Problem  3 
     
  Hannah More’s Contribution  8 
     
  Misinterpretation of Previous Scholarship  11 
     
  Broad Generalisations – Attributing the Cheap 
Repository in its entirety to Hannah More 
 20 
     
  Failure to Distinguish Unauthorized Marshall 
Tracts in Cheap Repository Criticism 
 22 
      
  The false assumption that Hannah More wrote all 
and only those tracts signed “Z” 
 23 
      
  A Case Study: Lancashire Collier Girl  27 
      
  Towards a Solution  29 
      
CHAPTER TWO  31 
 Attributing Authorship: Traditional and Non-traditional 
Authorial Attribution and Eighteenth-Century 
Literature 
 31 
    
  Anonymous Authorship in the Eighteenth-Century  33 
     
  Traditional Attribution and Eighteenth-Century  35 
 
iv 
 
Literature 
     
  Non-traditional Textual Scholarship and Eighteenth-
Century Literature 
 39 
     
  Benefits and Limitations of Authorial Attribution 
Studies 
 48 
     
  Applying attribution theory to the Cheap Repository 
Tracts 
 50 
     
CHAPTER THREE  56 
 Authorship and the Cheap Repository: Affirming 
Unproblematic Texts, Explicating Problematic Texts, 
and Attempting Authorial Attributions 
56 
   
  Applying Previous Bibliographies to the Authorship 
Problem 
58 
    
  Default Attributions to More 61 
    
  Individual Tracts – Conclusive Attribution to Hannah 
More 
61 
    
  Individual Tracts – Inconclusive or Unknown 
Authorship 
67 
    
            Case Study:  Inconclusive Authorship - Sinful Sally 73 
    
  Authors other than More 74 
    
             Stock in Trade and the Cheap Repository Tracts 79 
    
  Conditional Attribution to Authors Other than More 80 
    
  Collaborations between More and other Others 80 
    
              Lancashire Collier Girl 81 
    
              Sorrows of Yamba 82 
    
  Conclusion 84 
    
CHAPTER FOUR 86 
 
v 
 
 
 
 
  
 The Cheap Repository Tracts and Eighteenth-Century Discourse 86 
   
  Place of the Cheap Repository in Eighteenth-Century 
Discourse 
89 
    
  Content and Form 95 
    
  The Choice of Anonymity and Pseudonymity 101 
    
  Impact of identifying authors of individual tracts 106 
    
  Concluding Remarks 107 
    
APPENDIX 110 
  
WORKS CITED 203 
 
vi 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
My interest in the Cheap Repository Tracts, began a number of years ago in 
an undergraduate Honours seminar on 1790s British Literature at the 
Australian National University. This seminar provided me with my first 
exposure to the Tracts and the strong modern reactions to More and her work.  
The research that forms the basis of this thesis took place over the course 
of eighteen months. I would like to thank Dr James Barcus for his guidance as 
the Chair of my committee and for his enthusiasm for this project.  I would 
also like to thank Drs Jeffrey and Donnelly for committing time and energy to 
be part of my committee. I would like to acknowledge the support of Dr 
Eileen Bentsen and the Reference Librarians as well as Laura Sumrall and the 
Interlibrary Loan Office at Baylor University Libraries. Without the resources 
made available to me this project would have been impossible. 
 For their willingness to offer feedback and comments, I would like to 
thank my colleagues in the Bibliography and Research Methods Seminar, 
where this project found its genesis. I would also like to thank Dr Peter Epps, 
Andrew Hill (Lord High Executioner of the comma) and Kurt Thom for their 
clear eyes, humour, support, and insight in proofreading chapters. All errors 
that remain are mine alone. 
  
 
vii 
 
 
 
DEDICATION 
 
 
 
 
 
To  
Sam and Mia Kate 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER ONE 
 
Hannah More’s Cheap Repository?: Authorship, Bibliographical 
Scholarship, and the Reassessment of Accepted Wisdom 
 
 
Hannah More (1745--1833) describes the circumstances which led her to 
‚devise and prosecute the institution of the Cheap Repository,‛ with the 
encouragement of the Bishop of London and the assistance of her friends and 
sisters, in her preface to the 1801 Works of Hannah More (vii).  At the time of 
the Repository’s conception in 1794, More’s public profile was that of a 
playwright and a controversial political commentator, yet, the annals of 
literary history emphasize her contributions as an educator and religious 
writer (Brown 32; Yonge Hannah More 463; Philp 67; More Considerations on 
Religion and Public Education xiv).  The Cheap Repository Tracts, a collection of 
inexpensive moral and religious tracts, are an important factor in the 
construction of her reputation and the subsequent reception of her work.  
Indeed, the ‚sublime and immortal‛ Cheap Repository is the primary reason 
she is considered by some to have been the most prominent woman 
evangelical campaigner in England between 1780 and 1810 (M. G. Jones 139; 
Roberts 5; Yonge "Children's Literature of the Last Century" 231).1  
                                                 
1 Bishop Porteous to Hannah More, 16 January 1797, William Roberts, Memoirs of the Life 
and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More, 4th ed., vol. 2, 3 vols. (London: R.B Seeley & W 
Burnside, 1836) 4. 
 
 
2 
 
This thesis contends that the extent of Hannah More’s contribution to the 
Cheap Repository has never been definitively established and that there is a 
need for clarification of the authorship of individual tracts and bibliographical 
scholarship relating to the series.  This thesis details the current state of 
bibliographical scholarship as it relates to the Cheap Repository Tracts and 
identifies those tracts for which authorship can be established conclusively as 
well as those for which establishing authorship is problematic and must 
remain inconclusive or unknown.  This thesis will also explore the context in 
which the Cheap Repository Tracts were published and suggest that 
ascertaining the authorship of individual tracts contributes productively to 
future criticism of the tracts within their socio-historical, theological and 
political context. 
Chapter One will establish the scholarly context for this study by showing 
that a reassessment of previous bibliographical scholarship about the Cheap 
Repository is essential.  This chapter details the current state of Cheap 
Repository bibliographical scholarship.  The Appendix provides supporting 
material for Chapter One, as well as for Chapters Three and Four.  
Chapter Two will discuss both traditional and non-traditional authorship 
attribution methodology and explores how these are applicable to the Cheap 
Repository.  This chapter argues that an exhaustive traditional attribution 
 
 
3 
 
study has never been conducted on the Repository and that this must be 
completed prior to a non-traditional attribution study. 
Chapter Three will present a catalogue of all known Cheap Repository 
Tracts.  Applying traditional attribution methodology, this chapter asserts the 
number and name of those tracts which can be unproblematically attributed 
to either Hannah More or another contributor.  This chapter also details the 
name and number of those tracts for which an attribution of authorship 
should be tentatively made, along with those for which attribution should be 
reserved until such time as further evidence is found, whether through 
traditional attribution methodology, or through a comprehensive non-
traditional attribution study of the kind described in Chapter Two.  Chapter 
Four will explore the place of the Cheap Repository within the context of socio-
political, theological, and historical discourse of late eighteenth and early 
nineteenth-century Britain.  This chapter will also propose that challenging 
authorial attributions of specific tracts affects the understanding of this 
discourse by scholars. 
Defining the Problem 
 
This chapter contends that the extent of More’s contribution to the Cheap 
Repository has never been definitively or explicitly established and that there 
is a need to clarify the current state of bibliographical scholarship about the 
 
 
4 
 
Repository and clearly describe the extent of More’s involvement along with 
the involvement of other contributors.  Three main problems pervade the 
accepted bibliographic scholarship for the Cheap Repository.  First, there 
appear to be mistakes in the accepted scholarly wisdom as to how many tracts 
were published as part of the Cheap Repository, along with related confusion 
about the period of time over which the tracts were published.  Second, 
establishing the number of tracts contributed by Hannah More (1795--1798) is 
not as simple as it first appears.  Third, as a direct consequence of the failure 
of many scholars to outline a methodology for their attribution of authorship 
of individual tracts, concerns about the inadequacy of Cheap Repository 
bibliographic scholarship have been ignored.  The diverse assortment of tracts 
that comprise the Cheap Repository are not the work of More alone: Sally More, 
William Mason, Henry Thornton, Rev. John Newton, Zachary Macaulay, 
Selina Mills Macaulay are proposed as possible contributors by Spinney; to 
these Mary Jones adds Patty More, and Mrs Bouverie; Anne Stott adds Hester 
Mulso Chapone and Rev. William Gilpin, and Susan Pedersen additionally 
proposes John Venn (Spinney 311; Stott 178; M. G. Jones 139; Pedersen 85).  
Chapter Three will detail the evidence to suggest which of these possible 
contributors authored tracts in the series. 
 
 
5 
 
Publication under the series title of The Cheap Repository began on March 3, 
1795, with at least twenty tracts published and distributed on that day.2 From 
May, 1795, three tracts (often two tracts published in Octavo in a single chap-
book) were published every month until November, 1797.  There were three 
genres of tracts, poetry in the form of a ‚useful subject versified,‛ a story or 
sermon ‚particularly adopted for perusal on the Lord’s Day,‛ and the 
moralistic short story for which the Repository is best known (S. Pickering 17).  
The history of the Cheap Repository becomes rather complicated from 
November, 1797, when More withdraw from day-to-day involvement, until 
Saturday, the 22nd September, 1798, when More recorded in her journal that 
‚the Cheap Repository is closed‛ (Roberts 5).  The effects of the complicated 
printing history will be discussed later in further detail. 
The Cheap Repository was remarkable for the frequency with which new 
tracts were written, and published, as well as for the unprecedented number 
of copies distributed and sold.  The Cheap Repository reportedly sold two 
million copies by the end of March in 1796 (Shattock 303; Myers "Hannah 
More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology" 280, n.6), a 
                                                 
2 Another error in setting the year parameters of the Cheap Repository occurs when 
scholars set the dates 1794--1798. Sam Pickering does not discuss the authorship of any 
individual tracts, though he ascribes the ‚114 tracts published 1794--1798‛ as part of the Cheap 
Repository to ‚Hannah More and the Clapham Sect‛ : ‚Financed by Henry Thornton and 
distributed free among  the lower classes, primarily through Sunday Schools, 114 tracts, 
selling at ½d, 1d, and 1½d, were published 1794--1798.‛ Sam Pickering, "The Cheap Repository 
Tracts and the Short Story," Studies in Short Fiction 12 (1975): 17.                   
 
 
6 
 
figure which More herself claims in the advertisement to volume five of her 
1801 collected works (The Works of Hannah More viii) and which is confirmed 
by eighteenth-century periodicals (Myers "Hannah More's Tracts for the 
Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology" 280, n.6).3 Published in England, 
they were also reprinted and distributed in Ireland, and then in America (The 
Works of Hannah More vii).4 Initially printed in broadsheet and octavo, many of 
the tracts were reprinted either individually or with a small number of other 
tracts (usually two or three depending on length) in octavo or duodecimo; 
and many, but not all, were also republished in one of the volumes of Shorter 
Tracts, Sunday Reading, and Moral and Religious Tracts which were collections 
of tracts based on genre.5 Within twenty years, many of the tracts were 
translated into other languages including Romansch, Russian, Tamil, and 
Singhalese and they were distributed in such far flung places as the West 
Indies, Sierra Leone, and across Asia by British and Scottish Missionaries 
                                                 
3 For discussion of the unprecedented nature of the Cheap Repository’s publication figures, 
see Richard D Altick, The English Common Reader: A Social History of the Mass Reading Public 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957) 75-77. 
4 Sam Pickering reports that ‚individual numbers of the Cheap Repository were printed 
separately [in America] while collections came out almost immediately in Philadelphia, 
Boston, and New York.‛Pickering, "The Cheap Repository Tracts and the Short Story," 19.  For 
further discussion and bibliography of the American reprints, see Mark S. Schantz, "Religious 
Tracts, Evangelical Reform, and the Market Revolution in Antebellum America," Journal of the 
Early Republic 17.3 (1997): 432, Harry B. Weiss, "Hannah More’s Cheap Repository Tracts in 
America," Bulletin of the New York Public Library 50.7 (1946), Harry B. Weiss, "Hannah More’s 
Cheap Repository Tracts in America: Part 2," Bulletin of the New York Public Library 50.8 (1946). 
 
5 Volumes of collected Cheap Repository tracts were published in 1798, 1800, 1798, 1799, 
1800, 1806, 1818, 1827 and 1839. 
 
 
7 
 
(Roberts 5; Green 84; Stott 321).  Yet despite the contemporary popularity and 
sheer magnitude of the enterprise, or perhaps precisely because of it, the 
actual composition of the Cheap Repository, and attribution of authorship of 
individual tracts is problematic and has not been adequately resolved.  
Most articles and books about Hannah More contain a cursory description 
of the beginnings of the Cheap Repository drawn (whether verbatim or 
paraphrased) from the work of biographer William Roberts or bibliographer 
G.H Spinney.6 Often these descriptions are perfunctory and function as a 
mere nod to scholarly tradition on the way to discussing their opinions on the 
works and life of Mrs. Hannah More.  It can be inferred from comments about 
the authorship of individual tracts that the issue of authorship has largely 
been considered irrelevant or irresolvable.  However, the quirks of 
scholarship on the Cheap Repository show that the issue of authorship is not 
moot, especially where scholars have made conflicting attributions on 
individual tracts.  Much of the critical scholarship that exists about individual 
Cheap Repository tracts has confined itself to those tracts widely accepted to be 
                                                 
6 William Roberts was responsible for the first collection of More’s letters published in 
1834 and as such heavily influenced the critical reception of More’s biographical life for the 
next hundred and twenty years.  Roberts crafted a version of more through a judicious 
selection of letters, editing of their contents and general order including dating.  See Anne 
Stott, Hannah More: The First Victorian (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003) viii-ix.  The 
accompanying memoir penned by Roberts, and interspersed throughout the four volumes, is 
filled with his musings and interpretations of the events of Hannah More’s life.  For example, 
Roberts removed criticism of the State and the Church arguably softening the ground for 
portrayals of More by feminist critics as complicit with the patriarchy.  See William Roberts, 
Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More, 4th ed., 3 vols. (London: R.B Seeley 
& W Burnside, 1836).   
 
 
8 
 
by more: those signed ‚Z‛ as well as any included in an edition of her 
collected works (Lloyd 79, 102; Vallone 80--81; Webb 419--20).  Commentary 
on individual tracts in scholarly essays fails to address or downplays the 
matter of authorship, as in cases where the Cheap Repository is employed as 
representative of evangelical didacticism or chapbook literature of the late 
eighteenth-century, including in the work of Beth Kowaleski-Wallace, Gary 
Kelly, Robert Ryan, Mona Scheurmann, M.J Crossley Evans, and Jane Nardin 
(Kowaleski-Wallace "Hannah and Her Sister: Women and Evangelicalism in 
Early Nineteenth-Century England" 30; Kelly 147; Ryan 45; Scheurmann In 
Praise of Poverty: Hannah More Counters Thomas Paine and the Radical Threat 13; 
Evans 469; Nardin 277). The underlying attitude seems to be that it would be 
needlessly difficult and time-consuming to ascertain the authorship of each 
and every Cheap Repository tract.  However, the importance of clarifying the 
state of bibliographic scholarship and identifying the authorship of individual 
tracts, as far as possible, should not be underestimated.  Indeed, before 
further analysis of More’s work can be productively pursued and her 
contribution to the Cheap Repository described issues concerning authorial 
attribution must be resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Hannah More’s Contribution 
 
The lack of precision in critical scholarship with regard to the enterprise of 
the Cheap Repository has in turn served to increase the ambiguity surrounding 
Hannah More’s contribution as an author.  Inaccurate statements about the 
authorial contributions of More appear to be based on one or more of the 
following: (a) misinterpretations of previous scholarship that have become 
uncontested fact; (b) broad generalizations, such as attributing the Cheap 
Repository in its entirety to Hannah More; (c) failure to distinguish 
unauthorized Marshall Tracts in Cheap Repository criticism; and (d) the false 
assumption that Hannah More wrote all, and wrote only, those tracts signed 
[Z].  
The grounds upon which attributions of ‚anonymous‛ works have been 
made to more and others were the initial catalyst for this thesis.  The intention 
was to consider the technical and literary bases on which attributions have 
been made to More as they have been recorded in the scholarly literature and 
to evaluate their cogency and theoretical validity.  However, very few 
scholars offer methodologically articulate justifications for their attributions of 
authorship for individual Cheap Repository Tracts.  The methodology of this 
study requires an examination of the available evidence in order to assess the 
relative weight given to primary source material – More’s acknowledged 
(signed) works, other primary texts, and external textual statements – as well 
 
 
10 
 
as critical scholarship, with the goal of coming to a tentative but substantive 
conclusion about the contribution of Hannah More and others to the Cheap 
Repository.  The aim is to unravel the tangled web, attempt to establish if there 
are any contested attributions, and to propose a methodology for making 
attributions of authorship for each of the tracts in question.  The importance 
of establishing the contribution of Hannah More, and sorting out the 
conflicting factual evidence (or non-evidence) of scholars is fundamentally 
important to More scholarship, and will serve to remove barriers that may 
prevent critical examination of the Cheap Repository tracts.  
Hannah More assumed various guises as an author.  She variously 
published under her own name, anonymously, and under two different 
pseudonyms: ‚Will Chip‛ and ‚Z.‛  The pseudonym used in the Cheap 
Repository is [Z].  More’s acknowledgement of *Z+ as one of her pseudonyms is 
first disclosed in the advertisement to Volume Four of Cadell’s 1801, eight-
volume Works of Hannah More.  More identifies the nine works contained 
therein as being ‚first published, among a great number of others, in the 
Cheap Repository, under the signature [Z], and here presented to the Reader, 
much enlarged and improved‛ (The Works of Hannah More n.p).  It is 
reasonable, then, that the [Z] signature is widely held to refer to Hannah 
More.  However, scholars do not usually make clear the grounds upon which 
this signature came to be accepted as denoting More as author (Pharr 463; E. 
 
 
11 
 
M. G. Smith 223).  A signature of [Z] on the final line of the final page of a 
tract is not conclusive and definitive evidence, however, that it is the work of 
Hannah More. 
Misinterpretation of Previous Scholarship 
 
Scholarly recognition of the lack of clarity regarding the Cheap Repository 
bibliography, including authorship, dates back to Augustus De Morgan in 
1864 (241-45).  One of the forefathers on non-traditional authorship 
attribution, De Morgan was a mathematics professor at London University (S. 
De Morgan 215-16). 
In 1939, G.H. Spinney compiled a bibliography of extant copies of the 
Cheap Repository tracts, printed by Hazard and Marshall and held by the 
British Library at that time.  He also used the Stationers’ Hall Registers to 
confirm the date of publication of individual tracts.  Although Spinney’s 
bibliography is often considered authoritative, Mitzi Myers strongly cautions 
against this confirmatory evaluation (Ford 127; Demers 110; Walker 251; 
Myers "Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female 
Ideology" 281, n.9).  Spinney’s bibliography is the most comprehensive in 
terms of discussing the historical context of the relationship between More 
and the printers of the Cheap Repository.  Spinney initially sets the dates for the 
series at 1795-1798, which are the parameters most commonly repeated by 
scholars (295).  However, Spinney later explains that Hannah More’s day-to-
 
 
12 
 
day involvement with the Hazard and Marshall imprints ended in November, 
1797 (295, 307).7 In November, 1797, More appointed Evans and Hatchard as 
the new publishers (307).  Ten months later in September, 1798, More 
declared the Repository ‚closed,‛ and sold the rights to reprints to Evans, 
Hatchard and Rivington (Spinney 307-08).  From November, 1797, to 
September, 1798, Evans was the authorized printer the Cheap Repository and 
was responsible for publishing the ten previously unpublished tracts 
produced during this period.  However, and this is very important, despite 
being ostensibly sacked in November, 1797, John Marshall continued to sell 
reprints and publish new tracts under the name of the Cheap Repository, even 
going to the trouble of entering them under his own name at Stationer’s Hall 
(308).  Seventy-three such tracts were published by Marshall between 
December, 1797, and November, 1799. 
Statements describing Hannah More’s contributions have been repeated 
by generation after generation of scholars uncontested.  The numbers ‚114,‛ 
for the number of tracts produced between 1795-1798, and ‚50,‛ for Hannah 
                                                 
7 Marshall was appointed ‚The Official Printer to the Cheap Repository‛ in mid-1796, 
effectively demoting Hazard who apparently did not take this well. Stott reports that Hannah 
More showed little sympathy for Hazard whom she believed had profited significantly 
despite the project being almost reliant on subscriptions. Subscriptions were required as a 
consequence of the imperative to give the hawkers and booksellers good profit margins; 
given the events of 1797-1798, the trust in Marshall can be considered to have been misplaced. 
For more information, see Stott, Hannah More: The First Victorian  178.  
 
 
13 
 
More’s contributions are repeated ad nauseam.  The key quotation which 
seems to be the source of all subsequent scholarship, is as follows: 
Of the 114 different tracts published up to November 1797, 49 
bear the initial ‘Z’ and 6 ‘S’.  Those signed Z were by Hannah 
More; those signed S by Sarah More, her sister.  The authorship 
of the ‘Z’ tracts is disclosed in Cadell’s collected edition of 
Hannah More’s works published in 1818.  The statement that ‘S’ 
tracts were by Sarah More appears in Thompson’s life:  he may 
have it from a private source, though it would not be difficult to 
guess.  We are told in Roberts that the tracts were written by 
Hannah More with the assistance of her sisters and a few 
friends.  To discover the identity of the ‘few friends’ who 
between them wrote the remaining 51 is now almost impossible 
(310).8 
 
However, the numbers do not add up, and it is not just that the numbers in 
the quote equal 106, not 114.  Spinney’s conclusion specifically states that the 
count of 114 relates to ‚tracts published up to November, 1797‛ whereas 
many scholars that cite Spinney’s work and numerical conclusions often 
substitute an end date of 1798 without clarification or explanation (310). 
The lack of particularity in many descriptions of More’s involvement in 
the Cheap Repository is often the consequence of a heavy reliance on Spinney.  
Some scholars show explicit deference, such as in the work of Jones (1952), 
Ford (1996), Smith (1996), and Pharr (1998), which refer to Spinney’s 
conclusions as to the total number of tracts and More’s contribution.  For 
                                                 
8 Other people Spinney claims contributed are William Mason, Henry Thornton, Rev. 
John Newton, Zachary Macaulay, and Selina Mills Macaulay. G.H Spinney, "Cheap 
Repository Tracts: Hazard and Marshall Edition," The Library 4th Series, 20.No.3 (1939): 311. 
 
 
14 
 
example, Ford states that ‚between 1795 and 1798 Hannah More wrote at 
least 49 of the 114 ballads, allegories, and short stories collectively known as 
the Cheap Repository‛; Smith reports that there were ‚114 Cheap Repository 
tracts published between 1795-1798‛ (E. M. G. Smith 223; Ford 127).  Both 
Smith and Ford cite Spinney directly.  The numbers ‚49‛ and ‚114‛ are now 
so accepted that recent scholars, including Nicholas D. Smith in the 
introduction to his landmark book on More’s literary manuscripts, state them 
as fact without any citation (xxiii). 
In these summary statements attributions are commonly in the order of 
‚almost,‛ ‚at least,‛ or ‚more than‛ 50, or ‚almost,‛ ‚more than,‛ or ‚half‛ of 
all Cheap Repository tracts.  For example, Pharr declares that ‚this much 
praised anti-Jacobin propaganda led to the Cheap Repository Tracts (1795-1798), 
distributed by the rich to the poor in an effort to quell unrest.  A prime mover 
in this cause, M.*ore+ wrote almost fifty of these tracts‛ (463).  In another 
example, Jonathon Wordsworth’s (1995) contention that ‚More wrote almost 
half of the 114 that appeared before the scheme came to an end in 1798, others 
being provided by her sisters and numerous friends‛ is an example of where 
a scholar uses a less specific arithmetical measurement than ‚49‛ (v). 
Similarly, E.M.G Smith attributes a list of forty-eight Cheap Repository tracts 
to More; those listed in Smith’s bibliography do not exactly match those in 
Spinney’s bibliography nor in the bibliography of American reprints of the 
 
 
15 
 
Cheap Repository compiled by Harry B. Weiss ("Hannah More’s Cheap 
Repository Tracts in America; Hannah More’s Cheap Repository Tracts in 
America: Part 2").9 Weiss offers a summary of the history of the Cheap 
Repository prior to discussing the publication of the tracts in America, and 
though he freely admits his indebtedness to Spinney and also repeats the 
classic Spinney quotation ‚of the 114 different tracts published to November, 
1797, in the Cheap Repository proper, 49 were written by Hannah More and 
signed ‘Z’‛ Weiss accurately distinguishes between the ‚Cheap Repository 
proper‛  and the seventy-three tracts published by Marshall alone from 
November 1797 to November 1799 ("Hannah More’s Cheap Repository Tracts 
in America" 541). 
Two problems exist with the oft-repeated conclusion that there were 114 
tracts published during the period 1795-1798.  The first is a small anomaly 
relating to an inconsistent application of whether to count or not to count 
tracts entered at Stationer’s Hall for which there is no known copy, in which 
case the count rises to 116 or falls to 112.10 The second problem is more 
substantial.  Spinney explicitly notes the existence of five new tracts published 
                                                 
9 Smith does not give any indication in his bibliography as to which of the works were 
signed and which were anonymous, except those that used ‚Will Chip‛ as More’s 
pseudonym. 
10 An entry into the Stationer’s Hall Register does not mean a tract was distributed. For 
example, ‚The Idle Cobbler‛ was entered in the Register in November 1795; however, 
Spinney contends it was withdrawn from publication and may have been an early issue of 
‚Two Shoemakers. Part III‛ published in March 1796. 
 
 
16 
 
in 1798 by Evans and Hatchard, the new official printers of the Cheap 
Repository, though these are not included in Spinney’s final count (307).  
Spinney claims that at least 2 of the 5 new tracts were by Hannah More, 
though neither these nor any of the other 1798 Evans and Hatchard reprints 
are included in his bibliography (307).  It must be noted that evidence of an 
additional five tracts published by Evans, over and above the five included in 
Spinney’s count, has been uncovered.  If the 10 new ‚authorized‛ tracts from 
1798 are added then the number of tracts (starting with Spinney’s count) 
increases to 127, and More’s count to at least 51.  Chapter Three will detail 
how these ‚numbers‛ play out when the tracts are subjected to a preliminary 
traditional attribution study. 
 
To Z or not to Z 
 
There is an additional number of tracts that are not signed [Z] that More 
later acknowledges to be hers in the various editions of the Works of Hannah 
More and other collections of her poetry, all of which must be added to 
Spinney’s tally to gain a more accurate figure.  For example, of the six ‚tales‛ 
and five ‚ballads‛ included in More’s 1816 Poems, two (The Ploughman’s Ditty 
and Will Chip’s True Rights,) are not listed in Spinney.  Furthermore, the 1835 
American edition of The Complete Works of Hannah More includes 47 poems, 
ballads, or stories first published as part of the Cheap Repository including 
three tracts recorded by Spinney as not being signed [Z] and ‚Here and 
 
 
17 
 
There,‛ one of the 1798 tracts published by Evans, none of which are included 
in Spinney’s count (The Complete Works of Hannah More).11  
However, it was over twenty years ago that Mitzi Myers first cautioned 
against Spinney’s bibliography being considered exhaustive, because it is 
‚incomplete‛ ("Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female 
Ideology" 281, n. 9).  In addition to her contention that the Spinney 
bibliography is ‚incomplete,‛ Myers acknowledges Spinney and Green as the 
relevant bibliographies, and explains that ‚most, but not all, of the tracts More 
wrote herself are reprinted in the various editions of her works, as well as in 
numerous collected editions‛ ("Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social 
Fiction and Female Ideology" 281, n.9).  However, Myers does not provide an 
alternative bibliography or a numerical estimate of More’s contribution, 
beyond stating that: ‚More contributed almost one-half of the hundred odd 
pieces‛ ("Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female 
Ideology" 266).12 Patricia Demers, author of The World of Hannah More (1996), 
also makes no numerical assertions as to the numbers of tracts or More’s 
contribution while footnoting Spinney, Jones and Myers (110). 
                                                 
11 The 1835 edition of More’s Complete Works of Hannah More should be relied upon 
cautiously. It was published after More’s death. The 1830 Cadell Edition should be 
considered as the last authoritative edition of collected work published prior to her death. 
12 Myers explicitly attributes 23 tracts to Hannah More and a further 3 to her sister Sally 
throughout her article, though in the context of the article there is no indication that this is an 
upper limit. 
 
 
18 
 
More’s most recent, and efficacious, literary biographer Anne Stott, 
adroitly describes More as having ‚edit*ed+ the Cheap Repository Tracts‛ and 
argues that ‚overwhelmingly, the Cheap Repository was *More’s+ creation 
and her work‛ (178, 338).  Stott discusses a number of tracts including ‚The 
Market Woman‛ and ‚The Roguish Miller‛ without necessarily explicitly 
attributing them to any author, More or otherwise (182).  Furthermore, Stott 
does not make any numerical claims, while acknowledging her own reliance 
on Spinney and Susan Pederson (169).  Notwithstanding this deficit, Stott 
provides an excellent example of the kind of scholarship one hopes to find in 
relation to an examination of methodology employed in attributing 
authorship of anonymous works.  Stott’s examination and attribution of 
authorship of a number of Cheap Repository tracts to authors other than 
Hannah or Sally More, including Henry Thornton and Zachary Macaulay, is 
proposed on the basis of manuscripts, correspondence and diary evidence 
(182, 95).  For example, Anne Stott attributes ‚Sunday Reading.  The Religious 
advantages of the Present Inhabitants of Great Britain‛ and ‚The Beggarly 
Boy‛ to Henry Thornton, on the basis of his diary entries for 1795 (178).13 Stott 
also quotes from a letter Hannah More wrote Zachary Macaulay dated 14 
January [1796] which discusses a 
                                                 
13 Thornton, Add. MS 7674/1/R, folios. 93,117,118 
 
 
19 
 
Sunday reading [Macaulay] had contributed to the Cheap 
Repository, ‘Miss Mills has been busy at work transcribing your 
Communicant [...] We much approve of what you have done but 
have ventured to abridge in a few instances. Pray don’t forget to 
bring her previous performance, as I dare say she would be 
miserable to have lost it, and I must return the manuscript’‛ 
[italics in original](Stott 195).14  
 
However, Stott does not venture an assessment of which ‚Sunday 
Reading‛ this letter may be referencing as the ‚Communicant‛ and 
understandably so, for there are no tracts which contain this noun, or 
anything similar, in the title.  Notwithstanding, identification of such 
evidence by Stott is of great assistance in seeking external evidence to justify 
an attribution of authorship of individual Cheap Repository tracts. 
Sometimes it appears, at first, that Spinney is not the source relied upon by 
scholars.  However, on further examination it becomes clear that Spinney is in 
fact the root source for bibliographical claims made about Cheap Repository.  
For example, Linda Peterson relies on Susan Pederson’s attribution to Hannah 
More of such tracts as The Riot, The Loyal Sailor; or No Mutineering and Turn the 
Carpet to Hannah More (410).  Susan Pederson in turn describes Hannah More, 
by Mary Jones, as being her source for the attribution of individual tracts, and 
specifically for her contention that More wrote ‚over fifty‛ of the tracts (85).  
However, an examination of Jones reveals that she acknowledges Spinney as 
                                                 
14Hannah  More to Zachary Macaulay, 14 Jan [1796], William Andrews Clark Memorial 
Library, University of California at Los Angeles at Los Angeles, Hannah More, MSS 
 
 
20 
 
her source in her attribution of fifty-one tracts to More.  Jones’s count includes 
two tracts which were not signed *Z+, including the ‚Lancashire Collier Girl‛ 
(272-73; 56 n34).15 
 
Broad Generalisations – Attributing the Cheap Repository in its entirety to Hannah 
More  
 
The diffuse nature of the Cheap Repository enterprise and the intentional 
veil of anonymity which time and subsequent scholarship has sustained has 
inevitably led to broad generalizations as to the scope of More’s authorial 
responsibility. A number of scholars, including Emanuel Green (1902), 
Christine Krueger (1992), Whitney Womack (1999), and Anne Miegon (2002), 
generalize about More’s involvement and contribution to the Cheap Repository 
to such an extent that they effectively attribute it to her in its entirety (Krueger 
14; Womack 39; Miegon 32). 
Emanuel Green’s 1902 Bibliotheca Somersetensis is the earliest and by far the 
largest bibliography of More’s works, though even this thirty-page 
bibliography of works by and about Hannah More is neither exhaustive nor 
definitive.  First, while Green lists 215 separate tracts (cataloguing many of 
their editions and imprints), he implicitly attributes all tracts to Hannah More 
by placing all entries under her name without further clarification or 
                                                 
15 Anne Stott has recently raised evidence that suggested that the authorship of this tract 
remains unresolved. See Stott, Hannah More: The First Victorian  178. 
 
 
21 
 
qualification (63-99).  Green does indicate those with signatures of [Z], [S], [F], 
and [M.].  It is sobering to note that Spinney claims that Green has incorrectly 
described the tract The Old Man, His Children and the Bundle of Sticks as having 
the signature [Z] (317).  The tracts are listed alphabetically rather than 
chronologically with a publication year but without an indication of the 
month of issue, which is intrinsically important to the publication history of 
the series.  There are also many tracts interspersed in Green’s list that Spinney 
later argued were ‚unauthorized‛ tracts in which More had no involvement.  
Moreover, in a further intriguing twist, approximately half a dozen tracts that 
Marshall entered at Stationer’s Hall in 1798-1799 are listed by Green with a 
publication year of 1796 or 1797.  It is possible that Green was mistaken, (or if 
Green did not make a typographical or analytical error) that Marshall may 
have forged the year of publication in an attempt to mask his duplicity in 
profiting from the name and reputation of the Cheap Repository. 
Additionally, there are also numerous tracts with a first publication date 
of 1800, 1809, and 1819 in Green’s bibliography that do not appear in Spinney. 
Because of the ephemeral nature of Cheap Repository tracts, the existence of 
individual tracts listed with a date later than 1798 does not prima facie exclude 
them from the Cheap Repository. Additional tracts may be included in the 
Cheap Repository canon where other extant copies of these tracts are found to 
exist with evidence of a publication date during 1795-1798.  
 
 
22 
 
Failure to Distinguish Unauthorized Marshall Tracts in Cheap Repository 
Criticism 
 
Despite Spinney’s bibliography clarifying the dating parameters of the 
‚authorized‛ Cheap Repository tracts, this explication has not prevented recent 
scholarship from introducing new errors. These errors often arise through 
inclusion of ‚unauthorized‛ Marshall Tracts in discussions and analysis of the 
Cheap Repository without clear qualification. This failure to distinguish the 
imposters from the Repository proper is particularly problematic when 
apocryphal tracts are included in lists of tracts attributed to More, or are 
referenced without annotation or clarification in the midst of discussions 
about More’s contributions.  
In his 1975 discussion of the Cheap Repository’s impact on the genre of the 
short story, Samuel Pickering portrays The Two Cousins: Spare the Rod and Spoil 
the Child, as epitomizing the Cheap Repository, though no attribution is made to 
any particular author (18). However, Spinney identified Spare the Rod as one 
of the unauthorized tracts produced by Marshall in 1798/99 with which More 
had no involvement. Indeed, Spinney lists seventy-three ‚unauthorized‛ 
tracts published by John Marshall between November 1797 and November 
1799, none of which were written by More (306-09). Any numerical 
representation of the Cheap Repository should not include these unauthorized 
Marshall tracts. 
 
 
23 
 
Mitzi Myers is highly critical of Pickering’s failure to separate those 
authentic works of ‚More’s Repository‛ from the ‚spurious continuations‛ 
sold by ‚astute publishers‛ ("Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social 
Fiction and Female Ideology" 280, n.8).16 In some ways, Pickering’s error is not 
surprising as he acknowledges that ‚there are innumerable editions of Cheap 
Repository Tracts [sic], but the one I consulted in the British Museum was often 
neither dated nor paginated‛ (18). Yet a sense of irony endures, because while 
Pickering does not distinguish (or recognize) the unauthorized Marshall 
Tracts of 1798/99, he emphasizes that the Cheap Repository had many imitators 
in the years after 1798 and he discusses these efforts and collections in far 
more detail than he does the Cheap Repository (19).17  
 
The False Assumption That Hannah More Wrote All And Only Those Tracts Signed 
“Z” 
 
Spinney asserted the number of tracts to be attributed to Hannah More as 
‚49‛ because this was the number of tracts he found with the signature *Z+.  
Many scholars have confidently and understandably looked upon [Z] as 
being a proven pseudonym of Hannah More.  Relying on a proven 
                                                 
16 The work Mitzi Myers is criticizing can be found in Samuel F. Pickering, John Locke and 
Children’s Books in Eighteenth Century England (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1981). 
17 Susan Pedersen discusses the incidences of non-repository printers pirating and 
reprinting ‚the more successful tracts were reprinted in the same manner as More's 
chapbooks in the late eighteenth-century ‚ Susan Pedersen, "Hannah More Meets Simple 
Simon: Tracts, Chapbooks, and Popular Culture in Late Eighteenth-Century England," Journal 
of British Studies 25 (1986): 112. 
 
 
24 
 
pseudonym as a sound basis for asserting More’s authorship is in line with 
accepted scholarly practice (Sherbo 7; Altick and Fenstermaker 103).  Anne 
Stott, whose scholarship in relation to the attribution of authorship of 
individual tracts is otherwise a shining light, states confidently and 
emphatically that ‚those marked ‘Z’ were written by Hannah More and those 
marked ‘S’ by Sally‛ (178).  However, there are works contained in the Cheap 
Repository that have been acknowledged by More as her work, but which are 
not signed by either of her pseudonyms ‚Z‛ or ‚Will Chip.‛  For example, the 
first two parts of The Wealthy Farmers were not always signed, and the 
Lancashire Collier Girl, was never signed [Z], yet Hannah More included all of 
these in her 1801 Works of Hannah More.  The situation is further complicated 
by recent uncertainty surrounding the authorship of Lancashire Collier Girl 
incited by evidence, uncovered by Stott, which will be explored below. 
Myers rightly cautions against considering Spinney’s bibliography 
authoritative.  While Myers does not make a summary numerical statement of 
More’s contribution, she does make an unqualified statement that ‚‘Z’ is the 
‚persona of the Repository Tales *More+ wrote herself‛ (271).  During the 
course of her chapter in Schofield and Macheski’s Fetter’d or Free: British 
Women Novelists, 1670-1815 (1986), Myers lists twenty-three tracts.  For all but 
one, The True Heroes; or, The Noble Army of Martyrs, there is evidence to 
suggest that there are imprints in existence with the signature [Z] ("Hannah 
 
 
25 
 
More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology" 273).  The 
True Heroes; or, The Noble Army of Martyrs is one of three tracts, along with 
King Dionysius & Squire Damocles and The Bad Bargain or the World Set up to 
Sale, included in the 1835 American edition of The Complete Works of Hannah 
More and noted in Spinney’s bibliography.  However, Spinney’s bibliography 
records that these three tracts are not signed [Z], and are consequently not 
considered in Spinney’s reckoning (The Complete Works of Hannah More 46, 54, 
129; Spinney 328-30).  All three are listed in Green, while Bad Bargain is also 
included in More’s 1816 Poems (Poems, with a New Introduction by Caroline 
Franklin 285-90).  Three additional tracts, Tis all for the Best, Parley the Porter: an 
allegory, and Here and There are included in the 1830 Cadell edition, along with 
being listed in Green and recorded as being signed [Z], are not included at all 
in Spinney’s bibliography (The Complete Works of Hannah More 89,81,73).18 
Definitively attributing authorship on the basis of a [Z] signature is further 
complicated by the printing history.  Spinney details some of the textual 
variants of the two primary Cheap Repository Printers - Hazard and Marshall.  
An examination of The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain shows the potential pitfalls 
in assuming the certainty of the signature [Z] on an extant copy of a tract in 
ascertaining More’s authorship.  Spinney lists two editions of The Shepherd of 
                                                 
18 Charles Foster attributes ‚’Tis All for the Best‛ to More in Charles I Foster, An Errand of 
Mercy: The Evangelical United Front, 1790-1837 (Chapel Hill: 1960) 293. Foster’s attribution is 
relied upon by Mark Schantz in Schantz, "Religious Tracts, Evangelical Reform, and the 
Market Revolution in Antebellum America," 473. 
 
 
26 
 
Salisbury Plain, one in March and a second between March-May 1795.  The 
former, which he concludes was from Hazard’s press, does not have any 
attribution, while the latter, which Spinney concludes was from Marshall’s, 
has the signature ‚Z‛ on the final page of the tract.  It is this kind of textual 
variation in the appearance of a [Z] signature that makes it difficult to assume 
certainty of an attribution of authorship based on the signature. 
An American Johnson reprint of Shepherd of Salisbury Plain from 1800 
similarly illustrates this point – Part I is not signed, whereas Part II is signed 
[Z] on the final page (23).  However, The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain is not a 
contested work – The Shepherd was reprinted numerous times between 1800 
and More’s death in 1833 under her own name, and indeed it can be 
considered one of the most famous of the Cheap Repository tracts.  Another 
example of signature variations can be found in the examination of an 1800 
Dublin edition of the first two parts of the Two Wealthy Farmers; or the History 
of Mr Bragwell, which are not signed; whereas Spinney notes that the 1795 
Marshall, White and Hazard imprints of these two tracts are signed. 
While it must be acknowledged that it is difficult to establish the absolute 
veracity and the certainty that the signature *Z+ is definitive proof of More’s 
authorship, the appearance of a [Z] signature on the final page of a tract must 
be still considered persuasive and should not be completely discounted 
(Sherbo 7).  Such attributions are complicated by the problematic printing 
 
 
27 
 
history and the fact that More did not include all her contributions to the 
Cheap Repository in collections of her work (Myers "Hannah More's Tracts for 
the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology" 281).  Notwithstanding all of 
the above no scholar has yet completed an internal textual analysis to confirm 
that Hannah More did actually write all those tracts with the attribution [Z], 
even though she claims she wrote under the pseudonym [Z].  Even more 
problematically, no scholar has yet proposed a methodology by which it can 
be persuasively confirmed that More wrote all tracts signed [Z] which do not 
appear in another form specifically acknowledged by More, such as 
collections of More’s work published during her lifetime.  Indeed, without 
further internal textual analysis, despite More’s own statements, there can be 
no definitive declaration that Hannah More is the author of all tracts with a 
[Z] signature. 
 
A Case Study: Lancashire Collier Girl 
 
One tract that offers a complex and convoluted history in terms of 
authorship, while providing a valuable case study, is Lancashire Collier Girl.  
Like a number of other Cheap Repository tracts, ‚Lancashire Collier Girl‛ was a 
fictionalized account of a true story (Koracevic 136; Myers "Hannah More's 
Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology" 282).19 Spinney 
                                                 
19 Anonymous, "The Lancashire Collier Girl: A True Story," Gentleman's Magazine March 
1795: 197-9, 336, 486. For further discussion of the convoluted history of the tract see P 
 
 
28 
 
records that the Repository version was published as part of the Cheap 
Repository in May 1795, under the Hazard and Marshall imprint of that time 
(Bath: Sold by S. Hazard and J. Marshall & R. White, London, 1795) and that 
this edition of the tract was not signed (318).  The lack of signature is 
confirmed by Green for all three editions he lists between 1798 and 1800.  
However, he also indicates that there was a second undated version of the 
tract published by J Evans & Son, Hatchard and Binns (77).  Jones, Myers, and 
Pederson, all attribute ‚Lancashire Collier Girl‛ to More (M. G. Jones 272; 
Myers "Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female 
Ideology" 267; Pedersen 88).  Anne Stott attributes authorship of ‚Lancashire 
Collier Girl‛ to Henry Thornton (178).  Stott has recently traced the 
authorship of this tract and reveals that Henry Thornton asserted that he had 
‚reworked‛ a story by the same name that Hannah More had written, before 
it was published in May, 1795 (178-79).20 
 
Towards a Solution 
 
Tentatively, it is my contention that there were at least 127 tracts published 
as part of the ‚authorized‛ Cheap Repository from March, 1795, to September, 
                                                                                                                                            
Langford, Public and the Propertied Englishman, 1689-1798 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1994) 389. 
20 Stott bases this attribution on a Thornton Manuscript 76741/1/R, fo.96, Cambridge 
University Library, Thornton Papers. 
 
 
29 
 
1798.  Without further textual analysis, it is problematic to give a definitive 
numerical estimation of the contribution of Hannah More – though thus far I 
would propose a tentative estimate of 58.21  
The initial impetus for this thesis was to establish the grounds on which 
scholars justify which of the Cheap Repository tracts are the work of Hannah 
More and to ascertain how they prove the veracity of their attribution of her 
authorship.  However, many scholars simply do not offer a methodological 
justification for their attribution.  This thesis reflects the endeavour to 
establish the individual Cheap Repository tracts which scholars claim to be the 
work of Hannah More; to establish which works were acknowledged 
explicitly, or implicitly by More herself, including those that are not signed 
[Z] which are acknowledged.  Furthermore, G.H. Spinney’s commonly relied 
upon bibliography must be reconciled with the work of scholars over the last 
seventy years.  
Some progress has been made in attempting to compile a bibliography of 
works published as part of the Cheap Repository, including the editions, 
imprints, textual variations, and collections in which they are included, as 
                                                 
21 Although More included a number of the multi-part tracts in her Works as one work, in 
my estimation of More’s numerical contribution to the Cheap Repository each part (tract) will 
be considered one work if the part was originally published as a separate and distinct work. 
Myers has pragmatically termed these ‚short novels on the installment plan.‛ See Mitzi 
Myers, "Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology," Fetter'd or 
Free?: British Women Novelists, 1670-1815, eds. Mary Anne Schofield and Cecilia Macheski 
(Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1986) 266. 
 
 
30 
 
well as internal attributions and acknowledgement of authorship by possible 
contributors in contemporaneous external sources.  Scholarly attributions of 
authorship and details of manuscript holdings are included as far as is 
possible.  The Appendix represents the fruit of this labor. 
Further research would benefit all scholars interested in the Cheap 
Repository and the roles of Hannah More and other contributors.  Resolving 
the authorship of the Cheap Repository must occur before further literary 
analysis of the individual tracts.  Chapter Two will describe methodologies 
for both traditional and non-traditional attribution studies and discuss how 
these apply to the Cheap Repository. 
 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER TWO 
 
Attributing Authorship: Traditional and Non-traditional Authorial 
Attribution and Eighteenth-Century Literature 
 
 
Authorship, especially of anonymous works, can be a contentious issue 
and one which fundamentally affects literary criticism.  One important aspect 
of this study is to determine techniques that could be applied to establish the 
authorship of anonymous tracts in the Cheap Repository, and which could be 
used to confirm Hannah More as being the author of those tracts signed [Z].  
This chapter will offer a brief examination of authorship attribution 
theory, comparing traditional and non-traditional attribution methodologies 
in order to assess which methodology is most applicable to the Cheap 
Repository.  This chapter will define and distinguish non-traditional textual 
scholarship from traditional textual analysis before exploring the use of both 
traditional and non-traditional methodologies in the context of anonymous 
eighteenth-century literature.  Finally, this chapter will briefly discuss the 
perceived benefits and limitations of authorial attribution using non-
traditional methods before concluding with a discussion of the methodologies 
which are most applicable to the Cheap Repository Tracts.  Chapter Three will 
apply the theories discussed in this chapter. 
 
 
32 
 
For the purposes of authorial attribution, a non-traditional attribution 
study is one which employs stylometry.  Stylometry is the use of statistics, 
calculated by computer, to undertake an internal stylistic analysis of texts in 
order to determine the identity of the author.  Descriptive stylistics (also 
known as Forensic Stylistics or Forensic Linguistics) takes results from the 
statistical analysis provided by stylometry and attempts to describe the 
distinguishing features of the author’s literary style (McMenamin 45).  By 
elimination, traditional textual analysis is that which relies on non-
technologically assisted means and uses either, or both, internal and external 
textual evidence to make attributions of likely authorship.  
In the present research environment which has become so dependent on, 
and has benefited greatly, from technological innovation, these distinctions 
may seem outdated.  There is nonetheless a clear difference between 
traditional literary scholarship which seeks out evidence (both internal and 
external) for attribution of authorship of a Questioned Document (QD ) and 
the numerically based analyses that comprise a non-traditional attribution 
study.1 As a consequence of recent technological developments, traditional 
attribution studies often extensively employ ‚technological‛ means in the 
search for internal and external evidence to support an attribution of 
                                                 
1 Questioned document (QD) is Don Foster’s term for those texts whose authorship is 
unresolved Donald W Foster, "Commentary: In the Name of the Author," New Literary History 
33.2 (2002). 
 
 
33 
 
authorship.  For example, searchable electronic texts may reduce time needed 
for research.  Rudman and others have asserted that sound (and successful) 
bibliographical scholarship will employ a combination of traditional and non-
traditional methods ("The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions" 359; D. W. Foster 375).  
 
Anonymous Authorship in the Eighteenth-Century 
 
An anonymous publication is ‚a publication that does not give reference 
to the legal name of the empirical writer‛ (Griffin 878-79).  In addition to 
unsigned works, all forms of ‚pseudonymity and fictitious authorship‛ 
including works signed with initials, phrases such as ‚’By a Lady,’ and ‘By 
the author of’‛ can be categorised as anonymous (Griffin 878-79).  The 
motivations for, and functions of, anonymous and pseudonymous authorship 
in the relation to the Cheap Repository Tracts will be discussed further in 
Chapter Four.  Nonetheless, the prevalence of anonymous works and the 
applicability of authorial attribution methodology to eighteenth-century 
studies must be briefly considered.  According to a study by James Raven, 
over 80 percent of all novels published in Britain between 1750 and 1790 were 
published anonymously (143). Though this is a study of novels and not 
pamphlets, this study suggests that during the 1790s 62% of all novels were 
published anonymously (Raven 144). Interestingly this figure fell again to less 
than 50% in the first decade of the nineteenth century before rising again to 
 
 
34 
 
80% by 1820 (144). Possibly because of the ephemeral nature of the ha’penny 
tracts and pamphlets printed on low quality paper, no overarching study of 
the percentage of tracts published anonymously, akin to Raven’s study of 
Eighteenth- century novels, has been conducted. Nonetheless, it is clear that a 
large number of authorship attribution problems exist in the long eighteenth-
century. 
Since the Licensing Act (1662) lapsed in 1695, booksellers were no longer 
required by law to register books at Stationers Hall (Astbury 298).2 However, 
it becomes apparent from an examination of the Stationer’s Hall records that 
almost all, but not all, Cheap Repository Tracts were entered at Stationer’s Hall. 
The records for each of the Cheap Repository Tracts were entered 
predominantly by Hannah More, and towards the end by the authorized 
printers, Hazard and Marshall (Spinney).  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 Until the Copyright Act (1814) stationers could legally register and publish all 
manuscripts that came into their possession John Feather, "The English Book Trade and the 
Law," Publishing History 12 (1982): 52.. Once registered, the copyright was vested in the 
stationer of record, unless some other agreement was reached between author and stationer 
(Griffin 878). This did not, however, give a stationer unmitigated rights to attribute the 
manuscript to the actual author, or any other person, without their permission.  Legally, and 
morally, the writer’s name remained theirs, until their death. If nothing else, (especially in the 
case of female authors) an author’s name was their property over which they retained moral 
and commercial rights and the choice about whether to allow the stationer to publish the 
work with their name attached. 
 
 
 
35 
 
Traditional Attribution and Eighteenth-Century Literature 
 
Erdman and Fogel’s 1966 collection Evidence for Authorship was the 
standard text on traditional authorship attribution for close to forty years.  
Much of their methodology remains relevant.  The scholars in this collection, 
including Arthur Sherbo, David V. Erdman, and Ephim Fogel, assert that a 
solid attribution requires both internal and external evidence and anything 
less is ‚insufficient‛ (Sherbo 6; Erdman 68).  Moreover, scholars must be 
diligent in ensuring that the ‚data cited constitute*s+ evidence‛ rather than 
merely novel or anecdotal to the criticism of a text (Erdman and Fogel 
Evidence for Authorship: Essays on Problems of Attribution xiii).  They caution 
that scholars should assess whether the totality of cumulative evidence 
supports a particular attribution before making assertions to that effect.  
Significantly, Fogel particularly emphasises the importance of using a 
combination of internal and external literary analysis in conjunction with 
statistical analysis ("Editorial Note to Part I" 4).  All internal and external 
evidence must be contextualised by the broad historical and literary 
landscape focusing on general patterns rather than ‚isolated details‛ 
("Editorial Note to Part I" 4).  
One method for establishing an attribution of a text with undetermined 
authorship is that of internal textual analysis.  The work of scholars such as 
Don Foster, Stephen Schoenbauum, Ephim Fogel and Arthur Sherbo provide 
 
 
36 
 
a strong basis for utilizing internal textual analysis in conjunction with 
external evidence to attribute particular authorship to anonymous works 
(Sherbo 8; Schoenbauum 10).  
Even though Foster concedes that internal textual analysis will not 
inevitably lead to an attribution, he argues that each person is confined by 
and identifiable on the basis of their own words.  He contends that 
individuals can only say, or write, words they know (13).  Thus intimate 
knowledge of an author’s known writing and the works cited therein, along 
with patterns of word usage, knowledge of grammar, and other writing 
mechanics, may allow a possible attribution to be suggested on the basis of 
the evidence (D. Foster 7).  Foster’s modus operandi is to ‚get inside the head‛ 
of unknown authors by piecing together their literary background – the 
mechanics of their writing (not handwriting analysis) and their intellectual 
and literary education and knowledge – to rule them in or out as a suspect 
(15).  Foster establishes, by analysis of sources quoted or misquoted in the 
works, what their authors have been reading.  Unique or rarely used words, 
syntax and grammar, and phrases and compound words in an unknown 
work are compared with known writings of suspected authors (105-08, 11-12, 
66-67).  Sentence construction, spelling, punctuation, and syntax (culturally 
derived or habitual) may create patterns that tend towards inferences of 
attribution of an anonymous work (8).  Finally, Foster argues that an 
 
 
37 
 
unknown work may also contain attitudes towards certain groups, 
philosophical theories, and historical events (9).  
Compilation of internal evidence depends on the analysis of two aspects 
of a QD, style and ideas.  Aspects of style include measurement and analysis 
of sentence length and structure, verb and phrase repetition and vocabulary, 
‚characteristic imagery,‛ allusions and demonstrations of learning and 
education, ‚peculiarity of spelling and punctuation,‛ and parallels with 
known works of the suspect author, especially where the QD is dated close to 
the known work (Sherbo 7).3  For eighteenth-century texts one must be 
particularly careful to distinguish the spelling and punctuation proclivities of 
the author from those of the compositor (Sherbo 7).  Style must be considered 
in light of comparable audiences and language usage by class and profession, 
and commonly held ideas at the time of writing of the QD.  
The analysis of ideas is less easily quantifiable.  While a concordance of 
subjects, comprising vocabulary, imagery, and phrase repetition may be 
useful to establish a baseline of ideas present, the scholar’s role is to gauge 
whether the spirit of the ideas in the QD are ‚consonant with those of the 
putative author‛ unless a convincing argument can be constructed to explain 
the dissonance.  Sherbo cautions that scholars must be sensitive to the 
                                                 
3 Matters of structure include antithesis, balance, parallelism, and repetition. Vocabulary 
analysis may include an assessment of whether word use is predominantly polysyllabic or 
not, Latinate or not, as well as calculating parts-of-speech frequency.  
 
 
38 
 
possibility of irony and satire, especially when the views expressed in the QD 
are in ‚direct and deliberate conflict‛ with the known views of a suspect 
author (8).  An author’s ideas may be established by examining external 
evidence including letters, diaries, recorded conversations, and comments by 
contemporaries.  However, the weight given to particular ideas must also be 
tempered by the reality that over time an author’s ideas often change. 
In terms of weighting, Sherbo argues persuasively that internal evidence 
prevails over all else ‚short of an unequivocal acknowledgement by the 
author himself‛ (7).  External evidence is, by comparison, ancillary (Sherbo 7).  
However, it may be the cumulative effect of external evidence in conjunction 
with internal evidence that presents a preponderance of evidence supporting 
a particular attribution.  Indeed, though tenuous, external evidence is often 
legitimately invoked in support of an attribution (Sherbo 10).  The 
combination of a number of these external factual findings is, Sherbo argues, 
of ‚greater importance to the skeptically minded than the evidence of style 
and ideas‛ (7).  Examples of persuasive external evidence include attribution 
of a QD by a contemporary or near contemporary of the author (whether 
anonymous or named), publication of the QD in a periodical during a time-
period in which the suspect author is known to have been a contributor, the 
publication of the QD ‚cheek by jowl, or sandwiched between‛ other 
‚canonical‛ works in a collection or series of which the suspect author is the 
 
 
39 
 
known author, the date of publication, and a ‚pseudonym or distinguishing 
signature which is associated with canonical pieces‛ (Sherbo 7). 
 
Non-Traditional Textual Scholarship and Eighteenth-Century Literature 
 
The basic principle behind non-traditional authorship attribution is that a 
high degree of objective certainty can be achieved through the use of 
computer-assisted calculation of statistics, and stylometrics (Rudman "Non-
Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies in Eighteenth Century Literature, 
Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer").  The underlying assumption is that 
each author has an identifiable and unique style (1).  Sometimes described as 
forensic literary theory, non-traditional textual analysis applies 
computational linguistics to attribute authorship for anonymous documents.4 
The field of non-traditional attribution studies is generally traced back to the 
late nineteenth-century to the work of T.C. Mendenhall, Lucius Sherman, and 
William Benjamin Smith, who published under the pen name Conrad Mascol.  
Mendenhall advanced the concept of the ‚curve of style,‛ while Sherman is 
acknowledged as being the first to explore the idea of sentence length as an 
indicator of style and authorship (Mendenhall 237; Sherman 8).  These studies 
                                                 
4 Forensic literary analysis is also a label used by some in the law enforcement and 
intelligence community to denote the use of literary analysis systematically, or forensically, to 
further law enforcement objectives which employs both traditional (internal and external 
evidence-based research) and non-traditional means to make an attribution. See Moshe 
Koppel, Jonathon Schler and Eran Messeri, "Authorship Attribution in Law Enforcement 
Scenarios," NATO Meeting on Security Informatics and Terrorism (Beer Sheva, Israel: 2007), vol, 
Foster, "Commentary: In the Name of the Author." 
 
 
40 
 
are considered seminal in the field even though they make use of stylistics 
and statistics but not the computer.  Over the intervening century, scholarship 
has been limited to isolated pockets of interest distinguished by divergent 
research in the literary and computational aspects of attribution studies 
(Craig 103).  As computational speed has increased and scholarly literacy of 
computer-assisted calculations of statistics and stylistics has improved, 
however, so too has scholarly interest in the field.  In the last forty years alone 
there have been over 300 articles on the topic of non-traditional attribution 
studies (Rudman "The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions" 351).  Interest, however, does not necessarily equate with sound or 
useful results. 
In 2002, Rudman concluded that most non-traditional authorship studies 
of eighteenth-century literature are not valid ("Non-Traditional Authorship 
Attribution Studies in Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and 
the Computer" 10).  One positive exception identified by Rudman is the study 
by Sigelman et al of fifteen eighteenth-century pamphleteers (Sigelman, 
Martindale and McKenzie).  For a non-traditional study to be considered 
valid, under Rudman’s framework, it must be supported by a rigorous 
experiment design and the best possible copy text.5 The best copy text is the 
                                                 
5 One avoidable error in experimental design is the common failure to keep a randomly 
selected sub-set of the suspect author’s known writing in reserve to be used as a control. 
Another is using only tests and algorithms that prove pre-conceived theories while 
 
 
41 
 
closest possible text to the original holograph (Rudman "The State of 
Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions" 356).  The further away 
from the original holograph, the more likely the text has suffered corruption.  
Rudman identifies at least three different types of corruption that QDs can 
suffer: authorial, editorial, and experimental (357).  Authorial corruption 
includes plagiarism or imitation, lengthy quotations, borrowing from the 
author’s earlier work, and works subject to translation (357).  Editorial 
corruption includes typesetting errors, changes to comply with a publisher’s 
style sheet, and emendations by the publisher or overzealous editor to supply 
missing text from damaged manuscripts (357).  Finally, experimental 
corruption includes the modernization of spelling, lemmatizing, transcription 
errors, algorithmic or program bugs including inappropriately handling of 
systematic errors such as standard deviations and statistical fluctuations, and 
the incorrect classification of allomorphs (358).  Scholars must be prepared, 
Rudman argues, to reach an assessment that the non-traditional attribution 
study proposed cannot be successfully completed because an essential 
element is not available or cannot be examined in a rigorous or statistically 
sound manner (357).  Nonetheless, a proposed methodology for a non-
traditional attribution can be expressed in six steps.  The following is based 
                                                                                                                                           
discarding those that cause problems with that theory. See Joseph Rudman, "The State of 
Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions," Computers and the Humanities 31 (1998): 
358.  
 
 
42 
 
on Rudman’s methodological steps ("Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution 
Studies in Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the 
Computer").  
1. Enter Questioned Document (QD ) and add Text Encoding   
            Initiative (TEI) Coding.6 
2. Enter the samples of known-author texts and add the TEI   
            coding.  Texts should be of a similar genre and published within  
             (+ or -) five years of the QD.7 
3. Enter a substantial random sample of texts and add the TEI 
coding.  These will have the same genre and time constraints as 
the known-author texts.  This is a random sample of as many 
authors as possible within the constraints which acts as an 
experimental control.  Rudman exhorts that the larger the 
sample the lower the statistical error affecting the result ("Non-
Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies in Eighteenth 
Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer" 9). 
                                                 
6 Text must be typed by a human. Using an optical character reader results in an 
unacceptably high error rate, around 40 percent. TEI coding enables automated analysis of 
style markers. For more information see Joseph Rudman, Non-Traditional Authorship 
Attribution Studies in Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer, 2002, 
Available: http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg02/rudman.html, 10 March 2009. 
 
7  For a non-traditional attribution study to be successful the authorship of the known 
texts must be certain. Without the touchstone of known-author texts a non-traditional 
authorship attribution study will inevitably fail. A random sample of the known-author texts 
needs to be kept in reserve to act as a control set. The control sample is used to test the 
accuracy of the algorithms used in measuring the similarity between the QD and the known-
author texts. 
 
 
43 
 
4. Analyse the texts stylistically.  First, the texts must be ‚cleaned‛ 
of corrupting data, including quotes (of others, and of known 
author’s earlier works), translations, editorial corruption and 
orthographic errors (Rudman "Non-Traditional Authorship 
Attribution Studies in Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, 
Statistics, and the Computer" 9).  Second, identify all style 
markers that the known-author uses consistently.  Third, 
compare the known-author’s usage of these style markers to the 
writers in the random sample.  Finally, compare the known-
author’s usage of these style markers to the QD. 
5.  Analyse the results statistically.  As with the stylistic analysis, 
Rudman warns scholars to investigate and understand the 
assumptions and methodology of the computer program used 
for analysis, especially when using commercial computer 
programs (9).  Important underlying assumptions include the 
definition of word and sentence.    
6.  Did suspect author A write QD?  The answer should be in terms 
of probability because ‚no non-traditional authorship 
attribution study can say with 100% surety that an author wrote 
a given work‛ (9). 
 
 
44 
 
Rudman contended in 1998 that despite the growing interest over the 
previous 30 years in non-traditional authorial attribution there was no single 
widely accepted or definitive methodology for non-traditional attribution 
studies ("The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions" 
352).  Moreover, for every scholar who proposes a particular attribution 
method, or a variation on a method, Rudman argues that there is another 
scholar who presents a counter-argument identifying ‚real or imagined 
crucial shortcomings‛ ("The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions" 352).  In the last ten years no less than three scholars, Patrick Juola 
(2006), Efstathios Stamatatos (2008), and David L. Hoover (2008), have offered 
their own overviews and evaluation of the field of non-traditional attribution 
studies.  
Stylistics is the study and description of the choices of linguistic 
expression that are characteristic of a group or an individual in a specific 
communicative setting, including a literary work.  As an aspect of non-
traditional attribution studies, stylistics focuses on establishing those features 
(also referred to as style markers)  which are used consistently by a given 
author regardless of the document, but which might (hopefully) be used 
differently by different authors.  It is the latter set, those used differently by 
different authors, which are, as Koppel et al concede, the most challenging to 
distinguish (3).  While there is much debate about the relative strength of 
 
 
45 
 
different ‚machine-learning algorithms‛ by which the QDs and known-author 
control texts can be compared and analysed, the most significant variable in 
non-traditional attribution studies are those style markers identified as the 
points of comparison.8 Once texts are ‚cleaned‛ of corrupting data, the 
known-author texts can be translated into ‚numerical vectors‛ in order to 
capture measurements of those style markers identified as points of 
comparison.  These vectors can then be put through a learning algorithm to 
establish a classifier against which the QD can be compared for the purposes 
of attribution (Koppel, Schler and Messeri 2).9 The result is recorded as a 
percentage measuring the similarity between the classifier and the QD. 
The significance of the choice of style markers and features in establishing 
the points of comparison cannot be underestimated and, second only to the 
quality of the source text chosen (to be the QD), is the most important 
                                                 
8 Rudman contends that for every algorithm there are studies which demonstrate its 
usefulness and other studies to point out its limitations and flaws. Similarly, Koppel et al 
contends that the style markers are far more significant than the choice of learning algorithm 
and that ‚the good ones all give pretty much the same results‛ Rudman, "The State of 
Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions," 352, Koppel, Schler and Messeri, 
"Authorship Attribution in Law Enforcement Scenarios," vol., 2. 
 
9 Some of most commonly accepted learning algorithms include linear Support Vector 
Machines (SVM), considered by Koppel et al to be the de facto standard, Bayesian Regression, 
and ‚real-valued balanced Winnow‛ which is a kind of exponential gradient algorithm; see 
Koppel, Schler and Messeri, "Authorship Attribution in Law Enforcement Scenarios," vol., 4..  
For more information about linear SVM see T Joachims, "Text Categorization with Support 
Vector Machines: Learning with Many Relevant Features," In Proc. 10th European Conference 
on Machine Learning.ECML-98 (1998): 137-42.  For more information about real-valued 
balanced Winnow, see I Dagan, Y Karov and D Roth, "Mistake-Driven Learning in Text 
Categorization," In Proc. 2nd Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 
EMNLP-97 (1997): 55-63, N Littlestone, "Learning Quickly When Irrelevant Attributes 
Abound: A New Linear-Threshold Algorithm," Machine Learning 2.4 (1987): 285-318. 
 
 
46 
 
contributor to the veracity of the results achieved (Koppel, Schler and Messeri 
2-3; Stamatatos 11).  While over a thousand style markers have been 
described, some of the most important features for categorizing style include 
Function words, Syntax, Systemic Functional Linguistic (SFL) trees, 
Morphology, Complexity Measures, and Idiosyncrasies.10 Described by 
Koppel et al as the ‚ancestor of all stylistic features for authorship analysis,‛ 
function words are those like ‚and,‛ ‚of,‛ ‚the,‛ and ‚if‛ which do not relate 
strongly to content (3).  Mosteller and Wallace’s 1964 study of the Federalist 
papers is still considered to be the pre-eminent work explaining and utilising 
function words in a non-traditional authorial attribution study (F. Mosteller 
and D. Wallace 64).  Syntactic habits have been used by some scholars, 
including Foster, to distinguish between authors (11-12).  Koppel et al argue 
that an examination of the frequency with which authors use ‚particular 
sequences of parts-of-speech‛ (POS), measured by POS n-gram, is more 
productive than syntax alone, though it will also give indirect insight into 
syntax (3).11 Koppel’s approach, Systemic Functional Linguistic (SFL) trees, 
incorporates Function words and POS in a more generalised approach where 
analysis is conducted in a graduated manner, moving from kinds of each part 
                                                 
10 Rudman argues strongly that it is important not to discount any style markers until you 
can show in a given case study that they are not of statistical relevance. Moreover, certain 
style markers should not be privileged simply because they were effective in another study. 
See Rudman, "The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions," 361. 
 
11 In n-gram, n refers to frequency. 
 
 
47 
 
of speech through to the most specific and particular until one reaches ‚actual 
function words‛ (3). 
While not always particularly useful in relation to English texts, the 
frequency of the use of grammatical prefixes and suffixes, termed 
morphology, can be instructive.12 Prefixes may include ‚re‛ and ‚un.‛ 
Suffixes include ‚ing,‛ ‚ly,‛ and ‚es.‛  Foster suggests that morphology and 
mistakes in the use of English grammar are particularly useful in relation to 
establishing whether texts were written by authors from non-English 
speaking backgrounds (106-08).   
Features which can be grouped under the label ‚Complexity Measures‛ 
are those possible markers of authorial style including average word length, 
sentence length, various entropy measures, type/token ratio, and hapax 
legomena.13 These were the first, historically speaking, features examined as 
possible style markers (Mendenhall). 
Finally, features such as neologisms, exotic syntax, and compound word 
use, have been employed as style markers by some scholars as weighted 
elements in attribution studies.  The use of authorial idiosyncrasies in 
                                                 
12 Koppel argues that for languages like Arabic and Hebrew morphology is a crucial style 
marker, because in these languages many of the function words that make up the English 
language do not exist as separate words and are, thus, only distinguishable through an 
analysis of morphology; see Koppel, Schler and Messeri, "Authorship Attribution in Law 
Enforcement Scenarios," vol., 3. 
 
13 An early, significant, study of average sentence length, which is still considered 
influential is that by G.U. Yule, "On Sentence Length as a Statistical Characteristic of Style in 
Prose with Application to Two Cases of Disputed Authorship," Biometrika 30 (1938). 
 
 
48 
 
attributions is a key feature of Don Foster’s work (66-67).  However, Koppel 
questions their utility in relation to edited texts, contending instead that they 
are of the most use in relation to casual or occasional documents, like email 
(4). 
 
Benefits and Limitations of Authorial Attribution Studies 
 
In considering the benefits of attempting to attribute authorship in the 
case of anonymous and pseudonymous authors, it is helpful to weigh up the 
benefit obtained from a potential attribution against the difficulties and 
pitfalls of traditional and non-traditional analysis, including computational 
and stylistic analysis.  As Foster warns, ‚without considering the various 
ways in which the speaker of the text, as well as the speaker(s) in the text, may 
be constituted, attribution becomes a pointless game of pin the tale [sic] on 
the donkey‛ *italics in the original+ (394-95).  
Rudman identifies some of the fatal flaws of non-traditional attribution 
studies (Rudman "The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions").  In addition to poor experimental design and an inappropriate 
copy-text, one of the fatal flaws of a purely non-traditional attribution study 
is triggered when the study fails to exhaust traditional attribution 
methodologies prior to the commencement of a non-traditional study.  Joseph 
Rudman strongly argues; 
 
 
49 
 
Before any non-traditional study is undertaken, a rigorous and 
complete traditional study must be completed -- non-traditional 
methods are tools to be employed by the traditional scholars -- 
and surely not the most important tools‛ ("Non-Traditional 
Authorship Attribution Studies in Eighteenth Century 
Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer" 7). 
 
Moreover, many non-traditional studies limit their analysis to internal 
evidence (understandable when the study is based on stylometrics).  In failing 
to take a holistic approach that employs available external evidence and 
sound literary analysis, scholars who ignore the broader context of a QD are 
setting themselves up for nonsensical results that contribute little to 
bibliographical scholarship.  As Rudman declares, ‚Simply using statistics 
does not give validity to attribution studies.  Too many papers place too 
much emphasis on statistical technique – they try to create an aura of 
scientific invincibility without scientific rigour‛ ("The State of Authorship 
Studies: Some Problems and Solutions" 355).  Indeed, it is rare for statistical 
analysis to provide anything resembling conclusive answers.  
Attributing an anonymous work to an author can dramatically affect 
scholarly reception of that author.  However, the point of identifying 
anonymous or pseudonymous authorship is not merely to add to the known 
canon of an author.  Hugh Craig argues that one corollary of attribution 
studies is the opportunity to describe and interpret an author’s style (Craig 
103).  Indeed, Craig argues that descriptive stylistics (including statistical 
results which support traditional internal evidence based textual analysis) can 
 
 
50 
 
help confirm the validity of authorial attribution made through the use of 
traditional methodologies (Craig 103).   
 
Applying Attribution Theory To The Cheap Repository Tracts 
 
Before embarking on a full scale authorial attribution study by non-
traditional means, the sources and results of traditional attribution study 
must be exhausted ("Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies in 
Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer" 7-9).  
A full traditional textual analysis of the Cheap Repository has not yet been 
undertaken by scholars.  Completing a traditional authorial attribution study 
will be a long and tedious enterprise, and one which this study cannot hope 
to conclude exhaustively.  Rather, this thesis is about clearly articulating the 
problem of questioned authorship as it relates to the Cheap Repository.  In 
elucidating the problem and laying out the current state of criticism, the aim 
is to unravel the tangled and confused bibliographical scholarship that 
surrounds the collection.  In addition to the compilation of a comprehensive 
bibliography detailing all 127 Cheap Repository Tracts with attributions of 
authorship for each individual tract, a comprehensive traditional study of the 
Cheap Repository Tracts should also include the compilation of a concordance 
of More’s known works in the Cheap Repository.  Such a concordance would 
serve to establish a base-line for vocabulary use, and ideas.  
 
 
51 
 
This chapter has established that the scholarly standard of proof in the 
context of a traditional or non-traditional attribution study is one of a 
reasonable preponderance of evidence.  Moreover, where the totality of 
cumulative evidence supports a particular attribution it should be expressed 
in terms of probability. 
Moreover, Rudman’s persuasive critique of non-traditional textual 
analysis in the context of authorial attribution demonstrates that it is 
imperative of all the elements for a valid non-traditional study to be present 
prior to embarking on a non-traditional study of the Cheap Repository Tracts.  
In the case of the Repository the need for an exhaustive traditional attribution 
study must necessarily result in the conclusion that not all elements are 
present for the conduct of a non-traditional study.  An assessment that not all 
elements for a non-traditional study are currently present is still a helpful 
contribution to bibliographic scholarship, even if it does not result in a likely 
attribution (Fitzpatrick 97). 
An effective non-traditional attribution study will result in an assessment 
of probable, inconclusive, or unlikely authorship.  This assessment will be 
achieved by testing tracts (QD) against known documents by, in the first 
instance, Hannah More (and then other possible contributors).  Where there is  
a closed set of documents and a single author against whose canon of known 
documents the QD can be compared, as in this case, it is known as a ‚vanilla 
 
 
52 
 
problem‛ (Koppel, Schler and Bonchek-Dokow 2).  While Mosteller and 
Wallace consider this type of problem a simple test of homogeneity, Rudman 
considers the affirmation of authorship to be much more complex than an 
open problem (F. Mosteller and D. L. Wallace 275; Rudman 360).  A non-
traditional study of the Cheap Repository Tracts will hopefully serve to 
statistically support assertions of texts labelled [Z] as the work of Hannah 
More, particularly in the case of those where more than one source text have 
different signatures, for example, the presence of [Z] on one text and the lack 
of any signature on another.  A non-traditional study may help to resolve 
contentions surrounding proposed attributions of authorship of all other 
tracts to authors other than Hannah More but within the circle identified and 
proposed by scholars.   
For those tracts (signed [Z] but considered problematic) for which an 
assessment of ‚inconclusive‛ or ‚unlikely‛ is reached, along with all other 
anonymous and pseudonymous tracts from the Cheap Repository, the problem 
is anything but vanilla.  This problem can be categorised as complex, even 
though it can be resolved in stages.  After More has been eliminated as a 
probable author, analyses of other known works by other suspect authors 
identified by scholars as possible contributors to the Cheap Repository should 
be conducted.  In contrast to the earlier ‚supposed‛ vanilla problem, Rudman 
argues that a study of anonymous works where there are a small number, 
 
 
53 
 
two to four, of potential authors is the least complicated of attribution 
problem types and has the most legitimate studies on which to model a 
successful experiment ("The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions" 360).  
After analyses of this initial group of  suspect authors is made, any tracts 
for which an attribution has not been made will need to be considered in light 
of a broader pool of suspect authors from More’s circle in eighteenth-century 
Britain.  In both the second and third situations above, once a small, workable 
pool of suspect authors has been established, the purpose of the experiment is 
to assess which of the suspect authors is most likely to be the author of the 
QD.  However, the degree of probability that one of these suspect authors is 
the likely author must be weighed against the potential for error, including 
deception by the author to mask their identity (360).  Foster’s study of Primary 
Colours and David Holmes’ study of Cassandra are examples of legitimate 
studies addressing this kind of attribution problem (D. Foster; Holmes 7).  
The final type of attribution problem applicable to the Cheap Repository is the 
attribution of authorship for works which external evidence suggests are the 
result of collaboration.  Anonymous works which are known to be the work 
of more than one author present a particular attribution challenge.   
The sheer amount of data required for a full attribution study of the Cheap 
Repository is almost overwhelming, even though Koppel et al are persuasive 
 
 
54 
 
in their argument that a high degree of accuracy in attribution of QD can be 
made comparing the anonymous text with samples of known-author text as 
small as 500-1000 words.  When establishing authorship of a QD where a 
closed set of suspect authors exists and there is a ‚reasonable amount of 
known text for each author‛ (500 words or more), Koppel contends that non-
traditional attribution studies can yield attribution accuracy ‚well above 
90%‛ (Koppel, Schler and Messeri 4).  In order to maintain scholarly integrity, 
Koppel et al’s governing principle can be productively applied to a non-
traditional authorial attribution of the Cheap Repository.  Koppel contends that 
attributions can only be made in terms of degrees of probability; that is to say 
that the results will be expressed in terms of the difference between the most 
similar and the second most similar and so on.  Koppel goes on to argue that 
anything short of high probability should be labelled as ‚I don’t know‛ until 
more, or better, evidence is found (8).  In terms of the amount of text needed 
there is some disagreement.  Koppel et al used text lengths of 600 words to 
achieve 84 percent accuracy when attributing snippets to one of 10,000 
candidate authors, and 200 word snippets to achieve 82 percent accuracy 
from the same pool, when holding themselves to the standard which allows a 
conclusion of ‚I don’t know‛ or insufficient information rather than requiring 
an attribution (9).  
 
 
55 
 
However, this leaves the task of identifying appropriate electronic source 
texts, or texts that can be put into electronic form.  The best possible copy text 
is, according to Rudman, the text that is ‚as close to the original holograph as 
possible – each stage of removal introduces systematic and other errors that 
may be fatal‛ ("The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and 
Solutions" 356).  Eighteenth Century Collections Online is one source for 
electronic copies of tracts -– but this collection does not necessarily present 
the ‚best‛ texts.  There is no consistency, for example, in the editions and 
reprints of texts included; the collection indiscriminately includes the original 
editions of the authorized printers published in Bath or London as well as 
reprints of tracts published in Philadelphia and Dublin without distinction.  
Chapter Three presents a catalogue of each of the 127 tracts of the Cheap 
Repository and identifies the author where possible.  This chapter also 
identifies those tracts for which authorship is not easily established on the 
basis of internal or external evidence.  It is in relation to these problematic 
tracts that a non-traditional attribution study will likely prove efficacious.  
 
  
 
 
56 
 
 
 
CHAPTER THREE 
 
Authorship and the Cheap Repository: Affirming Unproblematic Texts, 
Explicating Problematic Texts, and Attempting Authorial Attributions 
 
 
As Chapter One detailed, attribution of individual tracts has been patchy 
at best, and methodological justification for those attributions have been 
scarcer still.  More has often been treated as the default author of all tracts 
without reference to the tracts themselves.  Chapter Two described both 
traditional and non-traditional methodology and concluded that an 
exhaustive traditional attribution study had not yet been completed on the 
Cheap Repository Tracts.  This chapter makes strides in the effort to complete 
an exhaustive traditional attribution study.  This chapter will apply the 
traditional authorship attribution theory discussed in Chapter Two, affirming 
unproblematic texts from the Cheap Repository and justifying the assertion of 
their unproblematic nature in the context of the current state of scholarship.  
This chapter identifies those tracts which can be considered problematic texts 
in terms of attribution and describes possible methodological steps for 
clarification of the authorial problem. 
The narrative of this chapter, including references to other scholars’ work 
on various editions of collected Cheap Repository Tracts and the conclusions 
they reach as well as the presence of individual tracts in editions of More’s 
 
 
57 
 
Collected Works, is drawn from a bibliography of the Cheap Repository Tracts 
which can be found in the Appendix.  The Appendix is presented in table 
form and includes, for each individual tract: dating of each tract based on the 
Stationer’s Hall Register, original publication details, Spinney’s numbering 
matrix, title variations, details of reprints and later editions, inclusion in 
editions of collected tracts and details of holding libraries, along with 
information about pseudonyms on various versions of the tracts, whether 
they have been acknowledged by More in editions of her Collected Works or 
elsewhere. Finally, the appendix records the attributions to More and others 
made by scholars.  The key to abbreviations used throughout the appendix 
can be found on its final page.   
The Cheap Repository Tracts comprise 127 tracts between March, 1795, and 
September, 1798.  More’s day-to-day involvement ceased in November 1797, 
and the Cheap Repository was ‚closed‛ in September 1798.  The 10 Repository 
tracts published between November 1797 and September 1798 are referred to 
as the ‚Evans‛ tracts because they were printed exclusively by J. Evans.  This 
chapter lists the titles of 43 tracts which can be attributed unproblematically to 
Hannah More.  However, there are 14 more tracts signed [Z] but not included 
in compilations of More’s works published during her lifetime.  These tracts 
could be attributed to More on the basis of the pseudonym; but attribution is 
here reserved pending further examination (including a non-traditional 
 
 
58 
 
attribution study).  There could be additional tracts which were not signed 
and not included in compilations of her work but which were also written by 
More.  This chapter argues that attribution of these tracts may only be 
established through a non-traditional attribution study.  In summary, in 
contrast to the oft-repeated claim that More was responsible for 49 tracts, 
which reflects Spinney’s observation of 49 tracts signed [Z] and held by the 
British library in 1939, More wrote at least 43 and more likely about 57 of the 
Cheap Repository tracts.  
 
Applying Previous Bibliographies to the Authorship Problem 
 
Drawing from the standard accepted bibliographies is a valid scholarly 
approach to establishing the canon of the Cheap Repository and the authors of 
individual tracts.  Chapter One described the ways in which scholars have 
relied upon the primary bibliographies of the Cheap Repository.  As Chapter 
One observed, it is important to clearly note the scope of each bibliographical 
study.  As mentioned there, Spinney’s bibliography details the Cheap 
Repository Tracts held by the British Library in 1939.  Spinney’s methodology 
for the dating of individual tracts is sound.  In dating the publication dates of 
each individual tract, Spinney draws upon the Stationer’s Hall Register, in 
conjunction with letters and other external evidence.  The Stationer’s Hall 
Register is the primary document supporting the dates of publication, though 
even this document is not an exhaustive record, as registration was not legally 
 
 
59 
 
required.  The Register does not give indication as to authorship, except in a 
small number of cases, because the names of tracts are listed with the name of 
the author or the name of the copyright holder, which may be a printer rather 
than an author (Halkett and Laing).  In listing their names as author or 
publisher, the Stationers’ Hall Register directly connects Hannah and Sally 
[Sarah] More to the Cheap Repository.  Money from the subscriptions 
supported the printing of the tracts, and consequently the copyright remained 
vested in More rather than being conferred upon the printer.  My own 
examination of the Stationer’s Hall Register affirms Spinney’s record on almost 
every point.  If a tract was not included in the Register, then Spinney offers an 
approximate date based on internal evidence including context and 
advertisements.  As such, Spinney’s dating offers persuasive guidance and 
forms the basis for my own dating in Appendix. 
In contrast, Green’s bibliography should be relied upon with caution when 
dating individual tracts.  At least two dozen tracts are dated one to three 
years earlier than the dates recorded in the Stationer’s Hall Register and 
provided by Spinney.  The tracts included in editions of compiled Repository 
tracts originally published in the years 1795 and 1796 (published in 1797) 
show persuasively that Green’s dating is incorrect.  Green’s erroneous dating 
is most problematic in relation to the unauthorized Marshall tracts, as almost 
all of these are dated as 1797 rather than the actual year of 1799.  A date of 
 
 
60 
 
1797 could lead scholars to infer incorrectly that the tracts were part of the 
Repository proper and could partially be responsible for some scholars 
inaccurately discussing unauthorised Marshall tracts as if they are part of the 
Cheap Repository. 
Because of the complex publication history, the parameters of the 
authorised Cheap Repository are an essential element in compiling an 
exhaustive bibliographical study and completing an exhaustive traditional 
attribution study.  As the organiser of The Cheap Repository Tracts, More 
communicated with the authorized printers.  As Chapter One described, in 
November 1797, when More stepped away from day-to-day involvement 
with the Cheap Repository, she broke off her association with Marshall.  At that 
time, also as Chapter One discusses, Evans and Hatchard were appointed the 
official printers to the Cheap Repository.  Not long after this time, the rights to 
reprint tracts issued between 1795 and 1797 were sold outright to F & C 
Rivington (Spinney).  Clearly identifying tracts fraudulently issued by 
Marshall under the Cheap Repository name provides an opportunity for 
scholars to compare and contrast them with those which are part of the 
original series.  While the Appendix lists these ‚unauthorized‛ tracts, this 
thesis is not concerned with identifying the authors responsible for them.  
Nevertheless, this chapter notes pertinent information that distinguishes the 
authors of the authorized tracts from those of post-1797 Marshall tracts, 
 
 
61 
 
specifically, where the pseudonyms are the same.  Chapter One detailed the 
problems that Marshall’s unauthorized tracts cause for bibliographical clarity.  
The impact was also felt in relation to tracts printed and reprinted in Britain.  
William Watson, and later Ann Watson, was the authorized printer in Dublin.  
Using Green’s bibliography, we can see that Watson acted as the printer for a 
number of Marshall’s unauthorized tracts, including The Divine Model; or, the 
Christian’s exemplar (Marshall, 1797 [sic] (1799)).  If Watson, as an authorized 
printer, was issuing the ‚unauthorized‛ tracts it is hardly surprising that the 
hawkers, reading public and subsequently scholars found it difficult to 
differentiate them from the Repository proper. 
 
Default Attributions to More 
 
Default attributions to More are largely a result of laziness.  As Foster 
concedes, ‚it was not unknown for a London stationer to attribute a text to a 
living writer without permission, *although+ it didn’t happen very often.  All 
citizens, writers included, had an exclusive right to their own name, and the 
London Stationers Company usually toed the line‛ (378).  Nicholas D. Smith 
details a number of anonymous works mistakenly attributed by the reading 
public to More that she did not author and which she explicitly denied 
writing in letters to acquaintances and families, such as The Velvet Cushion 
(London, 1814) (110-20).  Smith suggests that these incorrect assumptions are 
a natural corollary of More’s insistence on anonymity for so many of her 
 
 
62 
 
published writings (111).  As Chapter One explores, and MacDonald Shaw 
has observed, many scholars have not differentiated between More as the 
editor of the series and More as the author of only some of the tracts. 
 
Individual Tracts – Conclusive Attribution to Hannah More 
 
Tracts which are signed [Z], and which appear in the Cadell editions of 
More’s Collected Works (1801, 1818, and 1830) or in her 1816 Poems, can be 
considered to be more than likely to be by More.  The D. Graisberry 1803 
(Dublin) edition is a new typeset of the 1801 Cadell edition (Tales for the 
Common People ii).  Only thirty-three tracts are reprinted as part of the Cadell 
Editions. 
Although Spinney asserts that it was in the 1818 Cadell edition of More’s 
Collected Works that the identity of the author connected to the [Z] signature 
was first disclosed, it was actually in the ‚Advertisement‛ to volume four of 
the 1801 edition of Collected Works that More declared that the tracts included 
had first been published under the signature [Z] (310).  
These Stories, which were first published, among a great 
number of others, in the Cheap Repository, under the Signature 
Z, and here presented to the Reader, much enlarged and 
improved.  (n.p)  
 
In the advertisement to volume five, More confirms her authorship of the 
tracts included in Collected Works.  There is no absolute statement, however, 
indicating that these are the only tracts More wrote for the series: 
 
 
63 
 
As these stories, though principally are not calculated exclusively 
for the middle and lower classes of society, the Author has, at 
the desire of her friends, Selected those which were written by 
herself, and presented them to the public in this collection of her 
works, in an enlarged and improved form.  (Collected Works v, 
viii)  
 
The same advertisement appears in the equivalent volumes of Cadell’s 1818 
and 1830 editions, as well as William Watson’s 1803 Dublin edition of 
Collected Works. 
It is not good practice to rely on the 1835 US edition (Boston and New 
York: Francis) of Collected Works, though many scholars do.  A number of 
tracts appear in the 1835 edition that do not appear in earlier Cadell editions.  
The Francis edition should not be considered persuasive evidence of 
authorship without additional external evidence because it was published 
after More’s death in 1833.  Furthermore, there is no evidence to suggest More 
had any involvement in this edition, and consequently it should be relied 
upon cautiously. 
 The full list of forty tracts which are both signed [Z] and included in 
Poems or a Cadell edition of Collected Works or More’s Poems is as follows: 
1. The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain (March 1795)  
2. The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. Part II (June 1795) 
3. The History of Tom White the Postilion (March 1795) 
4. The Way to Plenty: or, the second part of Tom White (September 1795) 
5. The Two Shoemakers (March 1795) 
6. The Apprentice Turned Master; or, the Second Part of the Two Shoemakers: 
Shewing How James Stock from a Parish Apprentice Became a Creditable 
Tradesman (February 1796)  
 
 
64 
 
7. The History of Idle Jack Brown; containing the merry story of the 
mountebank, with some account of the bay mare Smiler. Being the third part 
of the Two Shoemakers (March 1796) 
8. Jack Brown in Prison ... Being the fourth part of the History of the Two 
Shoemakers (April 1796) 
9. Patient Joe, or, the Newcastle Collier (July 1795) 
10. The Riot; or, Half a loaf is better than no bread (August 1795) 
11. The Honest Miller of Gloucestershire  
12. The Two Wealthy Farmers, or, the History of Mr. Bragwell. Part I (October 
1795) 
13. The Two Wealthy Farmers; or, the History of Mr. Bragwell. Part II 
(November 1795) 
14. The History of Mr. Bragwell; or the Two Wealthy Farmers. Part III 
(September 1796) 
15. Sunday Reading. The History of the Two Wealthy Farmers, or a new dialogue 
between Mr Bragwell and Mr Worthy. Part IV (October 1796) 
16. The Two Wealthy Farmers, with the sad adventures of Miss Bragwell. Part V 
(October 1796) 
17. The Two Wealthy Farmers; or the Sixth part of the history of Mr. Bragwell 
and his two daughters (October 1797) 
18. The Two Wealthy Farmers; or, the Seventh and last part of the history of Mr. 
Bragwell and his two daughters (November 1797) 
19. The Hackney Coachman, or the Way to get a good fare (May 1796) 
20. Sunday Reading. On Carrying Religion into the Common Business of Life. A 
dialogue between James Stock and Will Simpson, the shoemakers (June 1796) 
21. Turn the Carpet; or, the Two weavers: a new song, in a dialogue between Dick 
and John. By Z. (July 1796) 
22. Betty Brown, the St. Giles's Orange girl, with some account of Mrs. Sponge, 
the Money-Lender (August 1796) 
23. Sunday Reading. The Grand Assizes; or, General gaol delivery  (August 
1796) 
24. Black Giles the Poacher: With Some Account of a Family who Had Rather 
Live By Their Wits Than Their Work (November 1796) 
25. Black Giles the Poacher. With the history of Widow Brown's apple-tree. Part 
II (December 1796) 
26. Sunday Reading. Bear ye one another's Burthens; or the Valley of tears: a 
vision (December 1796) 
27. The Cottage Cook; or, Mrs. Jones's Cheap Dishes. Shewing the way to do 
much good with little money (January 1797).1 
                                                 
1 Included in volume four of More’s 1801 Works under the title of Cure for Melancholy.  A 
footnote on the first page of the tract states: ‚This was first printed under the title of The 
 
 
65 
 
28. Tawny Rachel; or, The Fortune Teller: With Some Account of Dreams, 
Omens, and Conjurors. By Z (April 1797) 
29. The Sunday School (May 1797) 
30. The Two Gardeners (May 1797) 
31. The History of Hester Wilmot; or the Second part of the Sunday School (June 
1797) 
32. Sunday Reading. The Servant Man turned Soldier; or, the Fair weather 
Christian. A Parable. By Z (June 1797) 
33. The History of Hester Wilmot; or the New gown. Part II. Being a 
continuation of the Sunday School (July 1797) 
34. The Lady and the Pye; or Know thyself (July 1797) 
35. Sunday Reading. The Strait Gate and the Broad Way, being the second part of 
the Valley of Tears (July 1797) 
36. The History of Mr. Fantom, the new fashioned philosopher and his man 
William (August 1797) 
37. Sunday Reading. The Pilgrims: An allegory (September 1797) 
38. Dan and Jane; or Faith and works. A tale (October 1797) 
39. The Plum-Cakes: or, the Farmer and his three sons (November 1797) 
40. Parley the Porter: An allegory; shewing how robbers without can never get 
into an house unless there are traitors within. By Z (1798 – Evans 
Authorized) 
Some of these tracts are also supported by acknowledgement by More in 
the course of correspondence.  These include The Riot; or, Half a loaf is better 
than no bread and Patient Joe, or, the Newcastle Collier.  Patient Joe is an excellent 
example.  In a letter to her sister, More wrote ‚I have written a new ballad 
called the ‚Newcastle Collier‛ with which the Bishop of Durham is much 
pleased‛ (Roberts 430).  Furthermore, More’s correspondence clears up 
confusion surrounding a tract titled The Middle Way’s the Best.  This tract was 
entered in the Stationer’s Hall Register on January 1, 1796, but was never 
distributed.  Spinney suggests that copies were printed but that it was 
                                                                                                                                            
Cottage Cook‛ Hannah More, The Works of Hannah More, vol. 4, 8 vols. (London: Cadell & 
Davies, 1801) 325. 
 
 
 
66 
 
‚suppressed prior to publication‛ (Spinney 323).  It is not clear from available 
historical evidence whether the tract was actually printed; however, if a bulk 
of copies were actually printed and then destroyed, at least two were 
preserved by More.  In a letter to Zachary Macaulay (Bath: Jan 6, 1796), More 
states ‚the party of moderates is so small that there is no such thing as issuing 
the enclosed ballad from the Cheap Repository.  One copy is for the Bishop, the 
other for your own eating‛ (Roberts 462). 
As Chapter One detailed, relying overmuch on the [Z] pseudonym for 
attributing tracts to More may lead to overlooking tracts not signed [Z] but 
which are, nonetheless, by More.  Tracts which are included in 1801, 1818, or 
1830 editions of More’s Collected Works or Poems (1816) but which are not 
signed [Z] on any extant copies can be, especially if there is additional 
external evidence, assumed to be by More.  A list of these tracts is as follows: 
1. The Bad Bargain; or, The World set up to Sale (January 1797) 
2. Tis All for the Best (approx. 1797)2 
3. The Foolish Traveller; or, A good Inn is a bad Home (1798 – Evans 
Authorized) 
                                                 
2 One copy examined notes that it was entered at Stationer’s Hall but neither Spinney nor 
an examination of the Stationer’s Hall Register reveal an entry, and consequently a 
publication date.  
 
 
67 
 
In summary, the total number of tracts which can be attributed to More on 
the basis of an acknowledgement by More, in conjunction with other internal 
and external evidence, is 43. 
 
Individual Tracts – Inconclusive or Unknown Authorship 
 
As the first chapter noted, this thesis contends that there are 127 tracts 
comprised in the Cheap Repository Tracts.  This number excludes the 73 
additional unauthorized Marshall tracts fraudulently issued under the title of 
the Cheap Repository.  After his dismissal as a ‚Printer to Cheap Repository‛ 
Marshall no longer had rights to use the name to make reprints, let alone to 
issue new tracts.   
For the purposes of this study, where authorship cannot be attributed 
conclusively through internal and external evidence, authorship is considered 
to be problematic.  Tracts in this section are separated into two groups:  the 
inconclusive and the unknown.  
Where tracts are signed [Z] but are not included in an edition of her 
Collected Works, an attribution to Hannah More can be tentatively made, 
pending a non-traditional attribution study of each individual tract.  The 
authorship of these tracts should be considered inconclusive.  While more 
weight should be given to those attributions where there is clear textual, 
internal or external, support, attributions made to Hannah More by scholars 
without clear authority or methodology should still be noted and 
 
 
68 
 
investigated.  I have also included tracts which are signed [Z] only in some 
reprints and not others, or which are signed [Z] but only included in editions 
of the Collected Works published following More’s death in 1833; such editions 
include the 1835 Francis edition (US) and the 1835 Harper & Bros edition (US).  
In relation to each of these tracts, a non-traditional study would provide 
persuasive evidence in relation to the likelihood of More’s authorship.  Tracts 
in this category include: 
1. The Apprentice's Monitor; or Indentures in verse, shewing what they are 
bound to do. Proper to be hung up in all shops (March 1795) 
2. The Carpenter; or, the Danger of evil company (March 1795) 
3. The Gin-Shop; or, a Peep into a prison (March 1795) 
4. The Market Woman, a true tale, or Honesty is the best policy. By Z (March 
1795) 
5. The Old Man, His Children and the Bundle of Sticks, a fable (March 1795) 
6. The Roguish Miller; or, Nothing got by cheating (Feb-Mar 1795) 
7. The Sorrows of Yamba; or the Negro Woman’s Lamentation. To the tune of: 
“Hosiers ghost.” (October 1795) 
8. Robert and Richard; or the Ghost of poor Molly, who was drowned in 
Richard's mill pond. To the tune of : Collin’s Mulberry Tree (January 1796) 
9. The Shopkeeper Turned Sailor, or the folly of going out of our element. 
Shewing what a clever man John the Shopkeeper was in his own business, and 
what a rash step he took in resolving to go upon the water. Part I (March 
1796) 
10. A Hymn of Praise for the Abundant Harvest of 1796  (September 1796) 
11. The Good Militiaman, or the man that is worth a host; being a new song by 
Honest Dan the ploughboy turned soldier (February 1797) 
 
 
69 
 
12. The Judgment Day, in which a true and just account of the manner in which 
the scriptures teach that we and all mankind are to be tried on the great day of 
judgment. Showing plainly who shall go away and who shall go away to 
everlasting death, and who to life eternal – with a fear words of encouragement 
to fearful Christians (June 1797) 
13. The Black Prince, a true story; being an account of the life and death of 
Naimbanna, an African King’s son, who arrived in England in the year 1791, 
and set sail on his return in June 1793. (1798 – Evans Authorized) 
14. The Thunderstorm, or the history of Tom Watson, the unnatural son, being a 
warning to all parents. By Z. (1798 – Evans Authorized 
 
Tracts for which authorship is considered unknown are those tracts 
without any signature, being thus in the true sense of the term anonymous, 
and for which no internal or external evidence tending towards an attribution 
has yet been uncovered.  The list of tracts with currently unknown authorship 
is as follows: 
1. Babay. A true story of a Good Negro Woman (March 1795) 
2. The Book of Martyrs. An account of Holymen who died for the Christian 
Religion. (March 1795) 
3. The Cock Fighter (March 1795) 
4. Execution of MacLean, commonly known by the name of the Gentleman 
Highwayman (March 1795) 
5. The Horse Race, or the pleasures of the course (March 1795) 
6. Husbandry Moraliz’d; or, Pleasant Sunday reading for a farmer’s kitchen. 
Part I (March 1795) 
7. A New history of a True Book, in verse (March 1795) 
8. Wonderful Escape from Shipwreck. An account of the loss of His Majesty’s 
Ship Centaur. (March 1795) 
9. The Execution of Wild Robert. Being a Warning to all parents (June 1795) 
 
 
70 
 
10. Sunday Reading. Daniel in the Den of Lions (June 1795) 
11. Happy Waterman (August 1795) 
12. Sunday Reading. Hints to all Ranks of People on the Occasion of the Present 
Scarcity (August 1795) 
13. Dame Andrews, a Ballad (September 1795) 
14. Sunday Reading. Noah’s Flood(September 1795) 
15. Sunday Reading. The Harvest Home (October 1795) 
16. Sunday reading. The Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard (October 
1795) 
17. A New Christmas Carol Called the Merry Christmas and Happy New Year 
(December 1795) 
18. Sunday Reading. The troubles of Life, being a familiar description of the 
troubles of the poor labourer; the little shopkeeper; the great tradesman; the 
sickly man; the disappointed lover; the unhappy husband; the widower; and, 
lastly, the child of sorrow. To which is added the Guinea and the Shilling. 
Sickeness, sorrow, death. (December 1795) 
19. The History of Mary Wood The House-Maid; or, the Danger of false Excuses. 
(January 1796) 
20. Sunday Reading. Some New Thoughts for the New Year (January 1796) 
21. The Story of Sinful Sally, told by herself, shewing how from being Sally of the 
Green she was first led to become SINFUL SALLY, and afterwards 
DRUNKEN SAL, and how at last she came to a most melancholy and almost 
hopeless End; being therein a Warning to all young Women both in Town and 
Country (February 1796) 
22. Sunday Reading. Onesimus; or, the Run-Away Servant Converted (March 
1796) 
23. The Conversion of St. Paul the apostle. (April 1796) 
24. The Shopkeeper Turned Sailor, or the folly of going out of our element. 
Shewing what a clever man John the Shopkeeper was in his own business, and 
what a rash step he took in resolving to go upon the water. Part II (April 
1796) 
 
 
71 
 
25. Sunday Reading. The General Resurrection. Part I. Being a description taken 
from scripture of some of the events which will come to pass at the end of the 
World. (May 1796) 
26. The History of Charles Jones, the footman (May 1796) 
27. The Election. A quite new song. Shewing many which ought not to be dome. 
Being a new song very fit to be sung in all places where election is going on. 
To the Tune of: Dusky Night (June 1796) 
28. The Gamester. The story of poor Tricket the gamester, showing hoe he first lost 
his place by gaming, and then had well nigh been the death of his wife through 
the same cause, and how, lastly, his gaming was the occasion of his being 
transported as a convict to Botany Bay. (July 1796) 
29. Sunday Reading.  Look at home, or the accusers accused. Being an account of 
the manner in which our savior put to silence the scribes and Pharisees when 
they brought to him the woman taken into adultery. (July 1796) 
30. John the shopkeeper turned Sailor; Part III (August 1796) 
31. Sunday Reading. Explanation of the nature of Baptism, designed especially for 
all those parents who are about to bring a child to be baptized. (September 
1796) 
32. King Dionysius and Squire Damocles (October 1796) 
33. The Hampshire Tragedy; shewing how a servant maid first robbed her master, 
and was afterwards struck dead for telling a lie. A True Story (November 
1796) 
34. A New Christmas Carol for 1796 (December 1796) 
35. The Fall of Adam, our first parent with some account of the creation of the 
world. Shewing the happy state of man in paradise, and also the sin and 
misery which have entered since the fall. To which are added some remarks 
respecting our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the second Adam and the only 
Saviour of this world. (1796/1798) 
36. Sunday Reading: On the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper (January 1797) 
37. Sunday Reading: The Story of Joseph and his Brethren. Part I (February 
1797) 
38. The Wonderful Advantages of Adventuring in the Lottery!!! (February 1797) 
 
 
72 
 
39. Dick and Johnny ; or, the last new drinking song. (March 1797) 
40. Sunday Reading. Joseph in Prison. Part II (March 1797) 
41. Sunday Reading. Joseph delivered out of Prison. The story of Joseph< Part III 
(April 1797) 
42. The True Heroes; or, The Noble Army of Martyrs. Part 2 of Dick and Johnny; 
or the last new drinking song (April 1797) 
43. Sunday Reading. Joseph and his Brethren. Part IV, (May 1797) 
44. Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten Commandments. Part I. 
(August 1797) 
45. The Loyal Sailor; or No Mutineering. Being a song fit to be sung on board of 
all his majesty’s ships; giving an account of the late awkward affair at 
Portsmouth, with the increase of pay then agreed to on all sides, by a sailor 
supposed to be on board: and also of that most melancholy and dreadful 
mutiny which happened afterwards at the Nore and which caused so much 
astonishment throughout this loyal nation. In which song it is further 
represented how this honest sailor was giving away half his rations to his wife 
Nell, and was also promising part of his pay to her and the children, when a 
strange fleet hove in sight; and he instantly prepared for action. To the tune of: 
The hardy tar (August 1797) 
46. Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten Commandments. Part II. 
(October 1797) 
47. Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten Commandments. Part III. 
(November 1797) 
48. Here and There (1798 – Evans Authorized) 
49. The Death of Christ, or tract for Good Friday. (1798 – Evans Authorized) 
50. A New Christmas Tract, or the right way of rejoicing at Christmas. Shewing 
the reasons we have for joy at the event of our Saviour’s birth. In which also a 
description is given of the dreadful state the world was in before his coming; 
with some remarks suited to the times in which we live. (1798 – Evans 
Authorized) 
51. The Gravestone, being an account (supposed to have been written on a 
gravestone) of a wife who buried both her children in one day, and who from 
 
 
73 
 
that time became a very devout Christian. With a suitable address to those 
who may be attending a funeral. (1798 – Evans Authorized) 
 
 
Case Study:  Inconclusive Authorship - Sinful Sally 
 
The Story of Sinful Sally, told by herself, shewing how from being Sally of the 
Green she was first led to become SINFUL SALLY, and afterwards DRUNKEN SAL, 
and how at last she came to a most melancholy and almost hopeless End; being therein 
a Warning to all young Women both in Town and Country was entered at 
Stationer’s Hall in February 1796.  The authorship of this tract is uncertain.  
Spinney’s bibliography records the lack of signature on early copies, and my 
research has failed to uncover any examples of the tract with a signature 
(324).  Notwithstanding, Claire MacDonald Shaw attributes Sinful Sally to 
More on the basis of having viewed versions of the tract with the [Z] 
signature (Tales for the Common People and Other Cheap Repository Tracts. 176).  
MacDonald does not identify the location of the copies of this tract bearing a 
[Z] signature.  Alternatively, Julia Saunders concludes that Sinful Sally was 
‚probably written by one of More’s sisters‛ (9).  Saunders gives no further 
indication of the grounds for this attribution.  This tract would make an 
excellent subject for a non-traditional attribution study. 
 
Authors other than More 
 
Spinney stated that establishing the identity of those ‚friends‛ who 
contributed to the enterprise of the Cheap Repository is ‚now impossible‛ (310).  
 
 
74 
 
Identifying these ‚friends‛ in the course of a traditional authorship 
attribution study is an attempt, then, to do the impossible.  Nonetheless, as 
Chapter One noted, scholars have identified Sarah More, Hester Mulso 
Chapone, William Mason, Zachary Macaulay, Serena Mills Macaulay, 
Reverend John Newton, Henry Thornton, and Isaac Watts as possible 
contributors to the series. 
More’s sisters were involved in the enterprise to varying levels.  Sarah 
contributed tracts; and Hannah’s other sisters, Mary, Elizabeth, and Martha 
contributed subscriptions.  In addition to the Stationer’s Hall Register explicitly 
identifying Sarah More as the author some of the tracts signed [S], Henry 
Thompson asserts that Sarah (also known as Sally) More was the author of 
tracts signed [S] (151).  Most scholars identifying Sally as the author of 
individual tract rely on Thornton’s identification.  Spinney identifies six tracts 
signed [S], and at this stage only these 6 have been uncovered bearing the [S] 
signature.  It should be noted that the signature [S.S] appears on a number of 
the unauthorized Marshall tracts.  The [S.S.] signature has no relationship to 
the [S] signature of the earlier tracts, and most certainly does not denote the 
work of Sarah More.  The identity of [S.S.] is itself a matter of contention 
among scholars.  Spinney suggests that [S.S.] is generally identified as Mary 
Jane Kilner (308).  However, Anne Stott suggests that More believed that S.S. 
 
 
75 
 
was ‚high Calvinist‛ William Huntington, for whom the initials meant 
‚sinner saved‛ (Stott 150).  
In a letter from Hester Mulso Chapone to Mrs Carter, dated 29 June 1794, 
Chapone wrote: 
I have been writing a story for Mrs H. Moore’s *sic+ Cheap 
Publications [sic], who I thought must want assistance; but I find 
she has more composers than she knows what to do with; so I 
should grudge my trouble, were it not that I know I did it with 
good intention.  (168) 
 
This statement makes it difficult to determine the extent of Chapone’s 
eventual involvement.  No scholar has yet identified a single individual tract 
for which she was responsible. 
William Mason, the English poet (1724 – 1797), was also a contributor.3  
Letters between More and her sister Sarah indicate that there are two tracts in 
the series, both reportedly signed [M], which are the work of Mason (Roberts 
ii, 430).  In the 1795 letter, written from London, More reveals that Mason had 
submitted six tracts, but that she had rejected three on the basis of the 
overemphasis on politics and a further tract because its emphasis was too 
                                                 
3 This William Mason should not be confused with William Mason, Calvinist (1719 - 
1791), who authored A Spiritual Treasury for the Children of God (London: Deare and Andrews, 
1803) and was the editor of the Gospel Magazine. This is curious because it was more likely for 
the latter, given his evangelical bent, to be a contributor to the Cheap Repository; however his 
death in 1791 makes this impossible. The William Mason (1724 – 1797) who contributed to the 
Repository was an ordained minister of the Church of England, but he is better known for his 
imitations in the style of Milton and Gray. Indeed, some scholars have expressed surprise at 
Mason’s close friendship with Horace Walpole and consider his poetic talent to be limited to 
a gift for stylistic mimesis. For more information about William Mason and a critique of his 
talent, see Phelps, William Lyon. The Beginnings of the English Romantic Movement: A Study in 
Eighteenth Century Literature. London: Ginn & company, 1893. 
 
 
76 
 
much on love, before she accepted the two that were included in the series 
(459).  One tract is identified in the letter as The Plow-Boys Dream.  While 
British versions of Plow-Boys Dream appear, generally, to be signed [M], the 
1800 US reprints, out of Philadelphia, are not signed.  The second tract 
referred to in the correspondence has yet to be identified.  What should be 
noted, however, is that tracts with an [M] signature published following the 
closure of the Cheap Repository in 1798 should not be attributed to Mason 
(Spinney 337).  The Baker’s Dream, or death no bad change to the poor and good, by 
M, signed [M] is an example of an unauthorized Marshall tract, published in 
1799, which should not be attributed to William Mason purely on the basis of 
the pseudonymous signature. 
Zachary Macaulay provided financial support to the Repository as well as 
contributing tracts (Macaulay ii).  In a letter to Zachary Macaulay dated 
January 14, 1796, More indicates both Macaulay’s involvement and her role in 
editing the works of other contributors: ‚Miss Mills has been busy at work 
transcribing your communicant *<+.  We much approve of what you have 
done, but have ventured to abridge in a few instances‛ (qtd in Spinney 311).  
The letter refers to an attached manuscript by Serena Mills.  Serena Mills later 
married Zachary Macaulay, and the couple continued to support More’s 
endeavors.  The manuscript is not identified by name in the letter; however, 
 
 
77 
 
but Spinney contends that it was later used for the Cheap Repository.  As yet, 
no individual tracts have been attributed to Serena Mills Macaulay. 
Reverend John Newton (1725-1807) and Hannah More developed a 
friendship as a result of their common faith and involvement in the abolition 
movement.  Newton should be considered a possible contributor of one of the 
Sunday Reading tracts or one or more of the Hymns or (poems set to popular 
tunes).  In a letter to Newton, in 1794, More requests his and his wife’s 
involvement in the plan: ‚Will you allow me to make extracts of your good 
woman’s diary for a penny paper?  Or perhaps you might have the goodness 
to do it yourself; or a hymn or anything that would suit‛ (Roberts 430).  ‚Your 
good woman‛ is a reference to Newton’s wife, Elizabeth.  No tract has yet 
been identified as having been written by Newton or his wife. 
Henry Thornton (1760 - 1815), also an abolitionist, was a likely contributor 
to the series.  In a letter to Zachary Macaulay dated 14 January 1796, (the same 
letter detailing part of Macaulay’s own involvement) Hannah More referred 
to Thornton’s involvement: ‚our friend Henry Thornton is hard at work at 
some ‚prayers‛.‛  Spinney concludes that ‚these must be the Prayers to be used 
by a child, & C, published in the Repository in October 1796‛ (310).  The tract 
to which Spinney refers is Sunday Reading.  Prayers to be used by a child or young 
person – By a Grown Person – By the Master or Mistress of a Sunday School – and 
by the Master or Mistress of a Family (1796).  Stott has also suggested that 
 
 
78 
 
Sunday Reading, Part One.  On the Religious Advantage of the Present Inhabitants 
of Great Britain and a companion tract, Sunday Reading.  The Beggarly Boy.  A 
Religious Parable, both published in June 1795, are also Thornton’s work (178).  
It is highly possible that Thornton was responsible for some of the other 
Sunday Reading tracts. 
William Gilpin (1724-1804) was best known for his publications about 
picturesque qualities of the British countryside.  He was also, though this was 
less known, responsible for religious and historical biographies of Thomas 
Cranmer, Hugh Latimer, and John Wycliffe.  Though it should be tested by 
non-traditional authorial attribution methods, the subject matter of Life of 
William Baker, with his Funeral Sermon, by the Rev. Mr. Gilpin is consistent with 
that of other published works by this author.  
Tracts which can be attributed on the basis of external evidence, including 
letters, to contributors other than More are as follows: 
1. Sunday Reading, Part One. On the Religious Advantage of the Present 
Inhabitants of Great Britain. [Henry Thornton] (June 1795) 
2. Sunday Reading. Prayers to be used by a child or young person – By a Grown 
Person – By the Master or Mistress of a Sunday School – and by the Master 
or Mistress of a Family. [Henry Thornton] (November 1796) 
3. Sunday Reading. The Beggarly Boy. A Religious Parable. [Henry Thornton] 
(June 1795) 
4. The Touchstone; or, the way to know a true Christian. Being a description of 
the character of our blessed Saviour with an inquiry whether we are like him. 
To which is added, An appeal first to infidels, and then to persons who call 
themselves by the name of Christians. [Zachary Macaulay] (February 1796) 
 
 
79 
 
Stock in Trade and the Cheap Repository Tracts 
 
A number of Cheap Repository tracts are condensed versions of previously 
published works.  Divine Songs to which are added Prayers for Children (March 
1795) by Isaac Watts is a much condensed version of his Divine Songs 
attempted in the easy language of Children which had appeared in many editions 
since its initial publication in 1715.  Similarly, Daniel Defoe’s The History of the 
Plague in London in 1665, with suitable Reflections is a reprint of an earlier tract 
of the same name, and like Henry Fielding’s Murders: True examples of the 
interposition of Providence in the discovery and punishment of murder and the 
Watts piece, were part of Hazard’s stock in trade.  
A complete list of those tracts which can be attributed unproblematically 
to contributors other than More are as follows: 
1. Divine Songs, to which are added prayers for Children (March 1795) – Isaac 
Watts 
2. The History of the Plague in London in 1665, with suitable Reflections 
(March 1795) – Daniel Defoe 
3. Life of William Baker, with his Funeral Sermon, by the Rev. Mr. Gilpin. – 
Reverend William Gilpin (March 1795) 
4. Dialogue the Second. On the duty of carrying religion into our amusements. 
By Rev. Mr Gilpin  – Reverend William Gilpin (1798 – Evans 
Authorized) 
5. Murders. True examples of the interposition of Providence in the discovery 
and punishment of murder - Justice Henry Fielding (March 1795) 
6. Path to Riches and happiness [Benjamin Franklin] (1798 – Evans 
Authorized) 
 
 
80 
 
Conditional Attribution to Authors Other than More 
 
There are a number of tracts for which we can hazard an attribution based 
on the identification of a pseudonym, in this case [M] or [S], but for which 
there is not sufficient evidence to make an unconditional attribution.  These 
tracts should be examined as a second priority in a non-traditional study, 
behind those tracts signed [Z] but which have not been confirmed as being 
More’s work through external evidence.  The names of these tracts follow, 
with the possible author identified in square brackets before the approximate 
date of publication: 
1. Two Soldiers. By S. [Sarah More] (March 1795) 
2. Good Mother’s Legacy [Sarah More] (March 1795) 
3. Sorrowful Sam; or, The Two Blacksmiths. By S [Sarah More]  (December 
1795) 
4. The Cheapside Apprentice; or the History of Mr. Francis H<.Fully setting 
forth the danger of playing with edge tools. Shewing how a gay life may prove 
a short one, and that a merry evening may produce a sorrowful morning. By 
S. [Sarah More] (June 1796) 
5. The Hubbub; or, the History of Farmer Russel the hard-hearted overseer. By S. 
[Sarah More] (March 1797) 
6. The History of Diligent Dick; or, Truth Will Out, though it Be Hid in a Well 
[Sarah More] (September 1797) 
7. The Plow Boys Dream by [M]. [William Mason] (August 1795) 
 
Collaborations between More and other Others 
 
The Cheap Repository was a collaborative enterprise overseen by More.  The 
collaborative nature of a number of the tracts may continue to complicate 
 
 
81 
 
matters of attribution.  Little distinction has been made between those tracts 
solely authored by More and those tracts written by other contributors which 
she edited.  Identifying tracts written solely by others may be a simpler 
exercise than identifying those tracts More collaborated on with others.  There 
are some examples, including Sorrows of Yamba, discussed below, which are 
signed [Z] but for which it has been argued that More was only responsible.  
While scholars such as Claire Macdonald Shaw astutely recognize the clear 
link in the minds of the late eighteenth-century reading public between the 
series and More, concerns about consistency with which the [Z] signature 
denotes More’s sole authorship must be addressed, especially when this 
signature only appears on later reprints of the tracts (177).  
 
Lancashire Collier Girl 
 
 Chapter One explored the contention about the authorship of 
Lancashire Collier Girl.  As the earlier discussion detailed, it was Anne Stott 
who first claimed that Henry Thornton reworked a draft of a tract written by 
Hannah More and submitted it to The Lancashire Collier Girl for publication in 
the Gentlemen’s Magazine (1795) (Stott 178).  Despite Stott’s reasoned 
attribution, More’s authorship of Lancashire Collier Girl is often assumed by 
scholars on the basis of the subject matter it has in common with a known 
More text, Patient Joe, the Lancashire Collier.  At least this is the justification 
provided by Claire MacDonald Shaw for her assertion that More is the likely 
 
 
82 
 
author of Lancashire Collier Girl (174).  Stott’s evidence, as Chapter One laid 
out in full, is persuasive; Lancashire Collier Girl should be acknowledged as the 
collaborative work of Thornton and More. 
 
Sorrows of Yamba 
 
The Sorrows of Yamba; or the Negro Woman’s Lamentation.  To the tune of: 
“Hosiers ghost.”  By Z was entered at Stationer’s Hall on October 29, 1795, in 
preparation for distribution to booksellers and hawkers in November 1795.  
The authorship of this tract is disputed, though scholars such as Moira 
Ferguson have accepted More’s authorship on the basis of the [Z] signature 
(218).  However, no copy of the tract with a [Z] signature, printed prior to 
1800, has been examined in the course of this study.  Nevertheless, Sorrows of 
Yamba was reprinted and clearly labelled as More’s work during her lifetime 
in two works: a Religious Tracts Society pamphlet (Newcastle, 1823), and an 
Anti-Slavery Collection (1828).  The 1828 version is heavily condensed and 
complicates the matter of authorship – this latter text would not, for example, 
be suitable for a non-traditional authorship attribution study.  In 1999, Alan 
Richardson attributed Sorrows of Yamba jointly to More and Eaglesfield Smith 
(170).  Richardson notes that a shorter version of Sorrows of Yamba appeared 
under Smith’s pseudonym, E.S.J. in the Universal Magazine in 1797 and in two 
slightly different forms in his Poetical Works (1802 and 1822).  Richardson 
notes that the ‚conversion narrative and the use of dialect‛ present in More’s 
 
 
83 
 
version do not appear in Smith’s versions, perhaps being added ‚editorially‛ 
by More (177).  Despite Richardson’s observations of the poem’s apparent 
stylistic relationship to More’s work and his notation that Smith’s 1802 
version is titled ‚Ianda,‛ meaning ‚not wholly original,‛ Richardson is still 
adamant that Sorrows of Yamba is a collaborative work.  Scholars such as James 
Basker have taken their cue from Richardson and claim on the basis of his 
contentions, and without textual evidence, that Eagleton Smith must have 
submitted the poem to More who edited it for publication as part of the series 
(490). 
Not all scholars, however, have accepted Richardson’s attribution.  
McDonald Shaw sensibly suggests that Smith is possibly drawing on More’s 
unsigned text, and thus from the Repository as a ‚common resource for the 
creation of literary ballads‛ (177).  Consequently, a joint attribution of The 
Sorrows of Yamba can be considered premature, especially given the Cheap 
Repository publication precedes all of those linked with Eagleton Smith.  This 
tentative judgment, of course, would be negated if it can be shown that More 
was in contact with Smith and that the tract originated with him, or that the 
tract was a collaborative effort in the first instance rather than in his 
condensation of the tract in 1797 alone.  Given that there are extant copies of 
the Sorrows of Yamba tract signed [Z] yet no acknowledgment by More in 
another form, this tract should be tentatively attributed to her on the basis on 
 
 
84 
 
the signature but considered to be of inconclusive authorship.  This tract 
should be included as a priority in any non-traditional attribution study. 
While the Lancashire Collier Girl can be shown to be a collaborative work, 
the Sorrows of Yamba should not be considered to be a collaborative work 
without additional evidence.  A non-traditional study which addresses the 
possibility of collaboration may offer substantial clarity in relation to the 
authorship of many of the tracts which currently have ‚unknown‛ 
authorship.  In summary, at this stage only one of these tracts can be 
confidently attributed to More and another author as a collaborative work. 
1. Lancashire Collier Girl [Henry Thornton and Hannah More] (May 1795). 
 
Conclusion 
 
Of the 127 tracts published as part of the Cheap Repository between March 
1795 and September 1798, 43 can be attributed to Hannah More without 
recourse to non-traditional authorship attribution.  An additional 14 tracts are 
probably by More because internal evidence, a pseudonym, provides grounds 
for a tentative attribution to Hannah More.  One tract, Lancashire Collier Girl, 
can be attributed to both Henry Thornton and Hannah More as joint authors.  
Four tracts can be attributed to authors other than More on the basis of 
external textual evidence, including acknowledgement in correspondence.  At 
least six tracts are reprints of previously published works by authors other 
than Hannah More.  Seven additional tracts can be tentatively attributed to 
 
 
85 
 
various authors on the basis on the identification of the identity of the authors 
publishing under the veil of the [S] and [M] pseudonyms.  In summary, in this 
chapter 58 tracts are either conclusively or tentatively attributed to More and 
17 to others, while 52 tracts are described as being  
yet unattributable to any particular author.  Chapter Four explores the place 
of the Repository in the historical and social context of eighteenth-century 
discourse and discusses the impact of identifying the authors of each Cheap 
Repository tract. 
  
 
 
86 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
 
The Cheap Repository Tracts and Eighteenth-century Discourse 
 
 
The Cheap Repository was almost ubiquitous in British homes in the last 
decade of the eighteenth-century and the early decades of the nineteenth-
century.  Yet, despite their contemporary popularity, literary scholarship does 
not reflect the popularity of the Repository in its historical context.  The 
confusion surrounding the authorship of individual tracts within the Cheap 
Repository has arguably been a strong contributor to this incongruity.  
Chapters One and Three detailed the lack of clarity surrounding 
authorship of the anonymous and pseudonymous tracts of the Cheap 
Repository.  This final chapter explores the place of the Cheap Repository in the 
context of eighteenth-century theological and socio-political discourse and the 
impact of asserting attributions and challenging authorial attributions of 
specific tracts.  Finally, the chapter will briefly offer suggestions for future 
bibliographical research on the Cheap Repository. 
Assessing the impact of The Cheap Repository Tracts on late eighteenth-
century and early nineteenth-century theological and socio-political discourse 
is complex.  The relationship of the Cheap Repository Tract enterprise to the 
Sunday School Movement, the Religious Tract Society, specifically, and the 
 
 
87 
 
Tractist craze, generally, as well as its place among the increasingly literate 
working class, has not been adequately described.  This lack of definition 
further complicates discussion of their place within the historical and 
intellectual landscape.  This chapter follows on from recent critical 
reassessments of More’s integration of political and social activism with her 
philosophic and theological approach (Donawerth 243). 
More was the target of intense personal criticism as a consequence of her 
participation in public debate.  More suffered strident and vitriolic criticism 
directed at her character and gender, as well as at her impudence to criticise 
politicians, clergymen, and aristocrats alike on moral, social, political, and 
theological issues.  More was even labelled an ‚old Bishop in petticoats‛ by 
William Cobbett and a ‚She-Bishop‛ by others (Elfenbein 934).  Fellow 
bluestocking Mary Russell Mitford also described her as ‚masculine *and+ not 
in a good sense [...] she [More] writes like a man in petticoats, or a woman in 
breeches.  All her books have a loud voice, and a stern frown, and a long 
stride‛ (qtd in Myers "'a Peculiar Protection': History, Gender, and Eighteenth 
Century Literature" 227).  Despite the contemporary criticism that More was 
usurping roles that had traditionally been reserved for men, feminist critics 
such as Kowaleski-Wallace, Ellen Jordan, Mona Scheurmann, and Eleanor Ty 
have maligned More as antithetical to the course of social reform and have 
dismissed her as a passive agent of the patriarchy (Kowaleski-Wallace 
 
 
88 
 
"Milton's Daughters: The Education of Eighteenth-Century Women Writers" 
276; Jordan 439; Charlton 449; Miller 302; Scheurmann "Hannah More and the 
English Poor" 237; Ty 15). Patricia Demers goes so far as to accuse More of 
being ‚a daddy’s girl under patriarchy‛ (4).  William Roberts did scholars 
interested in More a great disservice in his abridgement of More’s 
correspondence and memoirs, especially his removal of expressions of 
disillusionment by More of the church and state.  Without access to unedited 
personal papers, scholars have perhaps understandably found it easy to 
dismiss More as ‚an agent of the patriarchy‛. 
Even within the limitations of Robert’s revisionist version of More’s journals 
and correspondence, it seems a shame that critics apparently fail to notice the 
wit with which a large bulk of More’s work, even of the most serious nature, 
is imbued. 
Though More has aroused the ire of critics both in her own time and in 
recent years, even those who use her as a convenient antagonist for their own 
views cannot ignore More’s persistence and literary output.  Indeed, Mitzi 
Myers contends that More was ‚a female crusader infinitely more successful 
than Wollstonecraft or any other woman of her day‛ ('Reform or Ruin': A 
Revolution in Female Manners 209; Impeccable Governesses, Rational Dames, 
and Moral Mothers: Mary Wollstonecraft and the Female Tradition in 
Georgian Children's Books" 54).  More was not afraid to challenge anyone, 
 
 
89 
 
and did so without regard for sex or stature, even if her adversary were a 
member of the clergy. 
 
Place of the Cheap Repository in Eighteenth-century Discourse 
 
The collaborative enterprise of the Cheap Repository Tracts built upon 
momentum which had developed following More’s Essays on Various Subjects 
Principally Designed for Young Ladies (1777), Village Politics (1792) and An 
Estimate of the Religion of the Fashionable World (1793).  Following the closure of 
the Cheap Repository in September 1798, More wrote a large number of other 
works including a novel, Coelebs in Search of a Wife (1808), and other works on 
moral and social topics including Strictures on the Modern System of Female 
Education (1799), Hints to Forming the Character of a Young Princess (1805) for a 
young Princess Victoria, and Practical Piety, or, the Influence of the Religion of the 
Heart on the Conduct of the Life (1811). 
The Cheap Repository Tracts provide a focus for the examination of the 
motives and methods of moral and social reform in the 1790s.  In her 
advertisement to volume five of her first edition of Collected Works, published 
by T. Cadell, London, in 1801, More gives a concise explanation of her 
motivation, at least in hindsight, for the enterprise of the Cheap Repository 
declaring that 
To improve the habit, and raise the principles of the common 
people, at a time when their dangers and temptation, moral and 
political, were multiplied beyond the example of any former period, 
 
 
90 
 
was the motive which compelled the Author of these volumes to 
devise and prosecute the institution of the Cheap Repository.  This 
plan was established with a humble wish, not only to counteract vice 
and profligacy on the one hand, but error, discontent, and false religion 
on the other.  And as an appetite for reading had, from a variety of 
causes, been increasing among the inferior ranks in this country, it was 
judged expedient, at this critical period, to supply such wholesome 
aliment as might give a new direction to their taste, and abate their 
relish for those corrupt and inflammatory publication which the 
consequences of the French Revolution have been so fatally pouring in 
upon us.  
The success of the plan exceeded the most sanguine expectation of 
its projector.  Above [sic] two millions of the Tracts were sold within 
the first year, besides very large numbers in Ireland; and they continue 
to be very extensively circulated, in their original form of single tracts, 
by Evans in Long-Lane, West Smithfield, Hatchard in Piccadilly, and 
Hazard in Bath, as well as in three bound volumes sold by Rivington, 
Hatchard, and all the other booksellers.  (vii-viii) 
 
The Cheap Repository came about as a mechanism for satisfying a number of 
social and moral reform imperatives of More and her close friends.  The Cheap 
Repository was, in part, a response to an appeal by the Bishop of London to 
respond to Thomas Paine.1  Like Village Politics (1792), which was designed to 
function as a positive substitute for inflammatory and radical tracts and 
pamphlets inciting workers and the poor, the Cheap Repository Tracts were 
designed to satisfy the growing desire for inexpensive reading material.  
Laurence Stone estimates that for servants and labourers, literacy rates were 
never below 35-40 percent after the early part of the eighteenth-century (69).  
                                                 
1 Whether the specific work of Paine’s that was in focus was Rights of Man (1791) or Age of 
Reason(1793) is a matter of contention among scholars;  E.M.G Smith, "Hannah More," 
Dictionary of Literary Biography: British Reform Writers, 1789-1832, eds. Gary  Kelly and Edd 
Applegate, A Bruccoli Clark Layman Book ed., vol. 158 (The Gale Group, 1996), The Editors, 
Cheap Repository Tracts, 14 April 2005 2005, The Literary Dictionary Company, Available: 
http://www.litencyc.com/php/stopics.php?rec=true&UID=1540, 9 September 2007. 
 
 
91 
 
Consequently, with the ever-growing numbers of newly literate working 
poor, there was a significant market for reading material among the so-called 
lower orders.   
In the beginning, the evangelicalism expressed by the contributors in 
individual tracts can be considered to be an explicit response to the atheism 
that motivated the French Revolution.  However, as the popularity of the 
series grew, the evangelical tone became a mechanism for the assertion of a 
distinct British identity.  In particular, the idea of the family as a unit of virtue 
and essential for the strength and protection of society was beginning to 
crystallize in the minds of eighteenth-century commentators.  More, 
Thornton, and the other contributors held a general belief that raising an 
awareness of moral and political threats to the nation would simultaneously 
stimulate reform and function to stabilise the nation in the face of continually 
evolving internal and external threats.  
For More, the content of education is intrinsically related to a desire for a 
practical and humble exercise of Christianity (Strictures on the Modern System 
of Female Education vol 1: 212). So too, More linked the success of moral reform 
with the assurance of the security and stability of the British nation.  More 
emphasised the importance of broader principles and a long-term approach to 
moral and intellectual education, focused on the development of intellectual 
maturity as opposed to the short-term time filler to prevent superficial 
 
 
92 
 
juvenile flaws.  More argued for the benefits of certain kinds of reading and 
warned against the injurious capacity of others.  For example, the 
development of modesty and propriety, character, and ‚spiritual maturity‛ 
were paramount, whereas vanity and ‚ill directed sensibility‛ were to be 
avoided (vol 1: 118). 
Additionally, More had more than just the working poor in mind as the 
audience for the series.  More was consistently interested in offering edifying 
literature for those "of rank and fortune‛ as her earlier Essays (1777) and An 
Estimate of the Religion of the Fashionable World (1793) demonstrate.  In Strictures 
on the Modern System of Female Education (1799) More details a plan for the 
moral and intellectual education of "young women of rank and fortune.‛  
Many of the principles contained therein are more broadly applicable, even as 
More recognised that the practical demands that faced the working poor 
necessitated training in practical skills.  It became increasingly important to 
More to present the individual tracts for a broad readership which included 
both the poor and those of  ‛rank and fortune‛ as she became aware that the 
latter group were buying the tracts to distribute to employees and tenants 
while also reading them for their own amusement.  More’s awareness of this 
shift in her audience is evident in the different editions of collected tracts 
produced in varying levels of quality.  For example, the premium editions 
were gilt-edged and printed on a much higher quality stock.  
 
 
93 
 
More’s facility for entering public debate, aware of their prevailing terms 
has been sorely underestimated.  More did not sit back satisfied in her own 
comfort and education; rather she adopted the genres and forms of the 
popular literature which caused her such concern as tools, stretching her own 
literary facility to its limits.  While More’s acceptance of what Demers terms 
‚More’s central belief in a natural hierarchical social order‛ does seem very 
conservative, More also challenged the views of the prevailing social elite 
(Demers 31).  More exhorted men as well as women to match their conduct 
with their spiritual convictions, exhorting the poor and the wealthy alike to 
redress errant behaviour and match their actions to their spiritual convictions.  
While she was unashamedly conservative in both her politics and theology, 
More was anything but the ‚standard-bearer for the status quo‛ she has been 
called (Scheurmann "Hannah More and the English Poor" 237). 
Following More’s withdrawal from day-today involvement with the 
Repository in November, 1797, new Tracts continued to be published by Evans 
until September, 1798; a year later The Religious Tract Society was formed to 
continue the same work.  Some scholars make an explicit connection between 
the Cheap Repository and the Religious Tract Society and infer that the 
Repository simply morphed into the Society (Rivers 2).  While the two shared 
similar objectives and modes of operation, and though More and her circle 
were supportive of the agenda of the Society, More was not directly involved 
 
 
94 
 
as a contributor or editor.  The Society explicitly acknowledges that its 
members saw themselves as successors to More’s enterprise, but also states in 
its official history that More was not involved with the Society’s founding or 
operation (W. Jones 7).  This is not surprising given that the Cheap Repository 
was a tiring enterprise, and her relief at ‚closing‛ the series was not soon 
forgotten (Roberts iii, 61). 
Assessing the efficacy of the Cheap Repository in ‚stemming the tide of 
infidelity and disaffection‛ is almost impossible at this historical distance (v: 
vii).  It is, of course, debateable whether immediacy would be of any 
assistance in the estimation.  It is not a mere quirk of history that the kind of 
Revolution that changed the face of France never occurred in Britain.  Reform 
movements for improved educational, health, and work opportunities were 
instead led by the very conservatives whose status (and ultimately financial 
security) might be undermined by social change.  The sales and distribution 
figures were by any estimation astonishing, at over 2 million tracts in the first 
year of sales alone (More vol iv, n.p).  However, and despite the ubiquity of 
these tracts in homes across Britain and the rest of the British empire, it is not 
really possible to state without reservation the impact of the tracts on the 
poor, including the newly literate, because the number of tracts that ended up 
in into the homes of the ‚lower orders‛ were not identical to the numbers 
printed (M. G. Jones 147).  This is, in part, because the poor was not the only 
 
 
95 
 
audience for the tracts, and also because they often did not buy the tracts 
themselves receiving them instead from wealthy landlords, Lords of the 
Manor, or clergy who  distributed the tracts to their tenants, employees, or 
congregants.  
More, as representative of the Repository, has often been criticized for 
giving the conservative elites the excuse to continue to believe in their grand 
notions of superiority (Pedersen 82).  However, Susan Pederson argues that in 
the context of Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, More did not intend to give the 
impression that, as a member of the upper class, she was sentimentalizing the 
ignorant bliss in which the poor and downtrodden lived, even if this is the 
way that a modern reader perceives it to be (82).The dissonance  between 
More’s intent and a modern assessment of the manner in which she exercised 
her values is common, primarily because the values themselves are so 
antithetical to the values of those scholars making the assessments. 
 
Content and Form 
 
Using chapbook literature to raise awareness about and to seek to put in 
place a program for the moral reformation of the poor was not a new idea in 
the 1790s.  E. P. Thomson has described the various methods used by the 
Church throughout the eighteenth-century to preach the duties required by 
obedience to the poor, and the inefficacy of those methods (386).  For 
example, the Society for Distributing Religious Tracts began disseminating 
 
 
96 
 
pamphlets among the poor in 1782 (Porter 293).  Earlier still, the Society for 
Promoting Christian Knowledge  (S. P. C. K), founded in 1698, and the Society 
for the Reformation of Manners, which dates from the early 1690s, used tracts as 
a means to combat both the irreligion and the ill-discipline of the poor (Porter 
295).2 The Cheap Repository Tracts drew on the chapbook form and far 
exceeded the success of any previous enterprise with moral or religious 
didactic intent.  Notably, the S. P. C. K. later reprinted at least two dozen 
Cheap Repository Tracts between 1800 and 1820. 
 The success of the Cheap Repository can in part be put down to the 
adoption of the forms of the ‘popular’ chapbook literature of the period.  
Notably, many of the shorter pieces were written to the tunes of popular, 
usually bawdy, songs of the time.  Ironically, despite the proliferation of pro-
revolutionary pamphlets (such as those to which Village Politics (1792) and 
possibly the most famous of all the Cheap Repository Tracts, The Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain (1795), respond) being an impetus for the series, the 
inflammatory chapbooks never reached the level of success that became 
familiar to the Repository.  Many of the tracts were intended to directly combat 
‚the vulgar and licentious publications‛ and the ‚profane and indecent songs 
and penny papers‛ that were the usual fare of the hawkers and booksellers 
(Pedersen 87).  Even the title Cheap Repository masked the reformist intent;  
                                                 
2 The S.P.C.K. later reprinted a number of tracts from the Cheap Repository. 
 
 
97 
 
and with prices of ½ - 1½  d., the tracts were within the means of the working 
poor (M. G. Jones 141).The tracts were originally printed on coarse brown 
paper, were adorned with lively and detailed woodcuts and illustrative book-
plates, were also titled to attract attention (Hopkins 212).  Some particularly 
colourful titles include: The Execution of Wild Robert, Being a Warning to all 
Parents; Robert and Richard; or the Ghost of poor Molly, who was drowned in 
Richard's mill pond.  To the tune of: Collin’s Mulberry Tree; Gin Shop, or a Peep into 
Prison and The Wonderful Advantages of Adventuring in the Lottery.  Mary Jones 
quotes a letter from More to a Mrs Bouverie where she gives insight into the 
thought put into the aesthetic form of the chap-books; More comments that 
‚by trying to make them a little amusing in the manner as well as ornamental 
in their appearance we may in time bring them still to high things‛ (qtd in M. 
G. Jones 139). 
In this employment of the profane and popular for the purpose of moral 
form, More was inspired by Sarah Trimmer.  Trimmer’s very successful tracts 
and stories for children adapted popular secular forms of märchen and 
chapbook literature to incorporate moral lessons.  More’s Mendip Hills 
Sunday Schools were part of a growing movement of such schools across 
Britain in the 17980s and 1790s and were strongly influenced by the model, 
and the success, of Trimmer’s own groundbreaking Sunday Schools.  
 
 
98 
 
 All of the 127 tracts in the series are imbued with a religious tone.  
They present a broad spectrum of religious, moral, social, political, and 
philanthropic issues.  The Cheap Repository categorized the tracts into three 
types: Histories, Poetry, and Sunday Readings.  The Histories and Sunday 
Readings are usually written in prose, while the Poetry is generally written in 
canto form, mirroring the meter of the popular tune to which it is set.  
Approximately three quarters of the tracts can be described as moral or 
entertaining tales, with the remaining one quarter, usually the Sunday 
Readings, having explicitly religious content often taking the form of direct 
explication of the Scriptures. 
The tracts indirectly raise awareness for the need for moral reform 
through the depiction of licentious behaviours and vices such as gambling, 
drinking, prostitution, and hypocrisy.  These behaviours are connected with 
personal and societal degeneracy through vivid characterisation.  Character 
traits are often signalled by character names which reflect a character trait to 
be imitated or avoided.  In a manner reminiscent of Pilgrim’s Progress, 
characters often function as models of virtue and morality; for example, Mrs. 
Jones, the virtuous merchant’s wife who preached frugality in time of scarcity 
in The Cottage Cook; or, Mrs. Jones's Cheap Dishes.  Shewing the way to do much 
good with little money (1797) and later provided for the moral and religious 
 
 
99 
 
education of poor children in The Sunday School.3 Similarly, character traits 
which are unworthy or undesirable are often depicted by characters (and 
their names) who embody degenerate behaviours.  In one of More’s own 
tracts, The Two Shoemakers, Jack Brown embodies idleness, and thus 
degeneracy: ‚Jack Brown grew so very idle and negligent, that he now totally 
neglected his affairs, and to hard drinking he added deep gaming‛ (The Works 
of Hannah More 69).  Idle attitudes are depicted as synonymous with vice and 
it is inferred that the former will lead inevitably to the latter.  The tracts 
consistently link the moral degeneracy of individuals, families, and 
communities with the image of the debauched nation.  The depiction of the 
poor is generally, but not entirely, distanced from religion and subject to the 
rampant excesses of the aristocracy.  The pious poor are depicted as content 
with their circumstances living faithfully, encouraged by faithful clergy and 
honest nobles.  
 Religious preoccupations are pervasive in the tracts, even if they are 
not always explicit in the title (though often the longer titles describe the 
moral state of affairs).  An example of a tract which explicitly flags religious 
preoccupations is The Judgment Day, in which a true and just account of the 
                                                 
3 The title of Cottage Cook was later changed to Cure for Melancholy.  A footnote on the first 
page of the tract in Collected Works (1801) states: ‚This was first printed under the title of The 
Cottage Cook‛ More, The Works of Hannah More  325. 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
manner in which the scriptures teach that we and all mankind are to be tried on the 
great day of judgment.  Showing plainly who shall go away and who shall go away to 
everlasting death, and who to life eternal - with a fear words of encouragement to 
fearful Christians(June, 1797) very clearly signposts its religious tone.  The 
reader is warned that no immoral activity will escape judgment, and all 
persons will be subject to the judgment of an omnipotent God. 
  You who to the world dissemble, 
  While you practice deeds of night, 
  Hypocrites! Behold and tremble, 
  All these deeds are brought to light. 
 
More’s concern that ‘helpful’ reading material be available to the literate 
poor was not merely an abstract motivation.  Concern for the poor, whose 
choices were limited because of their means, and to counteract the growth of 
profane publications, is an explicit feature of the discourse within the tracts 
themselves.  In The Two Wealthy Farmers, Mr. Worthy despondently laments 
that ‚this corrupt reading is now got down even amongst some of the lower 
classes.  And it is an evil which is spreading every day‛ ("The Two Wealthy 
Farmers" 134).  Moreover, by consciously adopting the forms, style, and 
distribution methods of popular literature, the tracts sought to remove a 
barrier that the moral content might have otherwise comprised.  The Story of 
Sinful Sally provides an example of the Repository’s conscious echoing of the 
style of the licentious chapbooks, while also imbuing the form with the 
elements necessary for moral reform.  The fluidity of the tract, a product of 
 
 
101 
 
the poetic form it embodies, together with the captivating title and content, 
successfully secure the reader’s interest:  
  Now I lay my Bible by, 
  Chuse that impious book so new, 
  Love the bold blaspheming lie, 
  And that filthy novel too. (Shorter Tracts 382) 
 
The Bible is juxtaposed with the novel.  The implication is that a choice to 
read the Bible is a choice for piety, and the choice of the novel as one’s 
reading material is a choice for blasphemy and filth.  Moreover, the novel is 
depicted as dangerously seductive in its appeal.  The message may be one of 
caution and sobriety; but the tone echoes the style of literature, the bawdy 
verse, that it sought to condemn. 
 The combination of the popular form (often sacrilegious) and a moral 
reformist agenda establishes the tracts as a paradigm for virtue and moral 
education and reflects their design as an alternative to the socially 
destabilizing licentious and profane literature that More and her fellow 
contributors feared.  More and her contributors sought to draw upon that 
which would be attractive to the poor and to use effectively the profane for 
sacred aims.  Marjorie Morgan observes that More’s blending of an ‚immoral 
style‛ with ‚virtuous substance‛ was felt to be justified by her 
contemporaries, even the most conservative, because it was inspired by a 
worthy motive (212). 
 
 
 
102 
 
The Choice of Anonymity and Pseudonymity 
 
The choice to publish these tracts anonymously and pseudonymously is 
significant.  Disentangling the authorship of individual tracts will also assist 
in discerning patterns and trends across the tracts.  Furthermore, the 
development of a methodology for attribution would be enormously helpful 
to discern patterns and trends within the Cheap Repository as a whole, while 
the conclusive attribution of individual tracts would greatly aid the 
scholarship surrounding that particular tract as well as improve upon 
scholars’ ability to analyse the writings of its author and possibly make 
further non-traditional attributions.  
The reality of anonymous authorship is also relevant to the place of the 
Cheap Repository within eighteenth-century discourse.  We can begin an 
exploration of the relationship between anonymity and authorship by 
reflecting on Michael Foucault’s ‚What is an Author?‛  Foucault suggests that 
modern literary authorship is defined by the author-function.  The author-
function describes the various ways in which the name of the author operates 
as an element of the discourse (Foucault 149).  Mark Rose observes,   
The name of the author becomes a kind of brand name, a 
recognizable sign that the cultural commodity will be of a certain 
kind and quality.  No institutional embodiment of the author-work 
relation, however, is more fundamental than copyright, which not 
only makes possible the manufacture and distribution of books, 
films, and other commodities but also, by endowing it with legal 
reality, helps to produce and affirm the very identity of the author 
as author (Rose 1-2).  
 
 
103 
 
 
Some scholars have linked the reduction of anonymity with the emergence of 
commercial culture.  However, as Robert J Griffin points out, a direct and 
exclusive relationship between the author’s name and copyright ownership 
does not always exist (Griffin 2).  Moreover, there are other reasons why an 
author may choose to publish anonymously or pseudonymously.  
Motivations for choosing anonymous and pseudonymous publication by 
authors are numerous, and are completely dependent on the personal beliefs 
and circumstances of the author, as well as the relationship between the 
author and the printer or bookseller.  Chapter Two briefly discussed the 
prevalence of anonymous authorship in eighteenth-century literature and 
quoted a study by James Raven, which states that during the 1790s 62% of all 
novels were published anonymously (Raven 144).  Unfortunately there has 
been no similar overarching study of the percentage of chapbooks and tracts 
published anonymously during this period so we can only speculate as to 
how prevalent anonymous authorship of tracts were during this period.  
Some historical reasons for publishing anonymously include reticence on 
the basis of social status (aristocratic position) or gender, ‚religious self-
effacement,‛ anxiety over public exposure, and an act of conscious deception 
on the part of the author (Griffin 3; Mullan 6).  Alexis Easley argues that 
gender was a significant aspect of the choice of anonymity in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries, especially when women were participating in 
 
 
104 
 
political, economic, or theological discourse (48).  Easley discusses the 
involvement of women in the industry of printing and writing and details the 
factors contributing to this involvement being an anonymous act by choice, 
rather than by compulsion. However Don Foster argues that  
as a general rule anonymous publication in early modern 
England had less to do with fear of censure, punishment, or 
shame than with the ordinary gratification of artistic 
performance. Long before professional authorship emerged in 
Britain as a road to celebrity status or figurative immortality, 
avocational literary endeavors were a playful pursuit not unlike 
that of courtly masques or the public stage, in which the subject 
self could speak under various personae, including even the 
thinnest verbal disguise, without being conflated with the 
speaking ‚I‛ of the text. Persons of rank, though more likely 
than commoners to dabble in literary endeavor, were more 
heavily invested in their personal name than in their literary 
product, and generally declined to let their name be dipped in 
printer’s ink. But anonymous publication and likewise explicit 
prefatory demurrals concerning ‚the stigma of print‛ (as we 
have come to call it), are two facets of the same modesty topos, 
demonstrating the writer’s lack of overweening pride in the text 
being circulated. Anonymous publication was a fundamentally 
democratic activity that allowed writers from every social rank 
to publish and to seek recognition for their work, while 
shielding their dignity, modesty, or privacy from trespass, and 
their name from being too closely associated with the product of 
a moment’s leisure (379). 
 
Nonetheless, Foster’s general statements do not capture the reasons why 
More was determined to be anonymous or semi-anonymous (through 
pseudonymity) in these tracts at the same time she was publishing under her 
own name, very successfully. More was not trying to avoid identification 
because she wanted to maintain her status, but because she did not want her 
 
 
105 
 
name or those of her high profile contributors to overshadow the contract of 
the tracts.  One function of the publication of the Cheap Repository Tracts 
anonymously or with pseudonymous authorship was to remove the 
reputation of the author from consideration, in an attempt to remove the 
authors of the tracts from the controversies of the eighteenth-century.  
Attaching an author’s name, especially those with prominent social 
reputations, would have likely overshadowed the philanthropic nature of 
these texts which were not aimed at bringing the authors literary or social 
fame. 
Even though More was, as Nicholas D Smith argues, forced to bow to the 
commercial necessity of adding her name to a publication to ensure adequate 
sales on at least one occasion.  Smith quotes a letter from More to Zachary 
Macaulay in which she acknowledges that Bible Rhymes would not have been 
saleable otherwise (123).  More also recognised that some readers might view 
tracts from the Cheap Repository as falling short of the standard of her other 
writing in the preface to her 1801 Collected Works: 
If it should be questioned whether the Tales which occupy the 
fourth and fifth volumes ought to have been made part of this 
collection, I can only answer, that tho’ in their original 
appearance it was found expedient to adopt a more usually 
familiar manner, and colloquial style; yet, in all that relates to 
sentiment and principle, and the ends of general utility, I am not 
conscious of having, on any occasion, taken more pains.  (Vol I, 
x) 
 
 
 
 
106 
 
Impact of Identifying Authors Of Individual Tracts 
 
Chapter Three identified at least nine other authors who are either 
probable or likely authors of individual tracts.  Four of these, Henry 
Thornton, William Mason, Sarah More, and Zachary Macaulay, contributed 
original, never-before-published, material.  In addition reprints of previously 
published works by Rev. William Gilpin, Benjamin Franklin, Daniel Defoe, 
Justice Henry Fielding, and Isaac Watts were printed as part of the Cheap 
Repository.  There is also evidence from More’s correspondence that Selina 
Mills Macaulay, and Rev. John Newton contributed tracts.  However, as yet, 
no individual tract can be attributed to either Newton or Mills.  Mary G. Jones 
also suggested that Mrs. Bouverie was a contributor (139).  No evidence has 
been uncovered to allow attribution of any individual tracts to this 
contributor. 
Clarification of the authorship of individual tracts marks an important 
watershed in Cheap Repository scholarship.  Moreover, the accepted 
bibliographies of the individual authors are enhanced by the addition of these 
tracts. In identifying contributors to the Repository another pattern emerged 
that would not otherwise have been apparent.  It has been known for some 
years that Horace Walpole, though he did not share More’s religious views, 
was a financial and moral supporter of the Repository (Walpole et al. 6).  
Walpole’s support extended to introducing some of the contributors to More.  
 
 
107 
 
That is to say, while More was the driving creative, moral, and practical force 
behind the series, not all the contributors were close intimates.  For example, 
William Mason’s involvement in the Cheap Repository is most likely a direct 
result of his friendship with Walpole.  Mason was a close friend of Walpole, 
but there is no evidence to suggest that he knew More well or had 
participated in any of More’s other social reform enterprises including 
abolition, anti-revolutionary political lobbying, and her Sunday School 
movements (Phelps 97).  
 
Concluding Remarks 
 
The Cheap Repository was not the result of the labors of just one woman, 
though without the insight and passion of Hannah More, its sheer magnitude 
would never have been realized.  Asserting the authorship of individual tracts 
was a secondary concern during the publication of the series and the 
bibliographical record has consequently become riddled with confusion, 
partly as a result of the misapplication of the work of scholars, such as Green 
and Spinney.  Persistent and repeated errors in the reception and application 
of bibliographic scholarship that concerns the tracts most patently and 
substantially affects tracts whose authorship may be attributed to More 
herself.  
This thesis has enumerated the current state of the bibliographical 
scholarship surrounding the Cheap Repository Tracts.  Chapter Three listed 
 
 
108 
 
those tracts for which authorship can be considered unproblematic as well as 
those tracts for which authorship must be considered problematic and should 
not be attributed to any author, not least More, without further traditional 
and non-traditional authorship attribution study.  Identifying the authors of 
individual tracts, and consequently those other authors who contributed to 
the series, was once described by G.H. Spinney as being an ‚impossible‛ 
problem to solve.  This thesis has demonstrated that the disparate inroads 
made by scholars along with extant epistolary and manuscript evidence 
provide evidence as to the identity of at least some of the contributors to the 
Repository.  This thesis has also shown that the use of non-traditional authorial 
attribution methodology along with traditional scholarship would be of great 
use in identifying the authors of all 127 tracts of the Cheap Repository.  In 
addition, Appendix provides the basis for what could become an exhaustive 
index to the Cheap Repository Tracts providing both a descriptive bibliography 
and a listing of libraries which hold copies of the 1795-1798 tracts.  Each entry 
of an efficacious Cheap Repository Index might adhere to the following 
template, which is based on that of the Index found in the Nicholas D. Smith’s 
The Literary Manuscripts and Letters of Hannah More (2008), to ensure the 
compilation of the most useful information for the purposes of scholarship: 
1. Title and/or first line 
2. Last, first (authorship attributed) [More, Hannah; Anonymous; 
More, Hannah (authorship attributed)] 
 
 
109 
 
3. Source and date of first publication (when known) and selected 
subsequent reprinting 
4. Annotation: references to the work by More and contemporaries 
in printed and unpublished sources 
5. Brief description of the original printing (including plate) 
6. Location and call number/shelf mark of original printings 
 
Essential scholarship that remains to be attempted includes, but is not 
limited to: (a) an Index to the Cheap Repository tracts as described above; (b) a 
comprehensive non-traditional authorial attribution study of the Cheap 
Repository -- This non-traditional study would initially attempt to confirm 
whether everything attributed to [Z.] is the work of Hannah More, and then, 
to seek authorial attribution of the whole Cheap Repository beginning with 
those possible authors suggested by other scholars; (c) a concordance to the 
Cheap Repository Tracts; and (d) a critical annotated bibliography of primary 
and secondary works by and about Hannah More. Above all, accuracy in 
scholarship is desirable and establishing a definitive bibliography of the Cheap 
Repository tracts will assist scholars in their examination of these highly 
influential pieces of late eighteenth-century literary and popular culture. 
 
  
 
 
110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Cheap Repository Tracts Bibliography & Scholarship 
 
111 
 
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[1] 1795.  
March 3 
The Apprentice's Monitor; or Indentures in verse, 
shewing what they are bound to do. Proper to be 
hung up in all shops 
[Green 64; DLB - 3] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). [Spinney 
314; BL] 
William 
Watson; with 
Path to Riches 
[Green 64]  
 
S.Hazard, 
1795 [Kress] 
 
The 
Apprentice's 
Monitor; or 
Indentures in 
verse, shewing 
what they are 
bound to do. 
Proper to be 
hung up in all 
shops. Together 
with The 
Golden Rule in 
verse. 
Harvard - 
Goldsmiths'-
Kress no. 
16442.3. 
 
Oxford – 
BOD Vet. A5 
b.133 (5)  
 
British 
Library – 
GRC 
1872.a.1.(111) 
and 
1870.d.1.(82) 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 314] 
[Green 65] 
[Kress] 
 
 [Spinney 
310;Jones 
272;Green 65;  
DLB;] 
[2] 1795. 
March 3 
Babay. A true story of a Good Negro Woman 
[Green 65;Spinney 314] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
 Green 
65;[Spinney 314] 
See Spinney 
for more info. 
 Not Signed, 
1795 
[Spinney 314] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
112 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[3] 1795. 
March 3 
The Book of Martyrs. An account of Holymen who 
died for the Christian Religion 
[Green 66; Spinney 314] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
[Spinney 314] 
Bath: Hazard, 
Marshall, 1796 
[Green 66] 
Published 
with Turn the 
Carpet. 
British 
Library – 
Not Signed, 
1795 
[Spinney 314] 
  
[4] 1795. 
March 3 
The Carpenter; or, the Danger of evil company  
[Green 66; DLB-4] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). [Spinney 
314; DLB] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1797. 
[Green 67] 
with The 
Sorrows of 
Yamba. 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns 
(     )[Green 
66] 
 
Dublin: 
Watson  
(   ) [Green 66] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Green 66] 
 
Special. 1819 
[Green 66] 
 
Harvard - 
 
[Z.] 
[1795, 
Spinney 314] 
[1795, Green 
66] 
1843HB (48) [Jones 272; 
Spinney 310; 
DLB; Myers 
(282, n. 17)] 
[5] 1795. 
March 3 
The Cock Fighter 
[Spinney 315] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
The Cock 
Fighter. A True 
Story. Also 
versified by that 
famous poet,  
 Not Signed, 
1795 
[Spinney 315] 
 Mr Cooper? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
113 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Mr. Cooper. 
[1820; Green 
67] 
 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 1820 
[Green 67] 
 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White, 1820 
[Green 67] 
    
[6] 1795. 
March 3 
Divine Songs, to which are added prayers for 
Children 
[Spinney 315] 
 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London. J 
Cottle, Bristol, 
1795). 
[Green 69] 
 
Marshall, White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 69] 
Part of 
Hazard’s 
stock in trade 
and altered  
for use in the 
CR [Spinney 
315)  
 
Divine Songs 
attempted in 
easy language 
for the use of 
children. By J 
Watts D.D. 
[Green 69] 
 Isaac Watts 
[Spinney 315] 
 Attributed to 
Isaac Watts 
 
There are 
many versions 
of the same 
tract with 
varied 
publication 
details in 
ECCO. 
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
114 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[7] 1795. 
March 3 
Execution of MacLean, commonly known by the name 
of the Gentleman Highwayman 
[Spinney 315] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
[Spinney 315] 
  Execution of 
MacLean, the 
highwayman. 
(Advertised 
but not met 
with.) – 
presumably 
this means that 
Green had not 
seen a copy. 
[Green 69] 
British Library 
- 
Not Signed, 
1795 
[Spinney 315] 
  
[8] 1795. 
March 3 
The Gin-Shop; or, a Peep into a prison  
[DLB - 5] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). [Spinney 
315; DLB] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, (1795). 
[Green 71] with 
Patient Joe. 
 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Nisbet, Binns 
(1795) [Green 
71] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns 
with Patient Joe 
(1795) [Green 
71] 
Collected 
Works 
1795, 1798, 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
[Green 81] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 315] 
[Green 71] 
1843HB (50) [Spinney 
315;Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
272] 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
115 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    With Patient 
Joe, Dan and 
Jane Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Nisbet, Binns 
(1796) [Green 
81] 
 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1800) 
[Green 81] 
    
[9] 1 795. 
March 3 
The History of the Plague in London in 1665, with 
suitable Reflections. 
[Spinney 315; Green 75] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
  Not Signed 
[Spinney 315] 
 Daniel Defoe 
[this is a 
reprint of a 
older non 
CRT] 
[10] 1795. 
March 3 
The History of Tom White the Postilion  
[DLB-6] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
[DLB] 
(Philadelphia: 
Published by 
B. Johnson, 
1798) 
[DLB] 
 
The History of 
Tom White the 
Postboy 
 (Dublin: 
Published by 
D.Graisberry, 
1803) 
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT) 
 
11 different 
electronic 
reprints in 
ECCO 
[Part I] [Z.] 
[Spinney 315] 
[Green 74] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(219-282)  
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(121-156) 
 
1843HB (224) 
 
[Spinney 
315;Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
113] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
116 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Tom White the 
Post boy  - new 
title appeared 
in Works 
(1801). 
    
[11] 1795. 
March 3 
The Horse Race, or the pleasures of the course 
[Spinney 316] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795).  
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. & 
J. Johnson, 
1800). Iss. 3 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798  
[Green 76] 
Not Signed 
[1800] 
  
[12] 1795. 
March 3 
Husbandry Moraliz’d; or, Pleasant Sunday 
reading for a farmer’s kitchen . Part I 
[Spinney 316] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
Husbandry 
Moralised, or 
pleasant 
Sunday 
Reading to a 
farmer’s 
kitchen. Part I.  
(Marshall, 
Hazard, 
White, 
Hazard 1796) 
[Green 76] 
 
Wm. Watson 
& Son 
(Dublin, 1820) 
[Green 76] 
 Not Signed 
[Spinney 316] 
  
[13] 1795. 
March 3 
Life of William Baker, with his Funeral Sermon, by 
the Rev. Mr. Gilpin. 
[Spinney 316] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R.  
 Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800,  
Rev. Mr. 
Gilpin. 
[Spinney 316] 
 Attributed to 
Rev. Mr Gilpin  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
117 
         
Ref  No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   White, London, 
1795). 
 1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Green 77]  [Spinney 316] 
[14] 1795. 
March 3 
The Market Woman, a true tale, or Honesty is the 
best policy. By Z 
[DLB-7; Green 78] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). [DLB] 
Dublin, 1800 
 
Wm Watson 
(With: Path to 
Riches. 
Dublin: 1820) 
 
Ann Watson 
(With: Path to 
Riches. 
Dublin: 1820) 
 [Z.] 
[Spinney 316] 
[Green 78 
 [Spinney 316; 
DLB] 
[15] 1795. 
March 3 
Murders. True examples of the interposition of 
Providence in the discovery and punishment of 
murder. 
[Spinney 316] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795).  
Murders. True 
examples of the 
interposition of 
Providence in 
the discovery 
and punishment 
of murder. By 
that famous 
magistrate Mr. 
Justice Fielding 
[Green 79] 
 
(Bath: Sold by 
S. Hazard and 
J. Marshall & 
R. White,  
 By that 
famous 
magistrate 
Mr. Justice 
Fielding 
[Spinney 316] 
[Green 79] 
 By that 
famous 
magistrate 
Mr. Justice 
Fielding 
[Spinney 316] 
 
Henry 
Fielding 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
118 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    London, 
1795). [Green 
79] 
 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White, 1820 
[Green 79] 
 
As a 
chapbook 
(Stirling, 
1799). [Green 
79] 
    
[16] 1795. 
March 3 
A New history of a True Book<Part the first. 
(broadside – 36 stanzas) 
[Spinney 316; Green 79] 
 
A New history of a True Book, in verse (86 
stanzas) 
[Spinney 316; Green 79] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
Wm. Watson 
(with: The 
Beggarly Boy): 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 79] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1795 [vol 1] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 316] 
See Spinney (316) 
for more info 
 
[17] 1795. 
March 3 
The Old Man, His Children and the Bundle of Sticks, 
a fable [Spinney 316] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). 
With Here and 
there; The honest 
miller of 
Gloucestershire; 
The election. 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1798) 
[Green 73] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
80] 
[Z.] Green 
But  
Spinney states 
not in 1795 
imprint. 
[Spinney 316] 
 [Green] 
Contested 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
119 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[18] Entered 
20/2/1795 
The Roguish Miller; or, Nothing got by cheating  
[DLB- 8] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795). [DLB; 
Green 83] 
  [Z.] 
[Spinney 317] 
[Green 83] 
 [Spinney 317; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
113] 
[19] Entered 
20/2/1795 
The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain  
[DLB- 9; Myers (273)] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) [DLB; 
Spinney 318] 
 
New ed. Mar – 
May 1795. 
[Spinney 318] 
Part 1. 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 84] 
 
Part 2. 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 84] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 84] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 
1818(CT), 
1827, 1837 
 
See Green 
[84] for many 
other 
languages 
and editions 
and Green 
[85] for tracts 
and works in 
response to 
or inspired 
by the 
Shepherd of 
Salisbury 
Plain. 
None. Mar 
1795 
[Spinney 317] 
 
None 
[Phil.1800] 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 317 
March-May 
1795.] 
 
 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(1-69) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(1-18) (no Z) 
 
1843HB (190) 
 
 
 
 
Spinney 317 
‚By Hannah 
More, but not 
signed Z in 
March 3 1795 
ed. 
[Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(268, 273); 
Saunders (12); 
Demers 114; 
Stott 170; 
Lloyd 102; 
Schantz 473; ] 
 
This tract was 
not signed in 
some editions 
but is an 
example of a 
tract that is 
not only  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
120 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    [Green 84] 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White: Bath, 
1820 [Green 
84] 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 83] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
   widely 
accepted to be 
by More but 
was 
acknowledged 
by More in 
letters, 
collected 
works and 
references in 
other signed 
works. 
[20] Entered 
20/2/1795 
The Two Shoemakers  
[DLB - 10] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) [DLB; 
Green 91]  
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 91] 
 
republished as 
The History of 
the Two 
Shoemakers. 
Part I 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800).[DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1795,  
1818(CT), 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 318] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(69-218) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(38-120) 
 
1843HB (201) 
 
 
[Jones 
272;DLB; 
Demers 112; 
Spinney 318] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
121 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White, Bath, 
1820 [Green 
91] 
    
[21] Entered 
24/2/1795 
Two Soldiers. By S. 
[Spinney 318; Green 92] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 318; 
Green 92]  
Marshall, 
Hazard, 1796 
[Green 92] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 92] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns 
[Green 92] 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin [Green 
92] Ann 
Watson: 
Dublin [Green 
92] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
92] 
 
History of the 
Two Soldiers. 
12mo, 
Warrington, 
1820. [Green 
92] 
[S.]  
[Spinney 318] 
[Green 92] 
 Attributed to 
Sally More 
[Spinney 318; 
Myers (272)] 
[22] March 3 
1795 
Wonderful Escape from Shipwreck. An account of 
the loss of His Majesty’s Ship Centaur. 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J.  
Hazard, 
Marshall,  
Collected 
1795. 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 318] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
122 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  [Spinney 318] Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 318; 
Green 94] 
[Green 94] 
 
The Shipwreck. 
To which is 
added, The 
execution of 
Wild Robert 
 
Wm. Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 85] 
    
[23] May 1795 Lancashire Collier Girl 
[Spinney 318] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 318; 
Green 77] 
 Gentleman’s 
Magazine 
(1795) 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
 
[Green 77] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 318] 
[Green 77] 
 Jones 272; 
Myers (267). 
Stott 
claims that it 
was Thornton 
who reworked 
The Lancashire 
Collier Girl for 
publication in 
the Gentlemen’s 
Magazine 
(1795). [Stott 
178] 
CONTESTED 
[24] Entered 
4 May 
1795 
Sunday Reading, Part One. On the Religious 
Advantage of the Present Inhabitants of Great 
Britain 
[Spinney 318] 
(Bath: S. Hazard 
and J. Marshall 
& R. White, 
London, 1795) 
[Spinney 318;  
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 80] 
 Not Signed 
[Spinney 318] 
 Attributed to 
Henry 
Thornton 
[Stott 178] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
123 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Green 80]      
[25] June 1795. 
Entered 30 
May 1795. 
Sunday Reading. The Beggarly Boy. A Religious 
Parable. 
[Spinney 319] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Green 65; 
Spinney 319] 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 65] 
Another 
Edition, as 
above [Green 
65]. 
 
William 
Watson, 1820. 
[Green 65]. 
 
J.Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 65]. 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
65]. 
Collected 
Tracts 1798, 
1807, 1812, 
1827, 1837 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 319] 
 Attributed to 
Henry 
Thornton 
[Stott 178] 
[26] June 1795. 
Entered 25 
May 1795. 
The Execution of Wild Robert. Being a Warning to 
all parents. 
[Spinney 319] 
Single Sheet 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R.  
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Nisbet, Binns 
() 
Collected 
Tracts, 1795. 
[Spinney 
319], 1798,  
Not Signed 
[Spinney 319] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
124 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 319]  
 
12 mo. With The 
Carpenter, 1795. 
[Green 70] 
 
[Green 70] 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (   )   
[Green 70] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 
Binns, with 
Patient Joe (    ) 
[Green 70] 
 
Watson. With 
the Shipwreck, 
Dublin, (  ) 
[Green 70] 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839. 
[Green 70] 
   
[27] June 1795. 
Entered 27 
May 1795. 
The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. Part II  
[DLB-11; Spinney 319] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) [DLB]  
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). Iss 2. 
Collected 
Tracts 
1795, 
1818(CT). 
See [19] for 
more details.  
[Z.] 
[Spinney 319] 
[Z.]  
[1800] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(1-69) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(18-36) (no Z) 
 
1843HB (190) 
 
 
[Spinney 319; 
Jones 
272;DLB; 
Myers (283 n. 
22); Demers 
114; Stott 170] 
[8] July 1795 
Entered 29  
Sunday Reading. Daniel in the Den of Lions 
[Spinney 319] 
Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J.  
J.Evans & 
Sons,  
Collected 
1795. 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 319] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
125 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
 June 1795  Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Green 68; 
Spinney 319] 
Hatchard, 
Binns  
[Green 68] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
S.P.C.K 1836. 
    
[29] July 1795 
Entered 29 
June 1795 
Good Mother’s Legacy 
[Spinney 319] 
Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 319] 
 Collected 
CRT 1795. 
[S.] 
[Spinney 319] 
[By S.] 
[Green 72] 
 Attributed to 
Sally More 
[Spinney 319; 
Myers (277)] 
[30] July 1795 
Entered 19 
June 1795 
Patient Joe, or, the Newcastle Collier  
[DLB-12; Poems; Green 81] 
[single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) [DLB; 
Green 72].  
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1795 ) 
[Green 81] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 71 – 
two different 
editions with  
Collected 
Tracts 
 CRT 1795. 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833. 
 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 319] 
In a letter to her 
sister ‚I have 
written a new 
ballad called the 
‚Newcastle 
Collier‛ with which 
the Bishop of 
Durham is much 
pleased. (London: 
1795) (Roberts, 430) 
 
Poems (329-333) 
1843HB (50) 
[Spinney 319; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
113; ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
126 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    the same 
details] 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1800 ) 
[Green 72] 
 
Wm. Watson, 
Dublin, 1800 
[Green 72] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed & sold 
by J. 
Rakeshaw, 
1808) [DLB] 
 
Wm. Watson. 
With: 
Lancashire 
Collier Girl. 
Dublin, 1820. 
[Green 81] 
 
Ann Watson, 
Dublin, 1820. 
    
[31] August 
1795 
Entered 30 
July 1795 
Happy Waterman 
[Spinney 319] 
 (Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London,  
The Happy 
Waterman. To 
which is added a 
hymn of praise  
Collected 
Tracts 
Collected CRT 
1795. 1798,  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
127 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   1795) [Spinney 
319; Green 73] 
for an abundant 
harvest. By Z. 
[Green 73] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1800) 
[Green 73] 
 
Watson, 
Dublin (  ) 
[Green 73] 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
 
S.P.C.K. 1832, 
1833 
 
Religious 
Tract Society 
1861, 1883 
   
[32] August 
1795 
Entered 30 
July 1795 
Sunday Reading. Hints to all Ranks of People on 
the Occasion of the Present Scarcity 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
Hints to all 
ranks of people, 
on the occasion 
of the present 
scarcity. (Being 
taken from the 
story of our 
saviour’s 
miraculous 
feeding five 
thousand 
persons with 
five barley 
loaves and two 
small fishes) 
Marshall,  
Collected 
CRT 1795. 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 319] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
128 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 73] 
    
[33] August 
1795 
Entered 24 
July 1795 
The Plow-Boys Dream [single sheet] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795).  
[Spinney 320; 
Green 82] 
The plow boys 
dream [Green 
82] 
 
The Ploughboy’s 
Dream [Stott 
178] 
 
J.Evans & son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. With: 
Turn of the 
Carpet, 1795 
[Green 82] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. With: 
Turn of the 
Carpet, 1795 
[Green 82] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard and  
Binns. With:  
Collected 
Tracts 
1800 
[M.] 
[Spinney 320] 
[Green 82] 
Roberts(ii,430) 
 
Not signed 
[1800] 
 Attributed to 
William Mason 
[Spinney 320; 
Stott 178] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
129 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Turn of the 
Carpet, 1795 
[Green 82] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). Iss. 3 
    
[34] August 
1795 
Entered 24 
July 1795 
The Riot; or, Half a loaf is better than no bread  
[DLB-13; Poems; Myers] 
[single sheet] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795). [DLB; 
Green 83] 
(Full title) The 
Riot; or, Half a 
Loaf is better 
than no bread: 
in a Dialogue 
between Jack 
Anvil and Tom 
Hod; written in 
1795, a Year of 
Scarcity and 
Alarm. To the 
tune of : A 
cobbler there 
was, & c. By Z. 
[Green 83] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 83] 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
 
Collected 
Tracts  
CRT 1795. 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Z.]  
[Spinney 320] 
Roberts 
(ii,384) 
[Green 83] 
Poems (334-340) 
1843HB (49) 
  
[Spinney 320; 
Jones 272; 
Harland 177; 
DLB; Myers 
(270), 
Saunders (12) 
; Demers 112; 
Stott 182] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
130 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Also:  
The Riot; or, 
Half a loaf is 
better than no 
bread . with 
The Good 
Militia man, or 
that man that is 
worth a host 
and The loyal 
sailor, or no 
mutineering.  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1798 
[Green 83] 
    
[35] September 
1795 
Entered 31 
August 
1795 
Dame Andrews, a Ballad 
[Green 68; Spinney 320] 
[single sheet] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795). 
[Spinney 320] 
  Not Signed 
[Spinney 320] 
  
[36] September 
1795 
Entered 31 
August 
1795 
Sunday Reading. Noah’s Flood 
[Spinney 320] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795). 
[Spinney 320;  
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White, 1795. 
[Green 79] 
 
J. Evans &  
Collected 
Tracts 
CRT 1795. 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836. S.P.C.K  
Not Signed 
[Spinney 320] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
131 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Green 79] Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1795 
[Green 79] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1795 
[Green 80] 
1832, 1836    
[37] September 
1795 
Entered 31 
August 
1795 
The Way to Plenty: or, the second part of Tom 
White  
[DLB-14] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795) [Spinney 
320; DLB] 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 
The Way to 
Plenty; or The 
History of Tom 
White, the Post 
Boy (Dublin: 
D.Graisberry, 
1803) 
Myers gives 
the 
alternative 
title [Myers 
(282, n. 19)] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
 CRT 1795. 
1798, 1807, 
1812,  
1818(CT) 
1827, 1837,  
 
S.P.C.K.  
1832 1833 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 320] 
[Green 74] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(219-282) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(121-156) 
 
1843HB (224) 
 
[Spinney 320; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(270); ; Stott 
184] 
[38] October 
1795 
Entered 16  
Sunday Reading. The Harvest Home 
[Spinney 320] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S.  
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard,  
Collected 
Tracts 
1795, 1798,  
[Spinney 320]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
132 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
 September 
1795 
 Hazard, Bath, 
1795)  
[Spinney 320; 
Green 73] 
Binns (1795) (2 
different 
editions) 
[Green 73] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1795) 
[Green 73] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1795) 
[Green 73] 
1803, 1809, 
1827, 1836. 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1836 
   
[39] October 
1795 
Entered 18 
September 
1795 
The Honest Miller of Gloucestershire  
[DLB-15; Myers] 
[single sheet] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795). [DLB; 
Green 76] 
With Here and 
there; The old 
man, his 
children, and the 
bundle of sticks; 
The election. 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1798) 
[Green 73] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
 
S.P.C.K. 1861 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 321] 
[Green 76] 
1843HB (56) [Spinney 
321;Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(282, n. 15)] 
[40] October 
1795 
Entered 21 
September 
1795 
The Two Wealthy Farmers, or, the History of Mr. 
Bragwell. Part I  
[DLB-16] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795) [Spinney 
321; DLB] 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White [Green 
92] 
 
(Philadelphia:  
Collected 
Tracts (all 7 
parts of the 
Wealthy 
Farmers) 
 CRT 1795.  
[Z.] 
[1795-Spinney 
321] 
Not Signed 
[Dublin 18—
(HRC)] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
 
ALL 7 tracts – J.  
[Spinney 321; 
Jones 272; DLB; 
Demers 110, 
116] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
133 
         
Ref N o. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 
Alt Title:The 
History of Mr 
Bragwell ; or, 
the Two 
Wealthy 
Farmers 
[1843HB 
(129)] 
 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 [Green 
93] 
 Evans & Sons, 
Hatchard, Binns 
[Green 93] 
 
J.Evans & Co 
Hatchard, Hazard 
[Green 93] 
 
Howard & Evans, 
Hatchard, Binns 
[Green 93] 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 93] 
 
[41] November 
1795 
Entered 23 
October 
1795 
Sunday reading. The Parable of the Labourers in 
the Vineyard  
Marshall, White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 80] 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1795 
[Green 80] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1795 
[Green 80] 
 
(London: Sold 
by J. Marshall  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
 
[Green 81] 
Not Signed 
[1800] 
No copies known 
(1795) [Spinney 
321] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
134 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    & R. White 
and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) Feb-
May 1796. 
[Spinney 321] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). Iss. 3 
    
[42] November 
1795 
Entered 29 
October 
1795 
The Sorrows of Yamba; or the Negro Woman’s 
Lamentation. To the tune of: ‚Hosiers ghost.‛ By 
Z 
[Green 67; Green 83] 
Marshall, White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 86]  
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1797. 
[Green 67] 
with The 
Carpenter. 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1797. 
[Green 86] with 
The Carpenter. 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. [Green 
86] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
CRT 1795, 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 [Green 
86] 
 
Religious 
Tract Society 
Pamphlet, 
Newcastle, 
1823  
 
Not Signed 
[1800] 
 No Imprint 
viewed by 
Spinney 
[Spinney 321] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
135 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    (Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). Iss. 2 
    
 
[43] 
November 
1795 
Entered 31 
October 
1795 
The Two Wealthy Farmers; or, the History of Mr. 
Bragwell. Part II  
[DLB-17; Green 92] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) [DLB; 
Green 92]] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1795 
[Green 92] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 [Z.] 
[1795-Spinney 
321] 
 
Not Signed  
[Dublin 18—
(HRC)] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 321; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
110, 116; 
Myers 284, n. 
32] 
 Entered 13 
November 
1795 
The Idle Cobbler Spinney notes 
that while this is 
in the Stationers’ 
Hall Registers 
this tract does 
not appear in 
published lists, 
and it was not 
reprinted in later 
editions. He 
considers that it 
might be an 
early version of 
Two Shoemakers – 
part III. 
Published March  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
136 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   1796 which was 
withdrawn. 
‚Jack Brown, one 
of the Two 
Shoemakers 
typifies idleness‛ 
[Spinney 321]. 
     
[44] December 
1795 
Entered 3 
December 
1795 
A New Christmas Carol Called the Merry 
Christmas and Happy New Year 
[Spinney 321] 
Single Sheet. 
:With the 
carpenter 
(Marshall, 
White, Hazard, 
1795) [Green 79] 
 Collected 
CRT 1795. 
 No copies seen 
[Spinney 321] 
 
[45] December 
1795 
Entered 3 
December 
1795 
Sorrowful Sam; or, The Two Blacksmiths. By S  
[Myers (282, n. 20); Green 86] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795) 
[Spinney 321; 
Green 86] 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
 
Another Edit. J. 
Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns  
 
Wm. Watson: 
Dublin, 1820  
Collected 
Tracts 
CRT 1795, 
1798, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
[Green 86] 
[S.] 
[Spinney 322; 
Green 86] 
 Attributed to 
Sally More 
[Henry 
Thompson 
276 ; Spinney 
321; Myers 
(282, n 20)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
137 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[46] December 
1795 
Entered 3 
December 
1795 
Sunday Reading. The troubles of Life, being a 
familiar description of the troubles of the poor 
labourer; the little shopkeeper; the great 
tradesman; the sickly man; the disappointed lover; 
the unhappy husband; the widower; and, lastly, 
the child of sorrow. To which is added the Guinea 
and the Shilling. Sickeness, sorrow, death. 
[Spinney 321; Green 89] 
(Bath: Sold by S. 
Hazard and J. 
Marshall & R. 
White, London, 
1795) 
[Spinney 321; 
Green 89] 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1798 
[Green 89] 
 
J. Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
[Green 89] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 89] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard and 
Binns [Green 
89] 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
90] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 321] 
  
Collected 
Tracts 
1795 
[Green 67] 
Collected Tracts: The Carpenter, or the danger of 
evil company. The gin shop, or peep into a prison. 
The riot, or half a loaf is better than no bread: in a 
dialogue between Jack Anvil and Tom Hod. To the 
Tune of: ‘A cobbler there was.‛ Patient Joe, or the 
Newcastle Collier. The execution of Wild Robert, 
being a warning to all parents. A new Christmas  
Marshall, White, 
Hazard, 1795.  
[Green 67] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
138 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  carol, called the merry Christmas and happy new 
year. 
[Green 67] 
      
[47] January 
1796 
 
The History of Mary Wood The House-Maid; or, 
the Danger of false Excuses. 
[Spinney 321] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
[Spinney 321] 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 
White, 1795 
[Green 74] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798[II], 1800, 
1806 , 1827, 
1839 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 321] 
  
[48] January 
1796 
Entered 1 
January 
1796 
Robert and Richard; or the Ghost of poor Molly, 
who was drowned in Richard's mill pond. To the 
tune of : Collin’s Mulberry Tree 
[Spinney 322; DLB-18; Green 83] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [DLB; 
Green 83] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
83] 
 
J Evans & son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (with 
the Story of 
Sinful Sally) 
[Green 83] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
83 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806 , 1827, 
1839 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 322] 
Not signed in 
Green [83] 
1843HB (47) [Spinney 322; 
Jones 272; 
DLB] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
139 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[49] Entered 1 
January 
1796 
Sunday Reading. Some New Thoughts for the New 
Year [Spinney 322] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
Marshall, 1798 
[Green 85] 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 85] 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 85] 
 
S.P.C.K. 1832, 
1836 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 321] 
  
50 
Included 
in Spinney 
but not 
numbered 
Entered 1 
January 
1796 
The Middle Way’s the Best 
[Spinney 322] 
No copies known. 
One sent to 
Zachary 
Macauley and one 
to the Bishop of 
London.[Spinney 
323] 
 Spinney 
suggests that 
this tract was 
‚printed but 
suppressed 
before 
publication‛ 
[323] 
 
In a letter to 
Zachary 
Macauley 
(Bath: Jan 6, 
1796) More 
states ‚the 
party of 
moderates is 
so small that  
Not Signed 
[Spinney 322] 
(Roberts ii, 462 
January 6, 1796) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
140 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
     there is no 
such thing as 
issued the 
enclosed 
ballad from 
the Cheap 
Repository. 
One copy is 
for the 
Bishop, the 
other for your 
own eating  
(Roberts ii, 
462). 
   
51 
[50] 
February 
1796 
Entered 1 
February 
1796 
The Apprentice Turned Master; or, the Second 
Part of the Two Shoemakers: Shewing How James 
Stock from a Parish Apprentice Became a 
Creditable Tradesman [DLB-19; Myers (282, n. 
20)] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB; 
Green 91] 
Hazard, 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 91] 
 
republished as 
The History of 
the Two 
Shoemakers. 
Part II 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 
Dublin, 1800 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT) 
[Z.]  
[Spinney 323] 
[ECC0 – 
Dublin, 1800] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(69-218) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(38-120) 
 
1843HB (201) 
 
[Spinney 323; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(282, n. 20) ; 
Demers 112] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
141 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 91] 
    
52 
[51] 
February 
1796 
Entered 1 
February 
1796 
The Story of Sinful Sally, told by herself, shewing 
how from being Sally of the Green she was first led 
to become SINFUL SALLY, and afterwards 
DRUNKEN SAL, and how at last she came to a 
most melancholy and almost hopeless End; being 
therein a Warning to all young Women both in 
Town and Country  
[Green 87; Saunders (9)] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
[Spinney 324; 
Green 87] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binn. With: 
The Hampshire 
Tragedy. 
[Green 87] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns: Stirling, 
1807 [Green 
87]  
 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 87] 
 
Sold by John 
Evans and Co, 
undated. 
[Saunders (9), 
title from tract 
in Bodleian 
Library, 
Oxford.] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. [Green 
87]  
Not Signed 
[Spinney 324] 
 attributed by 
Saunders as 
‚being 
probably 
written by one 
of More’s 
sisters‛. 
[Saunders (9)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
142 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    The Story of 
sinful Sally. 
The Hampshire 
Tragedy. The 
bad bargain; 
and Robert and 
Richard. 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
87] 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
87] 
    
53 
[52] 
February 
1796 
Entered 1 
February 
1796 
The Touchstone; or, the way to know a true 
Christian. Being a description of the character of 
our blessed Saviour with an inquiry whether we 
are like him. To which is added, An appeal first to 
infidels, and then to persons who call themselves 
by the name of Christians. 
[Spinney 324; Green 89] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
[Spinney 324; 
Green 89] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
89] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
89] 
 
John Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [89] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 [Green 
89] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 324] 
 Attributed to 
Zachary 
Macauley 
[Stott 178] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
143 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
54 
[53] 
March 
1796 
Entered 29 
February 
1796 
The History of Idle Jack Brown; containing the 
merry story of the mountebank, with some account 
of the bay mare Smiler. Being the third part of the 
Two Shoemakers  
[Green 91] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
91] 
 
republished as 
The History of 
the Two 
Shoemakers. 
Part III 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT) 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 324] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(69-218) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(38-120) 
 
1843HB (201) 
 
[Spinney 324; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
112] 
55 
[54] 
March 
1796 
Entered 29 
February 
1796 
Sunday Reading. Onesimus; or, the Run-Away 
Servant Converted, 
[Spinney 324] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
[Spinney 324; 
Green 80] 
Onesimus; or, 
the Run-Away 
Servant 
Converted. A 
true story. 
Shewing what a 
wonderful 
improvement in 
his condition 
Onesimus 
experienced 
after he became 
a Christian. To 
which is added 
an affectionate  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 324] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
144 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    address to all 
those unhappy 
persons both 
men and 
women, who, 
like Onesimus, 
have left their 
home and have 
got into a bad 
way of living, 
and who also 
have a mind to 
hear how they 
may get out. 
[Green 80] 
 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796  
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1796 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1796 
[Green 80] 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
145 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
56 
  
[55] 
March 
1796 
Entered 29 
February 
1796 
The Shopkeeper Turned Sailor, or the folly of going 
out of our element. Shewing what a clever man 
John the Shopkeeper was in his own business, and 
what a rash step he took in resolving to go upon 
the water. Part I  
[DLB-21; Green 85] 
Single Sheet 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Spinney 
324; DLB; Green 
85] 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by 
B.& J. 
Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 
Also, 
published in 
four parts. 
John the 
shopkeeper 
turned sailor, 
or the folly of 
going out of our 
element. In four 
parts (no 
distinct or 
separate 
headings) 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 85] 
  
See [106] for 
Demers 
argument that 
‚Loyal Sailor‛ 
is the fourth 
part. 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 
[Green 85] 
 
See [106] for 
Demers 
argument 
that ‚Loyal 
Sailor‛ is the 
fourth part. 
[Z.] 
Spinney 324 
(some 
imprints not 
signed) 
 
Only Part III 
signed Z 
[Green 85] 
 [Spinney 324; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
113] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
146 
   
      
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
57 
[56] 
April 1796 
Entered 1 
April 1796 
The Conversion of St. Paul the apostle. [Green 67; 
Spinney 325] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Spinney 
325] 
Marshall, 
Hazard (  ) 
[Green 67] 
 
J.Evans & 
Sons, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (   ) 
[Green 67] 
 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
[Green 67] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 325] 
  
58 
[57] 
April 1796 
Entered 1 
April 1796 
Jack Brown in Prison ... Being the fourth part of the 
History of the Two Shoemakers  
[DLB-22] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB] 
republished as 
The History of 
the Two 
Shoemakers. 
Part IV 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. & 
J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT), 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 325] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(69-218) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(38-120) 
 
1843HB (201) 
 
[Spinney 325; 
Jones 272; DLB; 
Demers 112] 
59 
[58] 
April 1796 
Entered 1 
April 1796 
The Shopkeeper Turned Sailor, or the folly of going 
out of our element. Shewing what a clever man John 
the Shopkeeper was in his own business, and what a 
rash step he took in resolving to go upon the water. 
Part II 
[Green 85] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Green 85] 
Marshall, 
White, Hazard, 
Elder [Green 
85] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 
[Green 85] 
Not signed 
[Spinney 325] 
 [Demers 113] 
60 
[59] 
May 1796 
Entered 2 
May 1796 
Sunday Reading. The General Resurrection. Part I. 
Being a description taken from scripture of some of 
the events which will come to pass at the end of the 
World. 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath,  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (   ) 
[Green 71] 
Published 
with 
Judgement Day: 
Part II   
Not Signed 
[Spinney 325] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
147 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  [Green 71] 1796) Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (  ) 
[Green 71] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard  (  ) 
[Green 71] 
 
Wm. Watson 
& Son, 
Dublin. 12mo 
(   ) 
 [Green 71] 
 
(Evans) 
[Spinney 325] 
 
Collected 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836  [Green 
71] 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1836 [Green 
71] 
   
61 
[60] 
May 1796 
Entered 2 
May 1796 
The Hackney Coachman, or the Way to get a good 
fare  
[Poems; DLB-23; Myers] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [DLB; 
Green 72] 
 
Wm. Watson: 
Dublin, (   ) 
[Green 72] 
The Hackney 
Coachman, or 
the way to get a 
good fare. To 
the tune:- I 
wish I was a 
fisherman. By 
Z [Green 72] 
 
Differing 
Version  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798 
 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 325] 
[By Z] 
[Green 72] 
 
Poems (325-328) 
1843HB (57) 
[Spinney 325; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(273); 
Saunders (11)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
148 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Marshall, 
White Hazard,  
1796 [Green 72] 
    
62 
[61] 
May 1796 
Entered 2 
May 1796 
The History of Charles Jones, the footman 
[Spinney 326] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). 
The History of 
Charles Jones, 
the footman. 
Written by 
Himself. 
[Green 74] 
 
Marshall, 
Hazard (1796) 
[Green 74] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798[II], 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
 
S.P.C.K. 1832, 
1833 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 326] 
  
63 
[62] 
June 1796 
Entered 31 
May 1796 
The Cheapside Apprentice; or the History of Mr. 
Francis H<.Fully setting forth the danger of playing 
with edge tools. Shewing how a gay life may prove a 
short one, and that a merry evening may produce a 
sorrowful morning. By S. 
[Green 67] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
 
Marshall, Hazard, 
1796 
[Green 67] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
1800 
[Green 67] 
 
Warrington: 
J.Evans & Co,  
The Cheapside 
Apprentice; or 
the History of 
Mr. Francis 
H**** 
[Spinney 326] 
Collected 
Works 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. 
[S.] 
[Spinney 326] 
[Green 67] 
 Attributed to 
Sally More 
[Spinney 326] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
149 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Hatchard, 
Hazard, 1800. 
[Green 67] 
     
64 
[63] 
June 1796 
Not 
entered 
The Election. A quite new song. Shewing many 
which ought not to be dome. Being a new song 
very fit to be sung in all places where election is 
going on. To the Tune of: Dusky Night 
[Green 69; Spinney 326] 
Single Sheet. No 
imprint 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). 
[Green 69] 
J.Evans & son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. With 
Here and There, 
1798 [Green 
69] 
 
With Here and 
there; The 
honest miller of 
Gloucestershire; 
The old man, 
his children, 
and the bundle 
of sticks. 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1798) 
[Green 73] 
 
(Roberts ii, 
479)  
 
The Election. 
A quite new 
song 
[Spinney 326] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 326] 
  
65 
[64] 
June 1796 
Entered 31 
May 1796 
Sunday Reading. On Carrying Religion into the 
Common Business of Life. A dialogue between 
James Stock and Will Simpson, the shoemakers  
[DLB-24; Green 91] 
Marshall, White, 
Hazard, 1796 
[Green 91] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder 
[Green 91] 
 
(London: Sold 
by J. Marshall  
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT), 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 326] 
[ECCO] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(69-218) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(38-120). This 
edition  indexes the  
[Spinney 326; 
Jones 272;  
DLB; Demers 
112] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
150 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    & R. White, 
1796). [DLB] 
A dialogue 
between James 
Stock and Will 
Simpson as 
they sat at their 
work. 
Philadelphia, 
1800 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 91] 
 
Anna Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 91]  
 
The Two 
Shoemakers, part 
V 
[Spinney 326] 
  Two Shoemakers: in 
six parts,‛ part VI is 
the second part of 
the dialogue begun 
in part V. Part VI is 
not indexed 
separately by 
Spinney. 
 
1843HB (201) 
 
66 
[65] 
July 1796 
Entered 30 
June 1796 
The Gamester. The story of poor Tricket the gamester, 
showing hoe he first lost his place by gaming, and 
then had well nigh been the death of his wife through 
the same cause, and how, lastly, his gaming was the 
occasion of his being transported as a convict to 
Botany Bay. [Green 71] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [Green 71; 
Spinney 326] 
William 
Watson & Son 
() [Green 71] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798. 
 Not Signed 
[Spinney 326] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
151 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
67 
[66] 
July 1796 
Entered 30 
June 1796 
Sunday Reading.  Look at home, or the accusers 
accused. Being an account of the manner in which 
our savior put to silence the scribes and Pharisees 
when they brought to him the woman taken into 
adultery. 
[Spinney 326] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). 
 (Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard 1795) 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1836 
[Green 78] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 326] 
[Green 78] 
  
68 
[67] 
July 1796 
Entered 30 
June 1796 
Turn the Carpet; or, the Two weavers: a new song, 
in a dialogue between Dick and John. By Z. 
[DLB-25; Spinney 326]  
Single Sheet 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [DLB; 
Green 90] 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 90] 
 
Turn the 
Carpet; or The 
Two Weavers: 
in a Dialogue 
between Dick 
and John 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Green 90] 
 
Religious 
Tract Society 
16mo, 1861 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 326] 
[Green 90] 
 
Roberts (letter to 
Sarah More. 
London, 1795: 459) 
Poems (281-284) 
[1801 Works I] 
1843HB (53) 
[Harland 177; 
Spinney 326; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; 
Saunders 12; 
Demers 113] 
69 
[68] 
August 
1796 
Entered 1 
August 
1896 
Betty Brown, the St. Giles's Orange girl, with 
some account of Mrs. Sponge, the Money-Lender 
[Green 65; referred to in Myers (267); 
Saunders 10; Works V] 
 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Green 65; 
DLB] 
 
Marshall,  
J.Evans & Co., 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 1797 
[Green 65] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 
1818(CT), 
1827, 1839 
[Green 66] 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 327] 
[Green 65] 
 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(372-396) listed as 
The History of Betty 
Brown the St Giles 
Orange Girl, with 
some account of Mrs 
Sponge the money-
lender. 
[Spinney 327; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(267); 
Saunders 11; 
Stott 186] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
152 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Hazard, 1796 
[Green 65] 
[Green 65] 
 
.Evans & 
Sons, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 65] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. [Green 
65] 
 
John Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
65] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
S.P.C.K., 
1832, 1833 
[Green 66] 
 1803 Works (Dub) 
(207-220) 
 
1843HB (247) 
 
 
70 
[69] 
August 
1796 
Entered 1 
August 
1896 
Sunday Reading. The Grand Assizes; or, General 
gaol delivery  
[DLB-27] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [DLB; 
Green 72] 
 
Betty Brown, the 
St. Giles's 
Orange girl, etc. 
[Spinney 327; 
DLB-26] 
Collected 
Works 
1800, 1809, 
1827, 1839 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 327] 
 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(322-359) 
 
1803 Works (Dub)  
(185-194) 
 
1843HB (241) 
[Spinney 327; 
Jones 
272;DLB] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
153 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Marshall, 
Hazard, 1796 
[Green 72] 
 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns 
(  ) [Green 72] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, Hatchard, 
Binns (  ) [Green 
72] 
 
Wm Watson: 
Dublin, (  ) 
[Green 72] 
     
71 
[70] 
August 
1796 
Entered 1 
August 
1796 
John the shopkeeper turned Sailor; Part III (London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). 
 Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 
[Green 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 327] 
 [Demers 113] 
72 
[71] 
September 
1796 
Entered 31 
August 
1796 
Sunday Reading. Explanation of the nature of 
Baptism, designed especially for all those parents 
who are about to bring a child to be baptized. 
[Green 70; Spinney 327] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). 
(London: Sold 
by J. Marshall 
& R. White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1796) [Green 
70] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836. [Green 
70] 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
154 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    J.Evans, & 
son, Hatchard 
and Binns (  ) 
[Green 70] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns  
(  ) [Green 70] 
    
73 
[72] 
September 
1796 
Entered 31 
August 
1796 
The History of Mr. Bragwell; or the Two Wealthy 
Farmers. Part III  
[DLB-28; Spinney 327] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1796) 
[DLB; Green 92] 
 republished 
as The Two 
Wealthy 
Farmers or the 
History of Mr. 
Bragwell. Part 
III 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 327] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 327; 
Jones 
272;DLB; 
Demers 110] 
74 
[73] 
September 
1796 
Entered 31 
August 
1796 
A Hymn of Praise for the Abundant Harvest of 
1796  
[DLB-29]  
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796). [DLB] 
 Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837  
S.P.C.K 1833 
[Green 76] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 328] 
[Green 73; 
Green 76] 
1843HB (55) [Spinney 328; 
Jones 272; 
DLB] 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
155 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
75 
[74] 
October 
1796 
Entered 30 
September  
Sunday Reading. The History of the Two Wealthy 
Farmers, or a new dialogue between Mr Bragwell 
and Mr Worthy. Part IV  
[DLB-30; Green 92] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB; 
Green 92] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder 
[Green 92] 
 
republished as 
The Two 
Wealthy 
Farmers; or the 
History of Mr. 
Bragwell. Part 
IV 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 [Z.] 
[Spinney 328] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 328; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Demers 
110] 
76 
[75] 
October 
1796 
Entered 30 
September 
King Dionysius and Squire Damocles [Spinney 
328] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) 
 Collected 
Tracts 
1798 
[Green 77] 
Not signed 
[Spinney 328] 
1843HB (129)  
77 
[76] 
October 
1796 
Entered 30 
September 
The Two Wealthy Farmers, with the sad 
adventures of Miss Bragwell. Part V  
[DLB-31] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB; 
Green 92] 
Marshall, 
White, Hazard, 
Elder [Green 
92] 
 
republished as 
The Two 
Wealthy 
Farmers; or,  
 [Z.] 
[Spinney 328] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 328; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; 
Myers(282, n. 
18); 
Demers 110] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
156 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    The History of 
Mr. Bragwell. 
Part V 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB; 
Myers (282, n. 
18)] 
    
78 
[77] 
November 
1796 
Entered 21 
October 
1796 
Black Giles the Poacher: With Some Account of a 
Family who Had Rather Live By Their Wits Than 
Their Work [Green 66; Myers (279)] 
 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Green 66; 
DLB-32] 
(J.Evans 
&Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800) 
[Green 66] 
 
Two parts in 
One, 
continuous: 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 
(   ) [Green 66] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard.  
(       )  [Green 
66] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800,  
1803(Dub), 
1806, 
1818(CT),  
1827, 1839 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 328] 
[Green 66] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(397-478) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(221-248) 
 
1843HB (251) 
 
[Harland 177; 
Spinney 328; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(279); 
Saunders (11); 
Demers 114; 
Stott 188] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
157 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Black Giles the 
Poacher . Part I  
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB 
32] 
    
79 
[78] 
November 
1796 
Entered 19 
October 
1796 
The Hampshire Tragedy; shewing how a servant 
maid first robbed her master, and was afterwards 
struck dead for telling a lie. A True Story [Green 
72] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Spinney 
328 Green 72] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
73] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, With 
Story of Sinful 
Sally (  ) 
[Green 73] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, With 
Story of Sinful 
Sally (  ) 
[Green 73] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. 
   
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
158 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
80 
[79] 
November 
1796 
Entered 1 
November 
1796 
Sunday Reading. Prayers to be used by a child or 
young person – By a Grown Person – By the 
Master or Mistress of a Sunday School – and by 
the Master or Mistress of a Family. 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [Spinney 
328; Green 82] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
82] 
 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827 
[Green 82] 
[By Henry 
Thornton?] 
[Spinney 328] 
 [By Henry 
Thornton?] 
[Spinney 328] 
81 
[80] 
December 
1796 
Entered 28 
November 
1796 
Sunday Reading. Bear ye one another's Burthens; 
or the Valley of tears: a vision 
[DLB-33; Green 65]  
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
1796) [Green 65; 
Spinney 329] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 93] 
 
(London: Sold 
by J. Marshall 
& R. White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797) [DLB; 
Green 65] 
 
J.Evans & 
Sons 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Benjamin 
Johnson, 
1813). [DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Green 65] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 329] 
[Green 65] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(430-453) under the 
title Valley of Tears 
 
1843HB (176) 
[Spinney 329; 
Jones 272; 
DLB] 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
159 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
82 
[81] 
December 
1796 
Entered 28 
November 
1796 
Black Giles the Poacher. With the history of widow 
Brown's apple-tree. Part II  
[DLB-34; Green 65] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall and 
S. Hazard, Bath, 
1796) [DLB] 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
 
Alternative 
Capitalisation 
in Myers: 
Black Giles the 
Poacher: with 
this History of 
Widow 
Brown’s Apple 
Tree (283, n. 
23) 
Collected 
Tracts 
1818(CT) 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 329] 
[Green 75] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(397-478) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(221-248) 
 
1843HB (251) 
 
[Harland 177; 
Spinney 329; 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(283, n. 23); 
Saunders (11); 
Demers 114; 
Stott 188] 
83 
[82] 
Entered 2 
December 
1796 
A New Christmas Carol for 1796 Not seen 
[Spinney 329] 
possibly the 
same as A New 
Christmas Hymn 
which forms part 
of Vol.1 of 1798 
uniform edition. 
 A Christmas 
Hymn 
1843HB (54) 
 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1837. 
 1843HB (54) 
 
Watch the 
different 
Christmas 
hymns and 
carols – there 
are at least 
three, one 
published 
each year of 
the CRT. 
84 
[Not in 
Spinney] 
1796/1798 The Fall of Adam, our first parent with some 
account of the creation of the world. Shewing the 
happy state of man in paradise, and also the sin 
and misery which have entered since the fall. To  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
12mo, 1796 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (   )  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827,  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
160 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  which are added some remarks respecting our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who is the second Adam and the only 
Saviour of this world. 
[Green 70] 
 [Green 70] 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard (   ) 
[Green 70] 
 
1836    
85 
[83] 
January 
1797  
Entered 30 
December 
1796 
The Bad Bargain; or, The World set up to Sale 
[Poems; Spinney 329] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 329; 
Green 65] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 
[Green, 65] 
 
Watson, 
Dublin [Green 
65] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (With 
the Story of 
Sinful Sally) 
 
J. Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (With 
the Story of 
Sinful Sally) 
 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
[Not Signed] 
[Spinney 329] 
Poems (285-290) 
1843HB (46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
161 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Collected 
Tracts 1798, 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
    
86 
[84] 
January 
1797  
Entered 30 
December 
1796 
The Cottage Cook; or, Mrs. Jones's Cheap Dishes. 
Shewing the way to do much good with little 
money. 
[Green 68] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796.  
[Green 68] 
(London: Sold 
by J. Evans & 
J. Hatchard 
and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1797). [DLB] 
 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1797. [Green 
68] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800. 
[Green 68] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 1800. 
[Green 68] 
 
William 
Watson, 
Dublin, 1820.  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1812, 
1827, 1837. 
[Green 68] 
 
The Cottage 
Cook; or, Mrs. 
Jones's Cheap 
Dishes  
[DLB - 1] 
 
A Cure for 
Melancholy: 
Showing the 
Way to Do 
Much Good 
with Little 
Money [Myers 
(275, 282, n. 
15)] 
[Z.] 
[1797 Spinney 
329] 
 
[1796 Green 
68] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(325-357) under the 
title of Cure for 
Melancholy. A 
footnote on the first 
page of the tract 
states: ‚This was 
first printed under 
the title of The 
Cottage Cook‛ (325) 
 
Cure for Melancholy 
1843HB (167) 
 
 
Both Titles 
[Spinney 329;  
 
Cottage Cook 
Jones 272; 
DLB; Myers 
(270); 
Saunders (3); 
Demers 114; 
Stott 171, 185;  
Lloyd 79] 
Cure for 
Melancholy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
162 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    [Green 68] 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns ( )[Green 
68] 
 
Evans, Hazard 
(   ) [Green 68] 
    
87 
[85] 
January 
1797  
Entered 30 
December 
1796 
Sunday Reading: On the Sacrament of the Lord’s 
Supper 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 329; 
Green 80] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1796 
[Green 80] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1796 
[Green 80] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1796 
[Green 80] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
   
88 
[86] 
February 
1797 
Entered 26 
January 
1797 
The Good Militiaman, or the man that is worth a 
host; being a new song by Honest Dan the 
ploughboy turned soldier  
[DLB-35; Green 71] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder,  
(London: Sold 
by J. Marshall 
& R. White 
and S. 
Hazard, Bath,  
Collected 
works 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 329] 
[Green 71] 
 [Spinney 329; 
Jones 
272;DLB; 
Myers 270] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
163 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 329; 
Green 71] 
1797). [DLB] 
 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns  [Green 
71]  
 
Alternative 
Title given by 
Myers 
Good Militia 
Man; or, The 
Man That is 
Worth a Host 
[Myers (269-
270)] 
    
89 
[87] 
February 
1797 
Entered 26 
January 
1797 
Sunday Reading: The Story of Joseph and his 
Brethren. Part I 
[Spinney 330; Green 86] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. Hazard, 
Bath; and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 329; 
Green 86] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 86] 
 
Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
87] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1836 
[Green 87] 
   
90 
[88] 
February 
1797 
Entered 26 
January 
1797 
The Wonderful Advantages of Adventuring in the 
Lottery!!! 
[Spinney 330] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. Hazard, 
Bath;  and J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder 
[Green 94]  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard 
Binns [Green 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
94] 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
164 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   1797) [Spinney 
330; Green 94] 
94] 
 
Wm. Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin. 
    
Collected 
Tracts 
 Cheap Repository Tracts published during the year 
of 1795 forming Volume I 
London, 1797   ECCO    
Collected 
Tracts 
 Volume II: Collected Tracts 
[Spinney 337] 
London, 1797 Issued early in 
1797, a review 
appeared in 
the April no. 
of Evangelical 
Magazine 
    
91 
 [89] 
March 
1797 
Entered 9 
February 
1797 
Dick and Johnny ; or, the last new drinking song. (London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 330] 
Reprinted in 
April 1797 as 
pt 1, of 94. 
May have 
been initially 
issued as 
single sheet. 
[Spinney 330] 
 
Single Sheet, 
1795 
[Green 69] 
Marshall, 
White, 
 Not Signed 
[Spinney 330] 
 See [96] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
165 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Hazard, Elder, 
1796 
[Green 69] 
    
92 
[90] 
March 
1797 
Entered 27 
February 
1797 
The Hubbub ; or, the History of Farmer Russel the 
hard-hearted overseer. 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 330; 
Green 75] 
Hubbub, or the 
history of 
farmer Russell, 
the hard-
hearted 
overseer. By S. 
[Green 75] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[S.] 
[Spinney 330] 
[Green 76] 
 Attributed to 
Sarah [sic] 
More 
[Spinney 330] 
 
*by Sarah, 
Spinney was 
referring to 
Sally More 
93 
[91] 
March 
1797 
Entered 27 
February 
1797 
Sunday Reading. Joseph in Prison. Part II (London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 330] 
     
94 
[92] 
April 1797 
Entered 22 
March 
1797 
Sunday Reading. Joseph delivered out of Prison. 
The story of Joseph< Part III 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 330] 
     
95 
[93] 
April 1797 
Entered 16 
March  
Tawny Rachel; or, The Fortune Teller: With Some 
Account of Dreams, Omens, and Conjurors. By Z 
[Spinney 330;DLB-36 Alt Title] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S.  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800  
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800,  
[Z.] 
[Spinney 330] 
[Green 88] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(478ff)  
  
[Harland 177; 
Spinney 330; 
Jones 273;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
166 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
 1797  Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB; Green 88] 
[Green 88] 
 
J.Evans & Co. 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
88] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
88] 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 88] 
 
republished as 
The Fortune 
Teller 
(Philadelphia: 
Published by 
B. Johnson, 
1798). [DLB-
36]  
Tawny Rachel; 
or, The Fortune 
Teller: With 
1806, 
1818(CT), 
1839 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
 
[Green 88] 
 
 1803 Works (Dub) 
(249-260) 
 
1843HB (258) 
 
DLB; Myers 
279; Saunders 
(9); Demers 
114; Stott 189] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
167 
         
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Some Account 
of Dreams, 
Omens, and 
Conjurors  
 [Myers (279); 
Saunders (9) 
[1801 Works 
V] 
    
96 
[94] 
April 1797 
Entered 31 
March 
1797 
The True Heroes; or, The Noble Army of Martyrs. 
Part 2 of Dick and Johnny; or the last new 
drinking song 
 [Spinney 331; Myers (273)] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 330; 
Green 90] 
With: Turn the 
carpet. J Evans 
& Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
90] 
 
May have 
been initially 
issued as 
single sheet. 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1837. [Green 
90] 
Not Signed 
[Spinney 330] 
1843HB (54) [Spinney 331; 
Jones 
273;DLB; 
Myers (275); 
Saunders (3)] 
97 
[95] 
May 1797 
Entered 25 
April 1797 
Sunday Reading. Joseph and his Brethren. Part IV, 
[Spinney 331] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[Spinney 331] 
     
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
168 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
98 
[96] 
May 1797 
Entered 25 
April 1797 
The Sunday School  
[Spinney 331; DLB - 2; Myers] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Evans & J. 
Hatchard and S. 
Hazard, Bath, 
1795). [DLB] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
87]  
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
87] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 87] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, and 
Binns [Green 
87] 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1812, 
1827, 1837. 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(358-386) 
 
Poems (261-263) 
 
1843HB (172) 
[Spinney 331; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Demers 
114; Stott 104 
& 171] 
99 
 [97] 
May 1797 
Entered 25 
April 1797 
The Two Gardeners  
[Spinney 331; DLB-37; Poems] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. Hazard, 
Bath; J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB] 
Marshall, 1796 
[Green 91] 
 [Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
Poems (London: 
1816) 
1843HB (51) 
[Spinney 33; 
Jones 273;] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
169 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
100 
[98] 
June 1797 
Entered 27 
May 1797 
The Judgment Day, in which a true and just 
account of the manner in which the scriptures 
teach that we and all mankind are to be tried on 
the great day of judgment. Showing plainly who 
shall go away and who shall go away to 
everlasting death, and who to life eternal – with a 
fear words of encouragement to fearful Christians 
 [Green 68; Spinney 331] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
John Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1791 (?) 
[Green 77] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1791 
[Green 77] 
 
Some tracts 
have the 
spelling, 
judgement 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1803, 1809, 
1816, 1827, 
1839. 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1836 
 
[Green 77] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
 
Not signed 
[Green 68] 
 [Spinney 331 ; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Myers 
(275); 
Saunders (3)] 
101 
[99] 
June 1797 
Entered 27 
May 1797 
The History of Hester Wilmot; or the Second part 
of the Sunday School  
[Spinney 331; DLB-38] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
88] 
 
J.Evans & Co. 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 88] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1812, 
1818(CT), 
1827, 1837 
[Green 88] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
1801 Works [vol 5] 
(283-321) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(157-183) 
 
1843HB (233) 
[Spinney 331; ; 
Jones 
273;DLB; 
Demers 114; 
Stott 104, 115, 
& 171] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
170 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    [Green 88] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Sunday and 
Adult School 
Union, 1818). 
[DLB] 
 
Part i and ii of 
the second 
part of Sunday 
School. 
(continuous 
pagination) 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
88] 
    
102 
[100] 
June 1797 
Entered 27 
May 1797 
Sunday Reading. The Servant Man turned 
Soldier; or, the Fair weather Christian. A Parable. 
By Z 
[Spinney 331; DLB-39] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
84] 
 
John Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 84] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 
1818(CT) 
1827, 1837 
[Green 84] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
[Green 83] 
1801 Works [Vol 5] 
(350-372) 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(195-206) 
 
1843HB (243) 
[Spinney 331 ; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Myers 
275; Saunders 
(3)] 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
171 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. [Green 
84] 
    
103 
[101] 
July 1797 
Entered 26 
June 1797 
The History of Hester Wilmot; or the New gown. 
Part II. Being a continuation of the Sunday School  
[Spinney 331; DLB-40] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB; 
Green 88] 
Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796 [Green 
88] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 88] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
[Green 88] 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 88] 
Collected 
Works 
1798, 1812, 
1818(CT), 
1827, 1837 
 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
1801 Works [vol 5] 
(283-321) 
 
 
1803 Works (Dub) 
(157-183) 
 
Poems (264-268); 
1843HB (233) 
[Spinney 331; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Stott 
104, 115,  & 
187] 
104 
[102] 
July 1797 
Entered 26 
June 1797 
The Lady and the Pye; or Know thyself  
[DLB-41; Poems] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J.  
Lady and the 
Pie: or, Know 
thyself 
[1843HB (52)] 
Collected 
Works 
1798, 1800 
1806, 1827  
[Z.] 
[Spinney 331] 
[Green 77] 
Poems (London: 
1816) 
[1843HB (52)] 
[Spinney 332; 
Jones 273; 
DLB] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
172 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
   Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB] 
 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
1798 [Green 72] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns (  
) [Green 72] 
Marshall, 
White, 
Hazard, 1797 
1839 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
   
105 
[103] 
July 1797 
Entered 26 
June 1797 
Sunday Reading. The Strait Gate and the Broad 
Way, being the second part of the Valley of Tears  
[DLB-42] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB] 
Marshall, 
White, Hazard, 
Elder [Green 
93] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
93] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard 
[Green 93] 
 
Special. 1819 
[Green 93] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
93] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 332] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(430-453) under its 
own title Strait Gate 
and Broad Way. 
 
1843HB (182) 
[Spinney 332] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
173 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
106 
[104] 
August 
1797 
Entered 31 
July 1797 
Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten 
Commandments. Part I. 
[Spinney 332] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [Spinney 
332] 
 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall & R. 
White; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1796).  [Green 
70] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (   ) 
[Green 70] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns  
(    ) [Green 
70] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1878 [?], 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836. 
[Green 70] 
 
S.P.C,K. 1832, 
1836 
[Green 70] 
Not signed 
[Spinney 33 2]  
Not signed 
[Green 70] 
  
107 
[105] 
August 
1797 
Entered 31 
July 1797 
The History of Mr. Fantom, the new fashioned 
philosopher and his man William  
[Spinney 332; DLB-43] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB; Green 75] 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed by B. 
& J. Johnson, 
1800). [DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1819, 
1827, 1839 
 
S.P.C.K. 1831 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 332] 
[Green 75] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(1-64) 
 
1843HB (120) 
[Spinney 332; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Myers 
(273); Demers 
116] 
108 
[106] 
August 
1797 
Entered 31 
July 1797 
The Loyal Sailor; or No Mutineering. Being a song 
fit to be sung on board of all his majesty’s ships; 
giving an account of the late awkward affair at 
Portsmouth, with the increase of pay then agreed 
to on all sides, by a sailor supposed to be on board:  
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
(Marshall, 
Hazard, Elder, 
1796) [Green 
78] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
Not signed 
[Spinney 332] 
 [Demers -
argues that 
this tract is 
Part IV of 
John the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
174 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  and also of that most melancholy and dreadful 
mutiny which happened afterwards at the Nore 
and which caused so much astonishment 
throughout this loyal nation. In which song it is 
futher represented how this honest sailor was 
giving away half his rations to his wife Nell, and 
was also promising part of his pay to her and the 
children, when a strange fleet hove in sight; and he 
instantly prepared for action. To the tune of: The 
hardy tar 
 (J.Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. With: 
the riot, 1798) 
[Green 78] 
   shopkeeper 
turned sailor 
113] 
109 
[107] 
September 
1797 
Entered 31 
August 
1797 
The History of Diligent Dick; or, Truth Will Out, 
though it Be Hid in a Well 
[Myers (284 n.34)] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
 Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[S.] 
[Spinney 332] 
[Green 74] 
 Attributed to 
Sally More 
[Spinney 332] 
110 
[108] 
September 
1797 
Entered 31 
August 
1797 
Sunday Reading. The Pilgrims: An allegory  
[DLB-44] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 1797) 
[DLB; Green 82] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 82] 
 
Wm. Watson. 
Dublin: 1800 
[Green 82] 
 
(Philadelphia: 
Printed & sold 
by Kimber, 
Conrad, 1808). 
[DLB] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1837 
[Green 82] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 332] 
[Green 82] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(387-414) 
 
1843HB (176) 
[Spinney 332; 
Jones 273; 
DLB] 
 
More and John 
Newton were 
discussing this 
tract and John 
Bunyan’s 
Pilgrim’s 
Progress in 
letters from 
March 5, 1797 
[Roberts, volII, 
4-7] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
175 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
111 
[109] 
October 
1797 
Entered 30 
September 
1797 
Dan and Jane; or Faith and works. A tale  
[Green 68; DLB-45; Poems] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB] 
Green has 
1796 as 
publication 
date. 
 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Nisbet, Binns (    
) 
[Green 68] 
 
J. Evans & 
Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns. With 
Patient Joe, 
1800 [Green 
68] 
 
William 
Watson, with 
Lancashire 
Collier Girl, 
Dublin 1820 
[Green 68] 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839 
[Green 68, 81] 
[Z.] 
[Spinney 332] 
Green [68, 81] 
Poems (149-154) 
1843HB (31) 
[Spinney 332; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Demers 
110] 
112 
[110] 
October 
1797 
Entered 20 
September  
Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten 
Commandments. Part II. 
[Spinney 332] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder,  
 See [104] for 
more details 
Not signed 
[Spinney 332] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
176 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
 1797  Edinburgh, 
1797). 
[Spinney 332] 
     
113 
[111] 
October 
1797 
Entered 30 
September 
1797 
The Two Wealthy Farmers; or the Sixth part of the 
history of Mr. Bragwell and his two daughters  
[Spinney 332;DLB-46]  
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB; 
Green 92] 
 The Two 
Wealthy 
Famers. Part 
VI [Jones 273] 
[Z.] 
[spinney 332] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 332; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Demers 
110] 
114 
[112] 
November 
1797 
Entered 30 
October 
1797 
Sunday Reading. The Explanation of the Ten 
Commandments. Part III. 
[Spinney 333] 
London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; J. 
Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). 
 See [104] for 
more details. 
Not signed 
[Spinney 333] 
  
115 
[113] 
November 
1797 
Entered 19 
October 
1797 
The Two Wealthy Farmers; or, the Seventh and 
last part of the history of Mr. Bragwell and his two 
daughters  
[DLB-47; Green 93] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall; S. 
Hazard, Bath; 
and J. Elder, 
Edinburgh, 
1797). [DLB; 
Green 93] 
The Two 
Wealthy 
Famers. Part 
VII [Jones 273] 
 [Z.] 
[Spinney 333] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(65-287) 
 
1843HB (129) 
[Spinney 333 ; 
Jones 
273;DLB; 
Demers 110] 
116 
[114] 
November 
1797 
Entered 30 
October 
1797 
The Plum-Cakes: or, the Farmer and his three sons  
[DLB-48; Poems] 
(London: Sold by 
J. Marshall and 
S. Hazard, Bath, 
1797). [DLB] 
 
 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1798 
[Green 72; 82] 
 
Howard & 
Evans,  
Collected 
Works 
1798, 1800 
1806, 1827 
1839 
Poems 
(London:  
[Z.] 
[Spinney 333] 
[Green 82] 
Poems (269-274) 
1843HB (52) 
[Spinney 333; 
Jones 273; 
DLB; Demers 
110] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
177 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Hatchard, 
Hazard, 
Binns. With: 
the Gravestone, 
1800 [Green 
82] 
1816)    
 
117 
 Tis All for the Best J. Hatchard, 
London; S. 
Hazard, Bath  
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 89] 
 [Z] 
[Green 89] 
[ECCO] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(288-324) 
 
1843HB (162) 
Schantz 473 
states: though 
the tract itself 
does not 
credit More 
with 
authorship, 
‘Tis All for the 
Best is 
credited to 
More by 
Foster, An 
Errand of 
Mercy, 
293. 
 
[copy 
examined 
notes that it 
was entered at 
Stationer’s 
Hall but 
Spinney does  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
178 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
        include this 
tract as one 
entered at 
Stationer’s 
Hall] 
Collected 
Tracts 
Entered 11 
November 
1797 
Volume III: Collected Tracts 
[Spinney 337] 
      
  EVANS ‘Authorised’       
118 1798 Here and There [Green 69; 1843HB (56)] J.Evans & son, 
Hatchard, Binns. 
With The 
Election. 1798 
[Green 69] 
 
Here and there, 
or this world 
and the next. 
Being suitable 
thoughts for the 
new year. By Z. 
[Green 73] 
 
J.Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 1800 
[Green 73] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 73] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839. 
[Z] 
[Green 73] 
1843HB (56)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
179 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    With The Old 
Man, his 
children, and 
the Bundle of 
sticks; The 
honest miller of 
Gloucestershire; 
The election. 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (1798) 
[Green 73] 
    
119 1798/1800 The Death of Christ, or tract for Good Friday. John Evans, 
Hatchard, Binns 
(1800) 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns (  ) 
[Green 68] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1803, 1809, 
1827, 1836. 
S.P.C.K. 1832, 
1833 
   
120 1798 
 
1800 
[Green 81] 
Parley the Porter: An allegory; shewing how 
robbers without can never get into an house unless 
there are traitors within. By Z 
[Harland 178; Green 81] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
1800 [Green 81] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, Bulgin, 
1800 [Green 
81] 
 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard, 1800 
 
Howard &  
Collected 
Tracts 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839. 
[Z] 
[Green 81] 
1801 Works [vol 4] 
(454-480) 
 
1843HB (186) 
Harland [178]; 
Schantz 473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
180 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800. 
Wm Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
 
Religious Tract 
Society 1861 
    
121 1798 
 
1800 
[Green 66] 
The Black Prince, a true story; being an account of the 
life and death of Naimbanna, an African King’s son, 
who arrived in England in the year 1791, and set sail 
on his return in June 1793. 
[Green 66] 
Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
1800 
[Green 66] 
Howard & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
[Green 66] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
[Green 66] 
Christian 
Knowledge 
Library. No. 
24, 1806. 
[Green 66] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839. 
[Z] 
[Green 68] 
  
122 1798  
[Green 79] 
A New Christmas Tract, or the right way of rejoicing 
at Christmas. Shewing the reasons we have for joy at 
the event of our Saviour’s birth. In which also a 
description is given of the dreadful state the world 
was in before his coming; with some remarks suited to 
the times in which we live. [Green 79] 
Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns, 
1798 
 [Green 79] 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns, 1798  
[Green 79] 
 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1803, 
1809, 1827, 
1836. 
 
S.P.C.K. 1832, 
1836 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
181 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
123  The Foolish Traveller; or, A good Inn is a bad 
Home [Poems] 
  Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
 Poems (275-280) 
1843HB (44) 
 
124 1798 The Gravestone, being an account (supposed to 
have been written on a gravestone) of a wife who 
buried both her children in one day, and who from 
that time became a very devout Christian. With a 
suitable address to those who may be attending a 
funeral. 
[Green 72] 
J. Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, Binns 
(1798) [Green 72] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, Hatchard, 
Hazard, Binns  (   
) [Green 72] 
 
 
Published 
with The Lady 
and the Pye, or 
Know thyself 
and The Plum 
Cakes, or the 
farmer and his 
three sons. 
[Green 72] 
Collected 
Tracts 
1798, 1800, 
1806, 1827, 
1839  
 
   
125 1798 (?) Path to Riches and happiness [Green 81] W. Watson and 
Son, 1800 
Ann Watson, 
Dublin: 1820  
 
To which are 
added: The 
apprentices 
monitor or 
indentures in 
verse; and, the 
market woman, 
or honesty is 
the best policy: 
A true tale. 
William 
Watson, 
Dublin: 1820 
 By Benjamin 
Franklin  
[W. Watson 
and Son, 
1800] 
 A tract with 
the same title 
by Benjamin 
Franklin 
appears to 
have been 
abridged. 
Tract has been 
reprinted with 
original tracts 
from the CRT 
but as yet there 
is no evidence 
of where this 
tract fits into 
the CRT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
182 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
126 1798 The Thunderstorm, or the history of Tom Watson, 
the unnatural son, being a warning to all parents. 
By Z. [Green 88] 
Parents. J.Evans 
& Son, Hatchard, 
Binns 
 
Children. J. Evans 
& Son, Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 88] 
One edition 
uses the word 
‚parents,‛ 
while others 
may say 
‚children‛ 
[Green 88] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
Collected 
Tracts  
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
[Green 89] 
 
Narratives 
for a 
Christian 
household, 
1860 [Green 
89] 
 
Religious 
Tract Society, 
16mo 1861, 
8vo 1863 & 
1864 [Green 
89] 
 
 
   
127 1798 Dialogue the Second. On the duty of carrying religion 
into our amusements. By Rev. Mr Gilpin 
Howard, Evans, 
Hatchard, Hazard 
[Green 91] 
Various 
pagination and 
in five and six 
parts. 
 
J. Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard [Green 
91] 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
92] 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
  Rev. Mr Gilpin 
[Green 91] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
183 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
92] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard &  
Binns [Green 
92] 
    
  Unapproved Tracts!       
  According to Spinney the following were issued by 
Marshall alone (imprint No.8) and do not belong 
to the Cheap Repository Proper [Spinney 333] 
   
[115] 
128 
1797 
December 
Delays are Dangerous; or the return of John 
Atkins 
[Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall 
[Spinney 333] 
     
[116] 
129 
1797 
December 
Richard and Rebecca; or a receipt for domestic 
happiness 
[Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83]  
    
[117] 
130 
1797 
December 
Entered 30 
Nov 1797. 
The Widow of Zarephath 
[Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall, 1796 
[Green 94] 
 
    
[118] 
131 
1798 
January  
Entered 1 
Jan 1798  
The Affectionate Orphans 
[Green 64; Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall  
[Green 64] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
184 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[119] 
132 
1798 
January  
Entered 1 
January 
1798 
(Green 64) 
Ananias and Sapphira. Sunday reading.. 
[Green 64; Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall  
[Green 64; 
Spinney 333] 
     
[120] 
133 
1798 
January 
Entered 1 
January 
1798 
(Green 64) 
The Good Aunt 
[Spinney 333] 
 
Bristol: Marshall  
[Spinney 333] 
 Marshall, 
1797 [Green 
71] 
   
[121] 
134 
1798 
February 
Entered 31 
January 
1798 
The History of Sampson 
[Spinney 333] 
Bristol and Bath: 
Marshall  
[Spinney 333] 
     
[122] 
135 
1798 
February 
Entered 31 
January 
1798 
The Wanderer, A Fable 
[Spinney 333] 
Bristol: Marshall  
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 94] 
 
    
[123] 
136 
1798 
February 
Entered 31 
January 
1798 
The Wreck 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall , 1796 
[Spinney 333; 
Green 94] 
     
[124] 1798 
March 
The Fatal Choice 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall , 1798 
[Spinney 333] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
185 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
137 Entered 28 
February 
1798 
 Marshall, 1797 
[Green 69] 
     
[125] 1798 
March 
Entered 28 
February 
1798 
The History of St Peter the Apostle 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall  
[Spinney 333] 
     
[126] 1798 
March 
Entered 28 
February 
1798 
The Wife Reformed 
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall  
[Spinney 333] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 94] 
 
William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
[Green 94] 
    
[127] 1798 April 
Entered 2 
April 1798 
Betty Gillis, or honesty rewarded 
[Green 66; Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall 1796 
[Green 66]  
     
[128] 1798 April 
Entered 2 
April 1798 
Easter Monday 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798. 
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797. 
[Green 69] 
     
[129] 1798 April 
Entered 2 
April 1798 
The Sower. A Parable. 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 86] 
    
[130] 1798 May 
Entered 1 
May 1798 
Jeremiah Wilkins; or the error repaired. 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 76] 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
186 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[131] 1798 May 
Entered 1 
May 1798 
The Mistaken Evil. A true story. 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 78] 
    
[132] 1798 May 
Entered 1 
May 1798 
The Unfruitful Fig-Tree. A Parable 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
     
[133] 1798 June 
Entered 1 
June 1798 
The Distressed Mother 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
     
[134] 1798 June 
Entered 1 
June 1798 
Eli the High Priest 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 69] 
     
[135] 1798 June 
Entered 1 
June 1798 
The Murder in the Wood 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
     
[136] 1798 July 
Entered 3 
July 1798 
David, the Chosen of God. 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1796 
[Green 68] 
     
[137] 1798 July 
Entered 3 
July 1798 
Elisha; or, the only two ways of subduing our 
enemies, either by kindness or the sword. 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 69] 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
187 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[138] 1798 July 
Entered 3 
July 1798 
The Good Step-Mother 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 72] 
 The Good 
Stepmother 
(Marshall, 
1797) [Green 
72] 
   
[139] 1798 
August 
Entered 2 
August 
1798 
The History of John the Baptist 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 74] 
    
[140] 1798 
August 
Entered 2 
August 
1798 
Never Fly from your Duty; or, the history of James 
Brown and John Simpson  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 79] 
    
[141] 1798 
August 
Entered 2 
August 
1798 
Satan’s Device; or the Devil no changeling. Being 
the history of Jack Flint the soldier, in four parts: 
Part I. [Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
 S.S 
[Spinney 334] 
  
[142] 1798 
September 
Entered 1 
September 
1798 
Madge Blarney, the Gipsey girl 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 78] 
    
[143] 1798 
September 
Entered 1 
September 
1798 
Prophecies relating to Jesus Christ 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 82] 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
188 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[144] 1798 
September 
Entered 1 
September 
1798 
Satan’s Device<.Being the history of Jack 
Flint<Part II 
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1798.  
[Spinney 334] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
    
[145] 1798 
October 
Entered 1 
October 
1798 
Sacred Biography. Part I. Adam a type of Christ. 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
    
[146] 1798 
October 
Entered 1 
October 
1798 
Satan’s Device<.Being the history of Jack 
Flint<Part III 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
    
[147] 1798 
October 
Entered 1 
October 
1798 
The Two Cousins; or, spare the rod and spoil the 
child 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 90] 
    
[148] 1798 
November  
Entered 5 
November 
1798 
The Honest Publican, or; the power of 
perseverance in a good cause 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 76] 
    
[149] 1798 
November  
Entered 5 
November 
1798 
Reflections on Our Late Glorious victory at the 
Mouth of the Nile 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335; 
Green 82] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
189 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[150] 1798 
November  
Entered 5 
November 
1798 
Satan’s Device<.Being the history of Jack 
Flint<Part IV 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
 [S.S.] 
[Spinney 335] 
 Stott suggests 
that More 
believed that 
S.S. was ‚high 
Calvinist‛ 
William 
Huntington, 
for whom the 
initials meant 
‘sinner saved’ 
[Stott 150] 
[151] 1798 
December 
Entered 1 
December 
1798 
The Parish Nurse 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 81] 
    
[152] 1798 
December 
Entered 1 
December 
1798 
Sacred Biography. Part II. Abel a type of Christ 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
    
[153] 1798 
December 
Entered 1 
December 
1798 
True Happiness 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 90] 
    
[154] 1798 Friendly Advice in a letter from Heartwhole to 
Dame Nicholls at HighWood Almshouses on her 
fears of the French invasion 
Marshall 1798 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
    Spinney notes 
that this tract 
was not  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
190 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  [Spinney 335] [Green 71]     entered at 
Stationer’s 
Hall and is 
dated on the 
basis of an 
internal 
reference to 
the Mutiny of 
the fleet 
having taken 
place the 
previous year. 
[Spinney 335] 
[155] January 
1799 
Domestic Contrasts; or the different fortunes of 
Nancy and Lucy. Part 1.  
[Spinney 335]  
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 335] 
 
Watson. Dublin ( 
) [Green 69] 
 
 
 Domestic 
Contrasts; or 
the different 
fortunes of 
Nancy and 
Lucy. Part 1. 
By W. 
Marshall 1797 
[Green 69] 
 
[W.] 
[Spinney 335] 
  
[156] January 
1799 
New Year’s Day; or, gratitude for blessings 
received. 
[Spinney 335]  
Marshall 1799 
 [Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 79] 
 [S.S.] 
[Spinney 335] 
[Green 79] 
  
[157] January 
1799 
Virtue Triumphant; or, the history of Queen 
Esther. 
[Spinney 335]  
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 94] 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
191 
         
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[158] 1799 
February 
Entered 6 
March 
1799 
Domestic Contrasts; or the different fortunes of 
Nancy and Lucy. Part II.  
[Spinney 335]  
Marshall 1799 
 [Spinney 335] 
 
Watson. Dublin ( 
) [Green 69] 
 
  Domestic 
Contrasts; or 
the different 
fortunes of 
Nancy and 
Lucy. Part I1. 
By W. 
Marshall 1797 
[Green 69] 
 
  
[159] 1799 
February 
Entered 6 
March 
1799 
Sacred Biography. Part III. Enoch a type of Christ 
[Spinney 335]  
Marshall 1799 
 [Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 83] 
    
[160] 1799 
February 
Entered 6 
March 
1799 
The Sorrows of Hannah: a ballad. To the tune of: 
The lamentation of Mary Queen of Scots. 
Addressed to her husband then under sentence of 
transportation for a first act of dishonesty, to 
which he had been tempted by extreme indigence. 
By F. 
[Spinney 335; Green 86]  
Marshall 1799 
 [Spinney 335] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 86] 
 F. 
[Spinney 335] 
  
[161] 1799 
March 
Entered 15 
March 
1799 
Cicely, or the Power of Honesty 
[Green 67; Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 67] 
Marshall and 
Hazard [Green 
67] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
192 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[162] 1799 
March 
Entered 15 
March 
1799 
Domestic Contrasts; or the different fortunes of 
Nancy and Lucy. Part III.  
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Watson. Dublin ( ) 
[Green 69] 
  W. 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Domestic 
Contrasts; or the 
different 
fortunes of 
Nancy and 
Lucy. Part I1. 
By W. Marshall 
1797 [Green 
69] 
 
  
[163] 1799 
March 
Entered 15 
March 
1799 
The Good Parish Priest; or, the drunken carpenter 
reclaimed. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 72] 
     
[164] 1799 April 
Entered 4 
April 1799 
The Humble Reformer; or, neighborly chat.  
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 76] 
 A.R 
[Green 76] 
  
[165] 1799 April 
Entered 4 
April 1799 
The Judgement awaiting undutiful children. 
Illustrated in the history of Absalom. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
 (Marshall, 
1797) [Green 
76] 
    
[166] 1799 April 
Entered 4 
April 1799 
The Miraculous Supply; or, the Widow sustained in 
the time of famine. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 78] 
 S.S 
[Spinney 336] 
[Green 78] 
  
[167] 1799 May 
Entered 15 
May 1799 
A Dream 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall 1797 
[Green 69] 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
193 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[168] 1799 May 
Entered 15 
May 1799 
The Parable of Ten Talents 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 81] 
    
[169] 1799 May 
Entered 15 
May 1799 
Sweep Soot O! ; or, some account of little Jem, the 
chimney sweeper, and his benefactress. By W  
[Spinney 336 (without W); Green 88] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 88] 
 W  
[Green 88] 
  
[170] 1799 June 
Entered 13 
June 1799 
The Happiness of Britain 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 73] 
 
  S.S. 
[Spinney 336] 
By S.S.  
[Green 73] 
  
[171] 1799 June 
Entered 13 
June 1799 
The History of Fanny Mills. Part I. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
     
[172] 1799 June 
Entered 13 
June 1799 
The Shropshire Rector ; or, rational devotion.  
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 85] 
 W 
[Spinney 336] 
  
[173] 1799 July 
Entered 4 
July 1799 
Cottage Prayers. Being intended as a second part 
to the Shropshire Rector. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 85] 
    
         
[174] 1799 July 
Entered 4 
July 1799 
The History of Fanny Mills.; or, no one too young 
to do good.  Part II. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 74] 
 L. 
 [Spinney 336] 
[Green 74] 
 
  
[175] 1799 July 
Entered 4 
July 1799 
The patient Father; or, the young sailor’s return. 
[Spinney 336] 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 81] 
 S.S. 
 [Spinney 336] 
[Green 81] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
194 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[176] 1799 
August 
Entered 5 
August 
1799 
The Bean Feast 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall 1796 
[Green 65] 
  S.S. 
[Spinney 336] 
  
[177] 1799 
August 
Entered 5 
August 
1799 
The Deceitfulness of pleasure; or, some account of 
my lady Blithe. 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 336] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 69] 
     
[178] 1799 
August 
Entered 5 
August 
1799 
The Divine Model ; or, the Christian’s exemplar. 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall, 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 69] 
 
Watson, Dublin ( 
) 
[Green 69] 
  A.R. 
[Spinney 337] 
  
[179] 1799 
September 
Entered 17 
September 
1799 
The Baker’s Dream, or death no bad change to the 
poor and good, by M 
[Green 65] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall 1796 
[Green 65]  
  [M.] 
[Green 65] 
[M.] 
[Spinney 337] 
 M. but not to 
be attributed 
to William 
Mason 
[Spinney 337] 
[180] 1799 
September 
Entered 17 
September 
1799 
The History of Jonathon Griffin and William 
Peterson. Pointing out an asylum to the destitute. 
[Spinney 337] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 74] 
 A.R. 
[Spinney 337] 
[Green 74] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
195 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[181] 1799 
September 
Entered 17 
September 
1799 
Old Tom Parr. A true story. Shewing that he was 
a laboring man and the wonder of his time, and 
how he was brought up to London by the earl of 
Arundel, 1635, in which year he died, aged 152, 
according to some historians; others say in his 
hundred and sixtieth year; but all agree that he 
had lived through the reign of ten different 
sovereigns. [Green 80] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 80] 
 
Short Title: 
Old Tom Parr. 
A true story etc 
[Spinney 337] 
    
[182] 1799 
October 
Entered 7 
October 
1799 
The Contented Cobbler. By S.S 
[Green 67] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall, 1797  
[Green 67 
] 
  S.S. 
[Green 67] 
[Spinney 337] 
  
[183] 1799 
October 
Entered 7 
October 
1799  
Noah 
[Spinney 337] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall 1797 
[Green 79] 
 
    
[184] 1799 
October 
Entered 7 
October 
1799 
The Saturday School 
[Spinney 337] 
 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337] 
 
     
[185] 1799 
November 
Entered 21 
November 
1799 
An Address to the Aged Poor; by A.R. 
[Green 64] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337]  
 
(Marshall) 1796 
[Green 64] 
  [A.R.] 
[Green 64] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
196 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
[186] 1799 
November 
Entered 21 
November 
1799 
The History of Jenny Froth and Polly Goodchild ; 
or pride and humility. Being the second part of the 
Second part of the Saturday School. 
[Spinney 337] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337]  
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 84] 
    
[187] 1799 
November 
Entered 21 
November 
1799 
Richard’s Address to his Lucy on the first return 
of their wedding-day. 
[Spinney 337] 
Marshall 1799 
[Spinney 337]  
Marshall, 1797 
[Green 82] 
    
  Additional Tracts - UNVERIFIED      
 Pre 1816 The impossibility Conquered : or, Love your 
neighbor as yourself, 
    1843HB (45)  
 Pre 1816? The Ploughman’s Ditty, being an answer to that 
foolish Question, What have the Poor to lose? A 
Question frequently asked during the Alarm of 
Invasion. To the tune of: He that has the best wife 
[Green 82] 
 Special, 1819 
[Green 82] 
Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
 Poems (317-320)  
 Pre 1816 Will Chip’s True Rights of Man, in opposition to 
the New Rights of Man: Written for the 
Volunteers of Somersetshire, when there was an 
Alarm of Invasion on that Coast. By a Journeyman 
Carpenter 
[Poems] 
  Poems 
(London: 
1816) 
 Poems (321-325)  
 1819 
[Green 90] 
The True Rights of Man, or the contented 
spitalfields weaver. [Green 90] 
Special, 1819 
[Green 90] 
Will Chip’s 
true rights and 
the delegate 
should be 
compared  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
197 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    with this tract 
to determine 
whether they 
are all the 
same. 
    
 1800 The Delegate , with some account of James 
Dawson, of Spitalfields 
[Green 69] 
Evans, Hatchard, 
Binns, Bulgin, 
1800 
[Green 69] 
 
Special, 1819 
[Green 69] 
     
 1819 
[Green 64] 
An Address to the meeting at Spa Fields 
[Green 64] 
Special, 1819 
[Green 64] 
     
 1819 
[Green 70] 
Fair Words and Foul Meanings 
 [Green 70] 
Special, 1819 
[Green 70] 
     
 1819 
[Green 70] 
The Fortunate Farthing. A New Song 
[Green 70] 
Special, 1819 
[Green 70] 
     
  The History of Samson Marshall, 1797 
[Green 75] 
     
 1819 
[Green 78] 
The Loyal Subject’s political creed, or what I do 
and do not think [Green 78] 
Special, 1819 
[Green 78] 
     
 1819 
[Green 78] 
The Market House orator, or the loyal weaver Special, 1819 
[Green 78] 
     
 1819 
[Green 82] 
The Private Virtues of public Reformists, or a 
continuation of the history of Mr Fantom. Suited 
to present times. 
Special, 1819 
[Green 82] 
     
 1800 Path to Riches and happiness [Green 81] W. Watson and 
Son, 1800 
Ann Watson, 
Dublin: 1820  
 By Benjamin 
Franklin  
 A tract with 
the same title  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
198 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    To which are 
added: The 
apprentices 
monitor or 
indentures in 
verse; and, the 
market woman, 
or honesty is 
the best policy: 
A true tale. 
William 
Watson, 
Dublin: 1820 
 [W. Watson 
and Son, 
1800] 
 by Benjamin 
Franklin 
appears to 
have been 
abridged. 
 
This tract has 
been 
reprinted with 
original tracts 
from the CRT 
but as yet 
there is no 
evidence of 
where this 
tract fits into 
the CRT. 
  The Thunderstorm, or the history of Tom Watson, 
the unnatural son, being a warning to all parents. 
By Z. [Green 88] 
Parents. J.Evans 
& Son, Hatchard, 
Binns 
 
Children. J. Evans 
& Son, Hatchard, 
Binns, 1800 
[Green 88] 
One edition 
uses the word 
‚parents,‛ 
while others 
may say 
‚children‛ 
[Green 88] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Binns 
Collected 
Tracts  
1800, 1806, 
1827, 1839 
[Green 89] 
 
Narratives 
for a 
Christian 
household, 
1860 [Green 
89] 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
199 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
    William 
Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
 
Ann Watson: 
Dublin, 1820 
Religious 
Tract Society, 
16mo 1861, 
8vo 1863 & 
1864 [Green 
89] 
   
  Dialogue the Second. On the duty of carrying religion 
into our amusements. By Rev. Mr Gilpin 
Howard, Evans, 
Hatchard, Hazard 
[Green 91] 
Various 
pagination and 
in five and six 
parts. 
 
J. Evans & Co, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard [Green 
91] 
J.Evans & Son, 
Hatchard, 
Binns [Green 
92] 
 
Howard & 
Evans, 
Hatchard, 
Hazard &  
Binns [Green 
92] 
Collected 
Tracts  
1798, 1807, 
1812, 1827, 
1839 [Green 
92] 
 
S.P.C.K 1832, 
1833 
 
  Rev. Mr Gilpin 
[Green 91] 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
200 
 
 
         
Ref No. 
[Spinney] 
Spinney 
Dating 
Cheap Repository Title Original Cheap 
Repository 
Publication  
Reprints and 
alternative 
titles 
Collected 
Tracts and 
Holding 
Libraries 
Signed? 
Attribution 
on Tracts 
Vers. 
Acknowledged by 
More? 
Attribution 
made to More 
  CONTESTED TRACTS – Incorrectly 
Attributed 
    
       
 1794 
[Stott 145] 
A Country Carpenter’s Confession of Faith with a few 
plain remarks on the Age of Reason in a letter from 
Will Chip, in Somersetshire to Thomas Pain [sic] , 
Stay-maker, in Paris [Saunders (12)] 
London, 1794 
[Stott, 145] 
    [Saunders 
(12);] Stott 
however 
argues that this 
was a 
‚scurrilous‛ 
imitation of 
More’s Village 
Politics. [Stott 
145] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
201 
Key to Abbreviations: 
1800   Philadelphia: Printed by B. & J. Johnson, 1800 (available on Proquest) 
1801 Works [vol] More, Hannah. The Works of Hannah More. 8 vols. London: Cadell & Davies, 1801  
1803 Works (Dub) More, Hannah. Tales for the Common People. The Works of Hannah More. Vol. 3. 8 vols. Dublin: D. Graisberry, 1803. Appears 
to be an edition that mirrors 1801 works. 
1818 Works More, Hannah. The Works of Hannah More. 19 vols. London: Cadell & Davies, 1818.  
1830 Works More, Hannah. The Works of Hannah More. A New Edition. Vol 2. 11 vols. London: T. Cadell, 1830.  
1834   More, Hannah. The Works of Hannah More. A New Edition. 6 vols. London: T. Cadell & Davies, 1834. 
1835CF   More, Hannah. The Complete Works of Hannah More. Boston and New York: Munro & Francis and Charles Francis, 1835.  
1843HB More, Hannah. The Complete Works of Hannah More. First Complete American Edition. New York: Harper & Brothers, Cliff 
Street, 1843. 
1856   More, Hannah. The Complete Works of Hannah More. New York: J.C. Derby, 1856. 
Demers   Demers, Patricia. The World of Hannah More. University Press of Kentucky, 1996. 
DLB Dictionary of Literary Biography Entry. E.M.G Smith. “ Hannah More” Dictionary of Literary Biography, Volume 158: British 
Reform Writers, 1789-1832. A Bruccoli Clark Layman Book. Edited by Gary Kelly, University of Keele and Edd Applegate, 
Middle Tennessee State University. The Gale Group, 1996. pp. 223-233. 
[Dublin  18—(HRC)] Cheap Repository. Dublin: Sold by William Watson, No.7, Capel-Street, printer to the Cheap Repository for Religious and 
Moral Tracts, and by the booksellers, Chapman and hawkers, in town and Country., [18--] Held at Harry Ransom Center, 
University of Texas at Austin. [8 Tracts Bound]. 
Foster     Foster, Charles I. An Errand of Mercy: The Evangelical United Front, 1790-1837. Chapel Hill, 1960. 
Green   Green, Emanuel. Bibliotheca Somersetensis. Vol. 3. 3 vols. Taunton: Barncott and Pearce, 1902. 
Harland   Harland, Marion. Hannah More. Literary Hearthstones: Studies of the Home-Life of Certain Writers and Thinkers. New York: 
The Knickerbocker Press, 1900. 
Lloyd  Lloyd, Sarah. "Cottage Conversations: Poverty and Manly Independence in Eighteenth Century England." Past and Present 
184.August (2004): pp 69-108. 
Myers Myers, Mitzi. "Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female Ideology."  Fetter'd or Free?: British Women 
Novelists, 1670-1815. Eds. Mary Anne Schofield and Cecilia Macheski. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1986. 264-84.  
Poems   More, Hannah. Poems, with a New Introduction by Caroline Franklin. 1816 Ed. London: Routlege/Thoemmes Press, 1996. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.1  Continued 
 
 
202 
Saunders    Saunders, Julia. "Putting the Reader Right: Reassessing Hannah More's Cheap Repository Tracts." Romanticism on the Net.16 
(1999) 
Schantz Schantz, Mark S. "Religious Tracts, Evangelical Reform, and the Market Revolution in Antebellum America." Journal of the 
Early Republic 17.3 (1997): 425-66. 
S.P.C.K. Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge 
Stott   Stott, Anne. Hannah More: The First Victorian. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
Thompson Thompson, Henry. The Life of Hannah More with Notices of Her Sisters. London: T. Cadell, Strand; and W. Blackwell and Sons, 
Edinburgh, 1838. 
 
Holding Libraries and Electronic Copies 
As far as possible the notation will indicate internal library reference for the copy of the tract. If the notation does not refer to the original publication 
this will be noted.  
Harvard      British Library 
Oxford       William Andrews Clark Memorial Library  
John Ryland University of Manchester 
 
Collected Tracts 
1797 [1] Cheap Repository Tracts published during the year of 1795, Forming volume I. (Bath: Sold by J. Marshall, S. Hazard, and Elder), London, 
1797 [716pp]  
1797 [II] Cheap Repository Tracts published during the year of 1796, Forming volume II. (Bath: S. Hazard, and Elder (Edinburgh)), London, 1797 
[716pp]  
1798 Cheap Repository tracts for Sunday reading. To which are added, some prayers for individuals and for families. London : sold by F. and C. 
Rivington; J. Evans; J. Hatchard; and S. Hazard, Bath, 1798. 
1798[ST] Cheap Repository Shorter Tracts. London, 1798 [482pp]. (London: F&C Rivington, J Evans, J. Hatchard, and S. Hazard, Bath), 1798 
1799  Cheap Repository Shorter Tracts. London, 1798 [482pp]. (London: F&C Rivington, J Evans, J. Hatchard, and S. Hazard, Bath), 1798 
  New Edition: London, 1799[494pp].  
1800  Cheap Repository Shorter Tracts. London, 1798 [482pp]. (London: F&C Rivington, J Evans, J. Hatchard, and S. Hazard, Bath), 1798  
New Edition: London, 1800 [489pp] 
1818(CT) Stories for the Middle Ranks of Society, and Tales for the Common People. By Hannah More.  2 Vols. (London: T Cadell), 1818 
 
203 
 
 
 
WORKS CITED 
 
 
Altick, Richard D. The English Common Reader: A Social History of the Mass 
Reading Public. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957. Print. 
 
Altick, Richard D, and John J Fenstermaker. The Art of Literary Research. 4th 
ed. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1993. Print. 
Anonymous. "The Lancashire Collier Girl: A True Story." Gentleman's 
Magazine March 1795: 197-9, 336, 486. Print. 
Astbury, Raymond. "The Renewal of the Licensing Act in 1693, and Its Lapse 
in 1695." The Library 33 5th Series (1978): 298-322. Print. 
Basker, James G. Amazing Grace: An Anthology of Poems About Slavery, 1660-
1810. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002. Print. 
Brown, Ford K. Fathers of the Victorians: The Age of Wilberforce. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1961. Print. 
Chapone, Hester. The Works of Mrs Chapone. London: W. Wells and T.B. Wait 
and Co., 1809. Print. 
Charlton, Kenneth. ""False Fonde Books, Ballades and Rimes": An Aspect of 
Informal Education in Early Modern England." History of Education 
Quarterly 27 4 (1987): 449-71. Print. 
Craig, Hugh. "Authorial Attribution and Computational Stylistics: If You Can 
Tell Authors Apart, Have You Learned Anything About Them?" 
Literary and Linguistic Computing 14 1 (1999): 103-13. Print. 
Dagan, I, Y Karov, and D Roth. "Mistake-Driven Learning in Text 
Categorization." In Proc. 2nd Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing EMNLP-97  (1997): 55-63. Print. 
De Morgan, Augustus. "Note on the Cheap Repository Tracts." Notes and Queries 
6. 24 Sept (1864): 241-45. Print. 
De Morgan, Sophia. Memoirs of Augustus De Morgan. London: Longmans, 
Green & Co., 1882. Print. 
 
204 
 
Demers, Patricia. The World of Hannah More. University Press of Kentucky, 
1996. Print. 
Donawerth, Jane. "Poaching on Men's Philosophies of Rhetoric: Eighteenth- 
and Nineteenth-Century Rhetorical Theory by Women." Philosophy and 
Rhetoric 33 3 (2000): 243-58. Print. 
Easley, Alexis. First Person Anonymous : Women Writers and Victorian Print 
Media, 1830-70 Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2004. Print. 
Editors, The. "Cheap Repository Tracts".  2005. The Literary Encyclopedia.  (14 
April 2005):  The Literary Dictionary Company. 9 September 2007. 
<http://www.litencyc.com/php/stopics.php?rec=true&UID=1540>. 
Elfenbein, Andrew. "Lesbianism and Romantic Genius: The Poetry of Anne 
Bannerman." ELH 63 4 (1996): 929-57. Print. 
Erdman, David V. "The Signature of Style." Evidence for Authorship: Essays on 
Problems of Attribution. Eds. Erdman, David V and Ephim Fogel. Ithaca, 
New York: Cornell University, 1966. 45-68. Print. 
Erdman, David V, and Ephim Fogel. "Editorial Note to Part I." Evidence for 
Authorship: Essays on Problems of Attribution. Eds. Erdman, David V and 
Ephim Fogel. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University, 1966. 3-5. Print. 
---, eds. Evidence for Authorship: Essays on Problems of Attribution. Ithaca, New 
York: Cornell University, 1966. Print. 
Evans, M.J. Crossley. "Evangelicals and Enlightenment: The Case of Hannah 
More." Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth century 303  (1992): 468-72. 
Print. 
Feather, John. "The English Book Trade and the Law." Publishing History 12  
(1982): 51-75. Print. 
Ferguson, Moira. Subject to Others: British Women Writers and Colonial Slavery 
1670-1834. London: Routledge, 1992. Print. 
Fitzpatrick, Barbara Laning. "Some Pieces in the British Magazine and a Small 
Part of the Translation of Voltaire's Works: Smollet Attributions." 
Eighteenth Century Fiction 9 1 (1996): 97-100. Print. 
Ford, Charles Howard. Hannah More: A Critical Biography. New York: Peter 
Lang, 1996. Print. 
 
205 
 
Foster, Charles I. An Errand of Mercy: The Evangelical United Front, 1790-1837. 
Chapel Hill, 1960. Print. 
Foster, Don. Author Unknown: On the Trail of Anonymous. New York: Henry 
Holt and Company, 2000. Print. 
Foster, Donald W. "Commentary: In the Name of the Author." New Literary 
History 33 2 (2002): 375-96. Print. 
Foucault, Michel. "What Is an Author?" Textual Strategies: Perspectives in Post-
Structuralist Criticism. Ed. Harari, Josue V. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1979. 149. Print. 
Green, Emanuel. Bibliotheca Somersetensis. Vol. 3. 3 vols. Taunton: Barncott 
and Pearce, 1902. Print. 
Griffin, Robert J., ed. The Faces of Anonymity: Anonymous and Pseudonymous 
Publication from the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Century. New York & 
Houndsmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. Print. 
Halkett, Samuel, and John Laing. A Dictionary of Anonymous and Pseudonymous 
Publication in the English Language. Edinburgh: W. Paterson, 1822-88. 
Print. 
Holmes, David I. "Unmasking Anonymous." The Daily Telegraph 3 December 
1996: 7. Print. 
Hoover, David L. "Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies." A Companion 
to Digital Literary Studies. Eds. Schreibman, Susan and Ray Seimens. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 2008. 28: 1-13. Print. 
Hopkins, Mary Alden. Hannah More and Her Circle. New York and Toronto: 
Longmans, 1947. Print. 
Joachims, T. "Text Categorization with Support Vector Machines: Learning 
with Many Relevant Features." In Proc. 10th European Conference on 
Machine Learning  ECML-98 (1998): 137-42. Print. 
Jones, M.G. Hannah More. Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 1952. 
Print. 
Jones, William. The Jubilee Memorial of the Religious Tract Society. London: The 
Religous Tract Society, 1850. Print. 
 
206 
 
Jordan, Ellen. ""Making Good Wives and Mothers"? The Transformation of 
Middle-Class Girls' Education in Nineteenth-Century Britain." History 
of Education Quarterly 31 4 (1991): 439-62. Print. 
Juola, Patrick. "Authorship Attribution." Foundations and Trends in Information 
Retrieval 1 3 (2006): 233-334. Print. 
Kelly, Gary. "Revolution, Reaction, and the Expropriation of Popular Culture: 
Hannah More's Cheap Repository." Man and Nature: Proceedings of the 
Canadian Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies. Eds. Graham, Kenneth 
W and Neal Johnson. Edmonton: Academic Printing and Publishing, 
1987. 147-59. Print. 
Koppel, Moshe, Jonathon Schler, and Elisheva Bonchek-Dokow. "Measuring 
Differentiability: Unmasking Pseudonymous Authors." Journal of 
Machine Learning Research   (2005): 1-15. Print. 
Koppel, Moshe, Jonathon Schler, and Eran Messeri. "Authorship Attribution 
in Law Enforcement Scenarios." NATO Meeting on Security Informatics 
and Terrorism. Ed. Print. 
Koracevic, Ivanka. Fact into Fiction:English Literature and the Industrial 
Scene,1750-1850. Leicester Leicester University Press, 1975. Print. 
Kowaleski-Wallace, Beth. "Hannah and Her Sister: Women and 
Evangelicalism in Early Nineteenth-Century England." Nineteenth-
Century Contexts 12 Fall (1988): 29-51. Print. 
---. "Milton's Daughters: The Education of Eighteenth-Century Women 
Writers." Feminist Studies 12 2 (1986): 275-93. Print. 
Krueger, Christine L. "Social Prophet: Hannah More as Political Writer." The 
Reader's Repentence: Women Preachers, Women Writers, and Nineteenth-
Century Social Discourse. Ed. Krueger, Christine L. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1992. 94-124. Print. 
Langford, P. Public and the Propertied Englishman, 1689-1798. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1994. Print. 
Littlestone, N. "Learning Quickly When Irrelevant Attributes Abound: A New 
Linear-Threshold Algorithm." Machine Learning 2 4 (1987): 285-318. 
Print. 
 
207 
 
Lloyd, Sarah. "Cottage Conversations: Poverty and Manly Independence in 
Eighteenth Century England." Past and Present 184 August (2004): pp 
69-108. Print. 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington. Miscellaneous Works of Lord Macaulay. New 
York: London, Harper & Bros., 1880. Print. 
Mascol, Conrad. "Curves of Pauline and Pseudo-Pauline Style I." Unitarian 
Review 30 November (1888): 452-60. Print. 
McMenamin, Gerald R. Forensic Stylistics. London: Elsevier, 1993. Print. 
Mendenhall, T.C. . "The Characteristic Curves of Composition." Science 214 
March (1887): 237-49. Print. 
Miegon, Anna. "Biographical Sketches of Principal Bluestocking Women." The 
Huntington Library Quarterly 65 1/2 (2002): 25-37. Print. 
Miller, P.J. "Women's Education, 'Self Improvement' and Social Mobility - a 
Late Eighteenth Century Debate." British Journal of Educational Studies 
20 3 (1972): 302-14. Print. 
More, Hannah, ed. Cheap Repository Shorter Tracts. London: F&C Rivington, 
J.Evans, J. Hatchard, & S Hazard, 1798. Print. 
---. The Complete Works of Hannah More. New York: Harper & Brothers, Cliff 
Street, 1835. Print. 
---. Considerations on Religion and Public Education. 1st American Edition, 1794. 
Ed. Society, Augustian Reprint. Los Angeles: University of California, 
1990. Print. 
---. Poems, with a New Introduction by Caroline Franklin. 1816 Ed. London: 
Routlege/Thoemmes Press, 1996. Print. 
---. Strictures on the Modern System of Female Education. Vol. 1. 2 vols. London: 
T. Cadell Jun. and W. Davies, 1799. Print. 
---. Tales for the Common People. The Works of Hannah More. Vol. 3. 4 vols. 
Dublin: D. Graisberry, 1803. Print. 
---. Tales for the Common People and Other Cheap Repository Tracts. Selected with 
Introduction and notes by Claire MacDonald Shaw ed. Nottingham: 
Trent Editions, 2002. Print. 
 
208 
 
---. "The Two Wealthy Farmers." Collected Works. Ed. More, Hannah. London: 
T.Cadell, 1830. 111-250. Print. 
---. The Works of Hannah More. Vol. 4. 8 vols. London: Cadell & Davies, 1801. 
Print. 
---. The Works of Hannah More. Vol. 5. 8 vols. London: Cadell & Davies, 1801. 
Print. 
Morgan, Marjorie. Manners, Morals and Class in England: 1774-1858. London: 
St. Martin's Press, 1994. Print. 
Mosteller, Frederick, and David Wallace. Inference and Disputed Authorship: 
The Federalist. Reading, Mass: Addison Wesley, 1964. Print. 
Mosteller, Frederick, and David L Wallace. Applied Bayesian and Classical 
Inference. 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1984. Print. 
Mullan, John. Anonymity: A Secret History of English Literature. London: Faber 
and Faber, 2007. Print. 
Myers, Mitzi. "Hannah More's Tracts for the Times: Social Fiction and Female 
Ideology." Fetter'd or Free?: British Women Novelists, 1670-1815. Eds. 
Schofield, Mary Anne and Cecilia Macheski. Athens, Ohio: Ohio 
University Press, 1986. 264-84. Print. 
---. "Impeccable Governesses, Rational Dames, and Moral Mothers: Mary 
Wollstonecraft and the Female Tradition in Georgian Children's 
Books." Children's Literature 14  (1986): 31-59. Print. 
---. "'a Peculiar Protection': History, Gender, and Eighteenth Century 
Literature." Hannah More and the Cultural Politics of the Blagdon 
Controversy. Ed. Tobin, Beth Fowkes. Athens: University of Georgia 
Press, 1994. 227-57. Print. 
---. 'Reform or Ruin': A Revolution in Female Manners. Studies in Eighteenth-
Century Culture. Ed. Payne, Harry C. Vol. 11. Madison: University of 
Wisconsin, 1982. Print. 
Nardin, Jane. "Avoiding the Perils of the Muse: Hannah More, Didactic 
Literature, and Eighteenth Century Criticism." Papers on Language and 
Literature: A Journal for Scholars and Critics of Language and Literature 36 4 
(2000): 277-91. Print. 
 
209 
 
Pedersen, Susan. "Hannah More Meets Simple Simon: Tracts, Chapbooks, and 
Popular Culture in Late Eighteenth-Century England." Journal of British 
Studies 25  (1986): 84-113. Print. 
Peterson, Linda H. "From French Revolution to English Reformation: Hannah, 
Harriet Martineau, and The "Little Book"." Nineteenth-Century Literature 
60 4 (2006): 409-50. Print. 
Pharr, Mary. "Hannah More." An Encyclopedia of British Women Writers. Eds. 
Schlueter, Paul  and June Schlueter. New Brunswick, N.J: Rutgers 
University Press, 1998. 463-64. Print. 
Phelps, William Lyon. The Beginnings of the English Romantic Movement: A 
Study in Eighteenth Century Literature. London: Ginn & company, 1893. 
Print. 
Philp, Mark. "Vulgar Conservatism, 1792-3." The English Historical Review 110 
435 (1995): 42-69. Print. 
Pickering, Sam. "The Cheap Repository Tracts and the Short Story." Studies in 
Short Fiction 12  (1975): 15-21. Print. 
Pickering, Samuel F. John Locke and Children’s Books in Eighteenth Century 
England Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1981. Print. 
Porter, Ray. English Society in the Eighteenth Century. London, 1990. Print. 
Raven, James. "The Anonymous Novel in Britain and Ireland, 1750-1830." The 
Faces of Anonymity: Anonymous and Pseudonymous Publication from the 
Sixteenth to the Twentieth Century. Ed. Griffin, Robert J. New York & 
Houndsmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 141-66. Print. 
Richardson, Alan. Slavery, Abolition and Emancipation: Writings in the British 
Romantic Perioid. Vol. 4: Verse. London: Pickering and Chatto, 1999. 
Print. 
Rivers, Isabel. "The First Evangelical Tract Society." The Historical Journal 50 1 
(2007): 1-22. Print. 
Roberts, William. Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More. 
4th ed. Vol. 2. 3 vols. London: R.B Seeley & W Burnside, 1836. Print. 
---. Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More. 4th ed. Vol. 3. 3 
vols. London: R.B Seeley & W Burnside, 1836. Print. 
 
210 
 
---. Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More. 4th ed. 3 vols. 
London: R.B Seeley & W Burnside, 1836. Print. 
Rose, Mark. Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1993. Print. 
Rudman, Joseph. "Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies in 
Eighteenth Century Literature, Stylistics, Statistics, and the Computer".  
2002. 10 March 2009. <http://computerphilologie.uni-
muenchen.de/jg02/rudman.html>. 
---. "The State of Authorship Studies: Some Problems and Solutions." 
Computers and the Humanities 31  (1998): 351-65. Print. 
Ryan, Robert M. The Romantic Reformation: Religious Politics in English Politics 
in English Literature, 1789-1824. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1997. Print. 
Saunders, Julia. "Putting the Reader Right: Reassessing Hannah More's Cheap 
Repository Tracts." Romanticism on the Net  16 (1999). Print. 
Schantz, Mark S. "Religious Tracts, Evangelical Reform, and the Market 
Revolution in Antebellum America." Journal of the Early Republic 17 3 
(1997): 425-66. Print. 
Scheurmann, Mona. "Hannah More and the English Poor." Eighteenth Century 
Life 25 Spring (2001): pp 237-51. Print. 
---. In Praise of Poverty: Hannah More Counters Thomas Paine and the Radical 
Threat. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2002. Print. 
Schoenbauum, Stephen. Internal Evidence and Elizabethan Dramatic Authorship. 
Philadelphia: Northwestern University Press, 1966. Print. 
Shattock, Joanne. "More, Hannah: Poet, Playwright, and Religious Writer." 
The Oxford Guide to British Women Writers. Ed. Shattock, Joanne. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. 302-04. Print. 
Sherbo, Arthur. "The Uses and Abuses of Internal Evidence." Evidence for 
Authorship: Essays on Problems of Attribution. Eds. Erdman, David V and 
Ephim G Fogel. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1966. 6-24. Print. 
Sherman, Lucius Adelno. Analytics of Literature: A Manual for the Objective 
Study of English Prose and Poetry. London: Ginn, 1893. Print. 
 
211 
 
Sigelman, Lee, Colin Martindale, and Dean McKenzie. "The Common Style of 
Common Sense." Computers and the Humanities 30 5 (1996/1997): 373-79. 
Print. 
Smith, E.M.G. "Hannah More." Dictionary of Literary Biography: British Reform 
Writers, 1789-1832. Eds. Kelly, Gary  and Edd Applegate. A Bruccoli 
Clark Layman Book ed. Vol. 158: The Gale Group, 1996. 223-33. Print. 
Smith, Nicholas D. The Literary Manuscripts and Letters of Hannah More. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2008. Print. 
Spinney, G.H. "Cheap Repository Tracts: Hazard and Marshall Edition." The 
Library 4th Series, 20 No.3 (1939): 295-340. Print. 
Stamatatos, Efstathios. "A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution 
Methods." JASIST   (2008): 1-28. Print. 
Stone, Lawrence. "Literacy and Education in England, 1640-1900." Past and 
Present 42 February (1969): 68-139. Print. 
Stott, Anne. Hannah More: The First Victorian. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2003. Print. 
Thompson, E.P. The Making of the English Working Class. London, 1963. Print. 
Thompson, Henry. The Life of Hannah More with Notices of Her Sisters. London: 
T. Cadell, Strand; and W. Blackwell and Sons, Edinburgh, 1838. Print. 
Ty, Eleanor. Unsex'd Revolutionaries. Five Women Novelists of the 1790s. 
Toronto: U of Toronto Press, 1993. Print. 
Vallone, Lynne. ""A Humble Spirit under Correction": Tracts, Hymns and the 
Ideology of Evangelical Fiction for Children, 1780-1820." Lion and the 
Unicorn 15 2 (1991): 72-95. Print. 
Walker, Alice. "Summary of Periodical Literature." The Review of English 
Studies 16 62 (1940): 250-56. Print. 
Walpole, Horace , et al. Horace Walpole's Correspondence with Hannah More, 
Lady Browne, Lady Mary Coke, Lady Hervey, Lady George Lennox, Anne 
Pitt, Lady Suffold [and] Mary Hamilton (Mrs. John Dickenson). The Yale 
Edition of Horace Walpole's Correspondence,; V. 31;. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1961. Print. 
 
212 
 
Webb, Samantha. "One Man's Trash Is Another Man's Dinner: Food and 
Poetics of Scarcity in the Cheap Repository Tracts." European Romantic 
Review 17 4 (2006): 419-36. Print. 
Weiss, Harry B. "Hannah More’s Cheap Repository Tracts in America." 
Bulletin of the New York Public Library 50 7 (1946): 539-49. Print. 
---. "Hannah More’s Cheap Repository Tracts in America: Part 2." Bulletin of 
the New York Public Library 50 8 (1946): 634-41. Print. 
Womack, Whitney. "Protesting Bodies: Transatlantic Women's Reform 
Writing, 1788-1872." PhD. Purdue University, 1999. Print. 
Wordsworth, Jonathon. "Introduction." Village Politics (1793) with the Shepard 
of Salisbury Plain (C.1820) by Hannah More. 1792. Ed. Wordsworth, 
Jonathon. Oxford and New York: Woodstock Books, 1995. n.p. Print. 
Yonge, Charlotte. "Children's Literature of the Last Century." Macmillan's 
Magazine 20 117 (1869). Print. 
---. Hannah More. Eminent Women Series. Ed. Ingram, John H. London: W.H. 
Allen & Co., 1888. Print. 
Yule, G.U. "On Sentence Length as a Statistical Characteristic of Style in Prose 
with Application to Two Cases of Disputed Authorship." Biometrika 30  
(1938): 363-90. Print. 
Z [Hannah More]. "The Shepard of Salisbury Plain." Cheap Repository (1800-
1800). Vol. 1. Philadelphia: Johnson, 1800. 2-23. Print. 
 
 
 
 
