
Olomouc, Czech Republic
May 29 – June 1, 2014
QUALICO 2014
Editors: 
Martina Benešová (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Emmerich Kelih (University of Vienna, Austria)
Ján Mačutek (Comenius University, Slovakia)
Program Comittee:
Jan Andres (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Radek Čech (University of Ostrava, Czech Republic)
Sheila Embleton (York University, Canada)
Peter Grzybek (University of Graz, Austria)
Emmerich Kelih (University of Vienna, Austria)
Reinhard Köhler (University of Trier, Germany)
Ján Mačutek (Comenius University, Slovakia)
George Mikros (National and Kapodistrian University, Greece)
Hermann Moisl (University of Newcastle, UK)
Ivan Obradović (University of Belgrade, Serbia)
Relja Vulanović (Kent State University, USA)
Local Organizers: 
Martina Benešová (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Radek Čech (University of Ostrava, Czech Republic)
Dan Faltýnek (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Petra Martinková (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Nela Urbaniková (Palacký University, Czech Republic)
Students Organizing Team from Palacký University: 
Kristýna Bajerová, Ludmila Lacková, Tereza Motalová, Michaela Roubínková, 
Denisa Schusterová, Lenka Spáčilová, Jana Ščigulinská, Juliana Zmetáková
Graphic design: Martina Šviráková
Copies: 100
Pages: 148
Publisher: Philosophical Faculty of Palacký University, Olomouc
ISBN 978-80-244-4096-5
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
Content
Preface  11
Welcome to Olomouc!  13
Quantitative analysis of poetic space:   15
discrimination of loci in Eugene Onegin by Pushkin 
Sergey Andreev 
The Menzerath-Altmann Law revisited  17
Jan Andres  
The dependency between the variance of word length and word frequency           19
Gemma Bel-Enguix, Kirsten Bohn, Ramon Ferrer-i-Cancho 
Distributional models of the verbal predicate-argument structure 21
Andrei Beliankou 
Menzerath-Altmann Law in differently segmented text  23
Martina Benešová, Dan Faltýnek, Lukáš H. Zámečník  
Application of the Menzerath-Altmann Law to contemporary   25
written Japanese – short story style  
Denis Biryukov, Martina Benešová  
Impact of semantics on case diversification  27
Radek Čech, Emmerich Kelih, Ján Mačutek  
Factors of readability of Polish texts: a psycholinguistic study 29
Edyta Charzyńska, Łukasz Dębowski 
Word length distribution in Chinese dialogue and prose texts 32
Heng Chen 
Using language network characteristics to do text classification  34
Xinying Chen 
A new universal code helps to distinguish natural language from random texts       36
Łukasz Dębowski 
QUALICO 2014
Large-scale stylometry using network analysis  38
Maciej Eder  
Quantitative studies: the advantages for dialectology 40
Sheila Embleton, Dorin Uritescu, Eric S. Wheeler 
Quantitative data on monosyllabism: a cross-linguistic study  42
Gertraud Fenk-Oczlon, August Fenk 
Towards a mathematical theory of word order evolution  45
Ramon Ferrer-i-Cancho  
The study of text clustering based on Chinese dependency treebank 47
Song Gao  
Modelling multidimensional polysemy networks. The case of /over/.  48
Dylan Glynn  
Stylistic fingerprints, POS tags and inflected languages: a case study in Polish      51
Rafał L. Górski, Maciej Eder, Jan Rybicki  
The Arens-Altmann Law: 
a matter of boundary conditions or an ostensible success story?  54
Peter Grzybek  
On the robust measurement of inflectional diversity  57
Guillaume Guex, Aris Xanthos  
Cross-linguistic transference of authorship attribution  59
Belinda Hasanaj, Erin Purnell, Patrick Juola  
Distribution pattern of given and new information in written English 61
Wang Hua  
Word frequency distribution in genres of modern Chinese 63
Wei Huang  
Loan words: a quantitative linguistics perspective  65
Emmerich Kelih  
The Menzerath-Altmann Law in film analysis  67
Veronika Koch, Peter Grzybek  
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
Quantitative index text analyser (QUITA)  69
Miroslav Kubát, Vladimír Matlach  
Quantitative psycholinguistic analysis of formal parameters of Czech text       71
Dalibor Kučera, Jiří Haviger  
Towards generalization of sociolinguistic distributions:  73
English loanwords in contemporary written Japanese 
Aimi Kuya 
Type-token relation for length motifs in Ukrainian texts  76
Ján Mačutek  
Gender identification in Modern Greek tweets 78
George Mikros, Kostas Perifanos 
Three models for the Menzerath’s Law  80
Jiří Milička 
Sentence semantics, word meaning, and nonlinear dynamics 81
Hermann Moisl 
Testing language units of written Chinese via Menzerath-Altmann Law           83
Tereza Motalová, Lenka Spáčilová 
Structural versus morphological coding. A cross-linguistic study.  85
Sven Naumann  
An exploration of the “Golden Section” in Chinese contemporary poetries        86
Xiaxing Pan, Hui Qiu  
Modelling proximity in a corpus of literary retranslations:  89
a methodological proposal for clustering texts based on 
systemic-functional annotation of lexicogrammatical features  
Adriana Pagano, Giacomo Figueredo, Annabelle Lukin  
The Krylov Law as a tool for comparative lexicology.  92
The example of Polish 19th century dictionaries. 
Adam Pawłowski  
Evolutionary derivation of laws for polysemic and age-polysemic              94 
distributions of language signs ensembles                 
Vasiliy Poddubny, Anatoly Polikarpov
QUALICO 2014
Quantitative studies in the corpus of Nko periodicals 97
Andrij Rovenchak 
Translations in networks: the (in)visibility of translator styles 99
Jan Rybicki 
A co-occurrence and an order of the valency in Japanese sentences 102
Haruko Sanada 
Authorship attribution using political speeches 104
Jacques Savoy 
Testing language units of spoken Chinese via Menzerath-Altmann Law         106
Jana Ščigulinská, Denisa Schusterová
Comparative rates of change as a diagnostic of vowel phonologization  108
Betsy Sneller  
Diversification in the noun inflection of Old English  111
Petra Steiner  
Quantitative verification of constancy measures of texts 113
Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii, Shunsuke Aihara 
History of words II – types of historical developments 115
Arjuna Tuzzi, Reinhard Köhler  
Defying Zipf ’s Law  117
Marjolein Van Egmond, Sergey Avrutin 
Opinion target identification using thematic concentration of the text  119
Kateřina Veselovská, Radek Čech  
Grammar efficiency and the idealization of parts-of-speech systems  121
Relja Vulanovič, Tatjana Hrubik-Vulanovič 
Polyfunctionality and polysemy in Chinese 123
Lu Wang  
Structural complexity of Chinese characters and Zipf ’s Law 126
Yanru Wang, Xinying Chen  
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
The influences of the word unit and the sentence length on the ratio 129
of the parts of speech in Japanese                
Makoto Yamazaki  
Addresses of authors  131
Register  146
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
9
Dedicated to Gabriel Altmann in honour of his 83rd birthday 
and to Luděk Hřebíček in honour of his 80th birthday.
Preface
Over the last decades, Quantitative Linguistics has undergone a rapid and fruitful 
development and already reached the status of a mature and fully developed 
branch of linguistics and text analysis. The International Quantitative Linguistics 
Association (IQLA) was founded on November 28, 1994 and celebrates this year 
its 20th anniversary. The same holds true for the Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 
(JQL), the official journal and flagship of IQLA. Additionally Quantitative 
Linguistics is growing in regard to the members of the association as well as to the 
number of journals and book series which are explicitly devoted to problems of 
quantitative methods in linguistics and quantitative text analysis (Glottometrics, 
Glottotheory, Quantitative Linguistics, Studies in Quantitative Linguistics etc.). 
One of the most important, main institutional contributions of IQLA to 
the development and propagation of Quantitative Linguistics is the regular 
organisation of International Congresses on Quantitative Linguistics (QUALICO). 
A tradition, which already started in Germany (Trier, 1991) and continued in 
Russia (Moscow, 1994), Finland (Helsinki, 1997), Czech Republic (Prague, 
2000) and the United States (Athens, GA, 2003). At the 5th Trier Conference 
on Quantitative Linguistics in 2007 the regular organisation of Qualico was 
confirmed and re-established, and the following conferences took place in 
Austria (Graz, 2009) and Serbia (Belgrade, 2012). QUALICO 2014 is hosted 
by the recently established Department of General Linguistics at the Palacký 
University Olomouc (Czech Republic) and the organization of QUALICO would 
not have been possible without a highly motivated and encouraged team of local 
organizers. Due to the help and substantial financial support of ESF projects it was 
possible to organize QUALICO 2014 and to celebrate the anniversary of IQLA 
and JQL in an appropriate and worthy way. Without any doubt QUALICO 2014 
will remain as a further important step in establishing and the dissemination of 
Quantitative Linguistics. 
President of IQLA 
on behalf of the IQLA-Council
Welcome to Olomouc!
Dear QUALICO 2014 participants and friends of Quantitative Linguistics, if 
we wanted to understand the word quantitative and consulted a dictionary, 
we would find that it means relating to, measuring, or measured by the quan-
tity of something rather than its quality. Therefore, with this respect, we wish 
to launch this book of abstracts and the conference itself by quantities related 
to Quantitative Linguistics and to some of its representatives.
Firstly, we would like to warmly welcome you to Olomouc and to Palacký 
University in Olomouc, which is the second oldest in the Czech Republic. Last 
year, the University celebrated the 440th anniversary of its foundation. The 
University is here represented by the Department of General Linguistics. The 
team of the department and the wider cooperating team consist of linguists, 
philosophers, statisticians and mathematicians; i.e. we promote team work and 
interdisciplinary approach which, we believe, would be an unavoidable fea- 
ture for future Quantitative Linguistics and general linguistics too. The tra-
dition of our department is quite short, it dates three years back, yet we are 
very eager and proud to be a co-organizer of QUALICO 2014.
We would be happy if the conference assissted in indicating at least tracks 
or possibilities of the future direction of Quantitative Linguistics, its position 
inside the wide stream, answers to questions like e.g. what the laws are, what 
the fundamental questions are, what appropriate methodology to use, to what 
extent to use sciences outside linguistics, i.e. mathematics, statistics etc. We 
would like to do our bit by co-organizing the conference to contribute to the 
process of revealing and maintaining the position of Quantitative Linguistics.
Last but not least, Gabriel Altmann, one of the founders of internatio-
nal Quantitative Linguistics, celebrated last week his birthday and in a  few 
days Luděk Hřebíček, one of the pioneers of Quantitative Linguistics in the 
Czech Republic, will celebrate his 80th birthday. Despite they are not physi-
cally present, we would like to dedicate the conference to them. Above all to 
Luděk Hřebíček. On the other hand Luděk Hřebíček regards the contribution 
of Gabriel Altmann as one of the milestones of the 20th century linguistics. He 
goes as far as to say in his contemplations that he calls the linguistics of the 
last century as Altmannian linguistics. 
Welcome to Olomouc and enjoy your stay here!
Local organizers
Department of General Linguistics
Palacký University Olomouc, Czech Republic
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
15
Quantitative analysis of poetic space: discrimination 
of loci in Eugene Onegin by Pushkin
Sergey Andreev
Keywords: locus, discriminant analysis, verse text, Eu-
gene Onegin, classification, nominality 
The representation of Time and Space (Chronotope) in novels is one of the most 
important and popular subjects of many philological studies. Special attention is 
usually paid to the latter of the above-mentioned components of Chronotope – 
Space. It has been analyzed from literary, cultural, semiotic, semantic, cognitive 
points of view. The purpose of this paper is to carry out a quantitative compari- 
son of text extracts referring to different loci. By a locus we understand a specific 
locality of the poetic world whose borders can be crossed in most cases only by 
the main characters of the novel and very often with dramatic results (Lotman 
1970). The database of this study is the novel in verse Eugene Onegin by Pushkin 
which is considered to be one of the highest (if not the highest) achievements in 
Russian literature. Traditionally the following main loci are singled out in this 
novel: Saint-Petersburg, Village, Moscow. As Saint-Petersburg is present in two 
rather distant chapters – the first and the last – we divided it into two: SPb-1 and 
SPb-2. The same was done for Village (Village-1 – in the second chapter and 
Village-2 – in the last but one). The formal characteristics which were used for the 
analysis include features which show certain deviation from the standard: three 
types of enjambement (rejet, contre-rejet and double-rejet), syntactic pause in 
the verse line, inversion (full), emphatic line (its formal markers are exclamation, 
interrogation marks or dots at the end of the line), emphatic sentence (the same 
markers as for emphatic line, but at the end of the sentence). Besides, coordi- 
nate and subordinate sentences, direct speech and three parts of speech – nouns, 
QUALICO 2014
16
verbs and adjectives were also counted. Each of these three part-of-speech 
characteristics was subdivided into three groups depending on the position of 
the word in the line: initial (first metrically strong position), final (last strong 
metrical position) and intermediate (all other positions in the middle of the line). 
5 main loci (SPb-1, SPb-2, Moscow, Village-1, Village-2) were compared with 
the help of the multivariate discriminant analysis. It gave unexpectedly good re-
sults of discrimination (post hoc test showing 100% correctness). The main char- 
acteristics, forming the discriminant model, are subordinate clauses, inversion, 
emphatic sentences, double-rejet, nouns in the initial and final positions. On the 
other hand, parts of speech in the middle of the line were found obscuring the 
discrimination. This can be interpreted as a proof of high relevance of features 
reflecting vertical organization of verse. Using these results the other loci (Way, 
The Tatyana’s dream, Duel, Tatyana’s letter, Onegin’s letter) were classified. The 
other stage of analysis included the comparison of the distribution of nouns, verbs 
and adjectives in different loci according to the method, suggested in (Naumann 
et al. 2012). The results showed differences of the degree of nominality and type 
of description (static vs. dynamic).
References 
Lotman, Y. M. 
(1970) The structure of the literary text. Moscow. 
Naumann S., Popescu I.-I., Altmann G.
(2012) Aspects of nominal style, Glottometrics, 23, 23–55.
Acknowledgment 
The research was supported by Russian Humanitarian Fund, Project №14-04-00266.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
17
The Menzerath-Altmann Law revisited 
Jan Andres 
Keywords: Menzerath-Altmann Law, optimization of 
parameters, accuracy of calculations 
One of the milestones of quantitative lingustics, the Menzerath-Altmann Law 
(MAL), will be examined from two perspectives:
(i) a possible accordance of the verbal form of MAL vs. an optimal related 
mathematical formula, 
(ii) the accuracy of calculations to the shape parameters in MAL (which is 
crucial for the fractal analysis of texts). 
For both goals, we will compare the results concerning the data without 
averaging, the averaged weighted data and those without weights. The concrete 
illustrative examples will be supplied. A  suitability of various formulas of the 
Menzerath-Altmann Law will be examined from the point of view of its verbal 
version (i.e. the tendency of the approximated functions to be decreasing) as well 
as of quantitative statistical criteria characterizing the accuracy of fitted data. In 
particular, we will concentrate on the optimal calculation of the shape parameter 
b and we explain its fundamental role for the fractal analysis of texts.
References
Andres, J., Kubáček, L., Machalová, J., Tučková, M.  
(2012)  Optimization of parameters in the Menzerath-Altmann Law. Acta 
Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis, Facultas rerum naturalium, 
Mathematica., 51, 1, 5–27.
QUALICO 2014
18
Andres, J., Benešová, M., Chvosteková, M., Fišerová, E.
(2014) Optimization of parameters in the Menzerath-Altmann Law, II. Acta 
Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis, Facultas rerum naturalium, 
Mathematica., submitted.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
19
The dependency between the variance of word 
length and word frequency
Gemma Bel-Enguix, Kirsten Bohn, Ramon  
Ferrer-i-Cancho
Keywords: language evolution, compression, depen-
dency word frequency / variance of length, English, 
Catalan, French, German, Latin
It is well-known that the length of words tends to decrease as their frequency in- 
creases. This phenomenon corresponds to Zipf ’s Law of abbreviation (Zipf 1949). 
G. K. Zipf attributed the Law to the minimization of a cost function consistent 
with the mean code length of information theory (Ferrer-i-Cancho et al, 2013). 
The Law of abbreviation can be seen as an epiphenomenon of a general principle 
of compression (Chater and Vitányi, 2003). Here, the problem of abbreviation 
is investigated from the perspective of the dependency between frequency and 
the variance of the length of words having that frequency. It is found that an es- 
timator of the variance of word length tends to decrease as frequency increases 
in English, Catalan, French, German and Latin texts. These results suggest that 
the pressure for reducing word length increases as word frequency increases 
and that models of the dependency between frequency and length (e.g., Strauss 
et al 2007) should take into account heteroscedasticity.
References
Chater, N., Vitányi, P. M. B. 
(2003) Simplicity: a  unifying principle in cognitive science? Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 19–22.
QUALICO 2014
20
Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Hernández-Fernández, A., Lusseau, D., Agoramoorthy, 
G., Hsu, M. J., Semple, S. 
(2013) Compression as a universal principle of animal behavior. Cognitive 
Science, in press. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12061.
Strauss, U., Grzybek, P., Altmann, G. 
(2007) Word length and word frequency. In: P. Grzybek (ed.), Contributions 
to the science of text and language, Dordrecht: Springer, 277–294.
Zipf, G. K. 
(1949)  Human behaviour and the principle of least effort. Cambridge, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
21
Distributional models of the verbal predicate-argu-
ment structure
Andrei Beliankou
Keywords: predicate-argument structure, verb valency, 
full valency, semantic frames, distributional models
The predicate-argument structure is a longstanding topic for the research com- 
munity. We are going to describe some quantitative properties of the verbal 
argument structure both on the syntactic and semantic levels. On the syntactic 
level, many works were devoted to dependency structures and valency properties 
of verbs. We are going to investigate full valency of verbs in Russian, German, 
Latin, and English and to compare our models to previous works on full va-
lency (e.g. Čech et al. 2010). We plan to compare the approaches distinguishing 
optional and obligatory arguments with approaches not doing such a  distinc-
tion. Proven hypotheses about the functional dependency of verb frequency and 
number of arguments as well as about the type of argument number distribution 
should be tested on new data sets for other European languages. On the semantic 
level, we want to prove the hypothesis about a tight interrelation of semantic roles 
and syntactic arguments for coarse- and fine-grained annotation frameworks 
(e.g. VerbNet vs. SALSA/FrameNet). We expect to find a similar distribution of 
full valency frames and coarse-grained semantic frames and develop a method 
for mapping coarse- and fine-grained semantic annotations in order to find 
a quantitative approach for semantic description of verbal predicate-argument 
structures.
QUALICO 2014
22
References
Čech, R., Pajas, P., Mačutek, J.
(2010) Full Valency. Verb Valency without Distinguishing Complements and 
Adjuncts. English. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics. 17, 4, 291–302. 
Liu, H.
(2011) Quantitative Properties of English Verb Valency. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics. 18, 3, 207–233.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
23
Menzerath-Altmann Law in differently segmented text 
Martina Benešová, Dan Faltýnek, Lukáš H. Zámečník 
Keywords: Menzerath-Altmann Law, segmentation of 
linguistic sample, construct, constituent, synergetic 
linguistics
The aim of our paper is to discuss one the fundamental assumptions of synergetic 
linguistics that a language system tends to balance itself due to possessing self-
-regulating and self-organizing mechanisms, and to postulate an inquiry when it 
happens, if it ever does. We chose the well-known and often quoted Menzerath-
Altmann Law (MAL) as a model whose assumed validity confirms that it does. 
The MAL original verbal formulation was extended to become a relationship be-
tween the generalized units of the construct and the constituent. A unit of a par-
ticular linguistic level, therefore, acts as a construct toward the unit of the im-
mediately lower neighbouring level and a constituent to the immediately higher 
neighbouring level. This has to lead inevitably to the precise definition of either 
on every linguistic level. Hence, the first discussed pitfall to be commented on is 
the choice of suitable linguistic units and the rules of a linguistic sample segmen-
tation. One text was chosen and additionally tested using different segmentation 
criteria and units. The results are to be compared and interpreted.
Altmann, G.
(1980) Prolegomena to Menzerath’s Law. Glottometrika 2, 1–10.
Andres, J., Benešová, M., Kubáček, L., Vrbková, J.
(2011) Methodological note on the fractal analysis of texts. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics, 18, 4, 337-367.
QUALICO 2014
24
Andres, J., Kubáček, L., Machalová, J., Tučková, M.
(2012) Optimization of parameters in Menzerath-Altmann Law II. Acta 
Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis, Facultas rerum naturalium, 
Mathematica, 51, 1, 5–27.
Andres, J., Benešová, M., Chvosteková, M., Fišerová, E.
(2014) Optimization of parameters in Menzerath-Altmann Law. Acta 
Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis, Facultas rerum naturalium, 
Mathematica, 53, 1, 3–23.
Givón, T. 
(2001) Syntax. An Introduction. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Haspelamth, M., Sims, A. D. 
(2010) Understanding Morphology. London: Hodder Education, an Hachette 
UK Company.
Hewlett, N., Beck, J.
(2006) An Introduction to the Science of Phonetics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Hřebíček, L.
(1997) Lectures on Text Theory. Prague: The Academy of the Sciences of the 
Czech Republic (Oriental Institute). 
Laver, J. 
(1994) Principles of Phonetics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C.
(1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tallerman, M. 
(1998) Understanding Syntax. London: Arnold.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
25
Application of the Menzerath-Altmann Law to con-
temporary written Japanese – short story style 
Denis Biryukov, Martina Benešová 
Keywords: Menzerath-Altmann Law, written Japanese, 
segmentation, short story 
The main objective of this experiment is verification of the applicability of the 
Menzerath-Altmann Law to contemporary written Japanese. The sample text style 
chosen for the analysis is a short story by a Japanese author. The methodology, 
i.e., sample text segmentation methods used in this experiment, partially stem 
from an earlier experiment on contemporary written Chinese, particularly the 
language unit of the component (island) proposed by Motalová and Spáčilová. 
Simultaneously, new language units and processes of segmentation of Japanese 
texts are also proposed and tested in this experiment as the Japanese writing 
system otherwise differs considerably from Chinese in many aspects. Analysis 
results will be presented and interpreted in the paper.
References 
Habein, Y. S., 
(2000) Decoding Kanji. A  Practical Approach to Learning Look-Alike 
Characters. 1st ed. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 2000.
Hřebíček, L.
(2002) Vyprávění o lingvistických experimentech s textem. Praha: Academia. 
QUALICO 2014
26
Kamada, T., Torataroō Y., Y. 
(2004) Shin Kangorin. Tōokyoō: Taishuūkan Shoten, 用例プラス Electronic 
Dictionary Edition.
Koike, S. 
(2010) Úvod do gramatiky moderní japonštiny. 1st edition. Brno: Tribun EU. 
Kraemerová, A. 
(2000) Úvod do japanologie: jazyk a  literatura. 1st edition. Olomouc: 
Univerzita Palackého, Filozofická fakulta.
Motalová, T., Spáčilová, L.
(2013) Aplikace Menzerath-Altmannova zákona na současnou psanou čínšti-
nu. Olomouc, 2013. thesis (Mgr.). Univerzita Palackého v Olomouci. 
Filozofická fakulta.
Nitsuú, N. Satoó, F.
(2004) 留学生のための論理的な文章の書き方. Tokyo: 3A Corporation.
Spahn, M., Hadamitzky, W., Fujie-Winter, K.
(1989) Kan-Ei Jukugo Ribāsu Jiten. Shohan. Tōkyō: Hatsubai Kinokuniya 
Shoten.
Švarný, O. (et al.)
(1967) Úvod do hovorové čínštiny: Příručka pro vys. šk. 2. Praha: SPN.
常用漢字表. 
(2010)  http://www.bunka.go.jp/kokugo_nihongo/pdf 
jouyoukanjihyou_h22pdf 
文章の書き方・ととのえ方: 5, 段落の作り方. 三省堂 
(2014) Web Dictionary [online]. 2014 [accessed 2014-01-04]. http://www.
sanseido.net/main/words/hyakka/howto/05.aspx 
文部省教科書局調査課国語調査室. くぎり符号の使ひ方. 
(1946) [accessed 2014- 01-04]. http://www.bunka.go.jp/kokugo%5Fnihongo/
joho/kijun/sanko/pdf/kugiri.pdf 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
27
Impact of semantics on case diversification 
Radek Čech, Emmerich Kelih, Ján Mačutek 
Keywords: case distribution, noun, semantics, Czech 
The relationship between semantics of noun and the frequency of particular 
grammatical cases in highly inflected languages is well known, e.g. Greenberg 
(1990). For instance, noun denoting person tends to occur most commonly in 
nominative – because of its agentive role – while place noun in locative. In our 
analysis, however, we try to interpret the relationship between semantics of noun 
and case distribution of particular nouns in a rather more general way. Based on 
both the Wimmer-Altmann theory (2005) and the idea of a diversification pro- 
cess (Altmann 2005), we assume that the distribution of cases of particular nouns 
in general should be ruled by an underlying mechanism which can be viewed 
as a manifestation of complex mutual interrelations in language system, in the 
sense of synergetic linguistics approach (Köhler 1996, 2005). Further, we assume 
that semantics of noun influences not only the ranking of particular cases but 
the distribution of cases as a whole. Therefore, hypotheses on a general relation-
ship between the semantics of nouns and case diversification will be presented. 
The analysis will be focused on case frequency and case frequency distribution 
in contemporary Czech corpora (lemmatized and morphologically tagged syn-
chronic corpus data from Czech National Corpus are used). Particularly, we will 
consider several noun categories, as for instance a) gender (masculine, feminine 
and neutral), b) animate/inanimate, c) number (singular, plural) and d) general 
semantic features (concrete vs. abstract nouns) and e) specific semantic features 
(animals, body parts, place nouns, nouns referring to persons and professions 
etc.). In addition to descriptive statistics, first steps in mathematical modelling 
and the integration of particular hypotheses into synergetic linguistics will be 
discussed.
QUALICO 2014
28
References
Altmann, G. 
(2005) Diversification processes. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, G., Piotrowski, 
R.G. (eds.), Handbook of Quantitative Linguistics. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
649–659. 
Greenberg, J. H. 
(1990) The Relation of Frequency to Semantic Feature in a Case Language 
(Russian). In: Denning, K., Kemmer, S. (eds.), On language: selected 
writings of Joseph H. Greenberg. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
207–226.
Köhler, R.
(1986) Zur linguistischen Synergetik. Struktur und Dynamik der Lexik. 
Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Köhler, R. 
(2005) Synergetic Linguistics. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, G., Piotrowski, R.G., 
Handbook of Quantitative Linguistics. Berlin: de Gruyter, 760–775. 
Těšitelová, M.
(1996) On quantification in grammar and semantics. Partee, B. N., Sgall, 
P. (eds.): Discourse and meaning. Papers in honour of Eva Hajičová. 
Amsterdam/ Philadelphia: Benjamins, 369–378. 
Wimmer, G., Altmann, G.
(2005) Unified derivation of some linguistic Laws. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, 
G., Piotrowski, R.G. (eds.), Handbook of Quantitative Linguistics. 
Berlin: de Gruyter, 791–807.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
29
Factors of readability of Polish texts: a psycholin-
guistic study
Edyta Charzyńska, Łukasz Dębowski
Keywords: readability, Polish, psycholinguistics, word 
length, sentence length 
Readability of a given text is the degree of difficulty of understanding the text. This 
degree can be measured using psycholinguistic methods such as multiple choice 
tests or cloze tests. It can be partly predicted by statistical properties of the text 
such as the mean sentence length or the percentage of difficult word tokens. Many 
formulae for predicting readability from such statistics have been proposed for 
English (Flesch 1948, Dale and Chall 1948, Gunning 1952, McLauglin 1969, Caylor 
et al. 1973, Kincaid et al. 1975). Subsequently these formulae have been transfer- 
red to other languages, e.g., Slovak (Mistrík 1968) and Polish (Pisarek 2007), but 
have not been verified experimentally. The aim of the present paper is to report 
the results of the first psycholinguistic study investigating readability formulae for 
Polish. For the study, a sample of 15 differentiated texts (2 scientific texts, 2 texts 
from the secondary school handbooks, 2 enactments, 2 official letters, 2 instruc-
tions, 2 Law brochures, 3 journalistic articles from various fields) has been selected 
and their readability has been evaluated by 3 different tests (multiple choice, cloze 
and open-ended question tests) on a sample of 1,309 subjects. The studied sample 
represents heterogeneity in sociodemographics (sex, age, education level, place of 
residence). Therefore the standard deviation of the test results is quite large. Despite 
that, the regression between the measured readability and text statistics has been 
investigated. The analyzed text statistics included: the mean sentence length (in 
words), the mean word length (in syllables) and the mean word entropy (-log fre-
quency of a word in the National Corpus of Polish). 
QUALICO 2014
30
In the study two of three used psycholinguistic tests have shown a strong 
negative correlation between the text comprehension and the mean sentence 
length (respectively, cloze test: ρ = -.436; ρ < .001; open-ended question test: 
ρ = -.386; p < .001; multiple-choice test: ρ = -.016; ρ > .05). The mean word 
length and the mean word entropy were much worse predictors of text com-
prehension, regardless of the type of the test. A  probable reason for that is 
the peculiar property of the text sample where the mean sentence length and 
the mean word length were strongly negatively correlated (rho_MC = -.508; 
ρ < .001; rho_Cloze = -.423; ρ < .001; rho_Open = -.460; p < .001). We suppose 
that this negative correlation is too strong to be explained by the Menzerath- 
-Altmann Law (Altmann 1980) but rather is an accidental property of the se-
lected sample of texts. Further studies, using more homogeneous text samples, 
are required to verify this hypothesis.
References
Altmann, G. 
(1980)  Prolegomena to Menzerath’s law. Glottometrika, 2, 1–10.
Caylor, J. S., Stitch, T. G., Fox, L. C., Ford, J. P.
(1973)  Methodologies for determining reading requirements of military occu-
pational specialties, Technical Report. 73–5, Alexander, Virginia: 
Human Resources Research Organization. 
Dale, E., Chall, J. S.
(1948) A formula for predicting readability. Educational Research Bulletin, 
27, 1–20, 27, 37–54.
Flesch, R.
(1948) A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32, 221–233.
Gunning, R.
(1952) The Technique of Clear Writing. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kincaid, J.P., Fishburne, R. P., Rogers, R. L., Chissom, B. S. 
(1975) Derivation of new readability formulas (Automated Readability 
Index, Fog Count, and Flesch Reading Ease Formula) for Navy enlist- 
ed personnel. CNTECHTRA Research Branch Report, 8–75.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
31
McLaughlin, G. H. 
(1969) SMOG grading-a  new readability formula. Journal of Reading, 
22, 639–646
Mistrík, J. 
(1968) Meranie zrozumiteľnosti prehovoru. Slovenská reč, 33, 3, 171–178.
Pisarek, W. 
(2007) Jak mierzyć zrozumiałość tekstu? O  mediach i  języku, 245–262, 
Kraków.
QUALICO 2014
32
Word length distribution in Chinese dialogue and 
prose texts
Heng Chen
Keywords: Chinese, word length distribution, measur- 
ing unit, style variation, synergetic linguistics
Word length measuring needs reasonably defined linguistic units, so if 
we want to investigate a  language’s  word length distribution, a  key prem- 
ise is to find an appropriate word length measuring unit of the language, in 
addition to defining the „word“. Grotjahn and Altmann (1993) stated that 
„there are three basic types of units to measure the word length, namely 
(a) graphical, (b) phonetic, and (c) semantic ones“ (1993: 142). Yet, regretfully, just 
as what Grzybek (2006) said, “yet, even today, there are no reliable systematic stud- 
ies on the influence of the measuring unit chosen, nor on possible interrelations 
between them.“ An appropriate word length measuring unit is not fixed, it varies 
with language types and text styles. We will explore these questions in this pa-
per. This paper investigates the word length distribution of Chinese spoken and 
written languages using 20 dialogue texts (spoken language) and 20 prose texts 
(written language) as data sources, in which the length of words is potentially 
determined in terms of pinyin letter, phoneme, syllable and stroke, component, 
character respectively. Results show the syllable is the most appropriate word 
length measuring unit of the Chinese spoken language, and the component is the 
most appropriate word length measuring unit of Chinese written language; the 
Chinese word length distribution can be described with the poisson or binomial 
distribution series, among which extended logarithmic and mixed poisson are 
the most generally accepted models. The results also show that different measur- 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
33
ing units are highly related with one another. Further the reasons are given to 
explain why the syllable and component are the most appropriate word length 
measuring units for the Chinese spoken and written languages respectively by 
referring to synergetic linguistic theories and the Menzerath’s Law. In addition, 
the paper scrutinizes the application of the Chinese word length distribution in 
language style variations studies: written language has more word length classes 
than spoken language; it also has more word types in word length classes 1 and 
2 compared with spoken language. These two differences can also be observed 
through the model’s parameter changes, which may make it useful for literary 
studies such as genre discrimination.
References
Grotjahn, R., Altmann, G.
(1993) Modeling the distribution of word length: some methodological prob- 
lems. In: Köhler, R., Rieger, B. (eds.), Contributions to Quantitative 
Linguistics: Proceedings of the First International Conference on 
Quantitative Linguistics, QUALICO, Trier. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
141–153.
Grzybek, P.
(2006) History and methodology of word length studies. In: Grzybek, P. 
(ed.), Contributions to the Science of Text and Language: Word Length 
Studies and Related Issues. Dordrecht: Springer, 15–90.
QUALICO 2014
34
Using language network characteristics to do text 
classification 
Xinying Chen
Keywords: network characteristics, genre classifi-
cation, author identification, clustering, syntactic 
complexity
Linguistic research using modern network analysis tools is an upcoming domain. 
The key interest of the network approach in linguistic research is that it provides 
a new way to analyze language systems. A central assumption of modern linguis-
tic theories is that language is a system (Kretzschmar 2009). This widely accepted 
point of view, however, has remained on a purely theoretic level due to the ab- 
sence of an operational methodology, until corpora and modern network analysis 
tools appeared. Modeling language as a network provides an operational way for 
observing the macroscopic features of the language system, such as text styles or 
genres. Some research has been done on language clustering (Liu and Li 2010, Liu 
and Cong 2013, Abramov and Mehler 2011) and all of these studies show good 
results in identifying genealogical groups. The common aspect of these studies 
is that they all focus on the clustering or classification of different languages. So 
for testing the effectiveness of using network characteristics identifying different 
text groups in a  single language, we applied a  similar strategy to text classifi-
cation of a  single language, more specifically to automatic genre classification 
and author identification. For genre classification, we constructed six Chinese 
syntactic dependency networks based on six dependency treebanks of different 
styles. Then we did a comparative analysis of network characteristics, including 
the number of edges, the number of nodes, the average degree, the clustering 
coefficient, the average path length, the centralization, the diameter, the index of 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
35
power-law, the coefficient of determination. After that, we used different cluster- 
ing methods, with characteristics as variables, to do clustering analysis of these 
networks parameters. The results showed that, using some of the main parame-
ters of the networks, namely the number of the nodes, the clustering coefficient, 
the average path length, the centralization and the index of power-law, we can 
get very good automatic clustering results on texts and the result is better than 
simple text clustering based on word frequency distributions. For author identi-
fication, we constructed four-word co-occurrence networks based on 48 English 
articles, separated into two topics: anecdote and film, all written by 24 Chinese 
students. Each of the 24 students was asked to write two articles. We split up the 
24 anecdotal articles into two groups just as the 24 film articles. The first and the 
second group of each genre were written by the same students. The same process 
 was repeated with the genre classification: The results show that, using some 
main parameters of networks, namely the number of the nodes, the clustering 
coefficient, the average degree, the average path length, the centralization, and 
the index of power-law, we can get fair results on identifying author groups. The 
results, however, are not as good as the results we got in genre classification. This 
work shows that network features offer a new source of typological information 
about texts and this information can contribute to a better understanding of dif-
ference of styles in a language.
References
Kretzschmar, W. A.
(2009) The Linguistics of Speech. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Liu, H. 
(2010) Language Clusters based on Linguistic Complex Networks. Chinese 
Science Bulletin, 55, 30, 3458–3465.
Liu, H., Cong, J.
(2013) Language Clustering with Word Cooccurrence Networks based on 
Parallel Texts. Chinese Science Bulletin, 58, 10, 1139–1144.
Abramov, O., Mehler, A.
(2011) Automatic Language Classification by Means of Syntactic Dependency 
Networks. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 18, 4, 291–336.
QUALICO 2014
36
A  new universal code helps to distinguish natural 
language from random texts
Łukasz Dębowski
Keywords: universal coding, English, random text, 
Zipf’s law, Hilberg’s conjecture 
It is widely agreed that texts in natural language differ statistically from „mon-
key-typing“, i.e., the output of producing characters at random (Zipf 1965). The 
difference can be revealed using various experimental methods. For example, 
there is a prominent difference between texts in natural language and random 
texts with respect to the rank-frequency distribution of words (Ferrer-i-Cancho 
and Elvevåg 2010). The latter result is somewhat unexpected since both texts in 
natural language and random texts obey some versions of Zipf ’s law (Mandelbrot 
1954, Miller 1957). 
In this paper we wish to demonstrate a difference between random texts and 
texts in natural language which can be detected by means of universal coding. 
We consider two universal codes: the Lempel-Ziv code (Ziv and Lempel 1977) 
and the plain switch distribution (Dębowski 2013b). These two codes are applied 
to two texts: „20,000 Leagues under the Sea“ by Jules Verne and a unigram model 
of this novel. In case of the Lempel-Ziv code we observe no substantial difference 
between these two texts. For both texts, the compression rate decreases hyperbol- 
ically, whereas the mutual information grows like a power Law. If we apply the 
plain switch distribution, however, there arises a huge difference. The compre-
ssion rate for the text in natural language decreases hyperbolically, whereas the 
compression rate for the random text almost stabilizes. Moreover, the mutual 
information for the text in natural language grows like a power Law, whereas 
for the random text it grows logarithmically. This observation provides a new 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
37
stronger support for Hilberg’s  conjecture (Dębowski 2013a), an important hy-
pothesis concerning the entropy of natural language. By the „no hypercompre-
ssion“ inequality (Grunwald 2007, p. 103), we can also use the aforementioned 
observation for proving that the probability that „20,000 Leagues under the Sea“ 
was generated by the unigram model is less than 2(-1,000,000).
References
Dębowski, Ł. 
(2013a) Empirical evidence for Hilberg’s conjecture in single-author texts. 
In: Obradović, I., Kelih, E., Köhler, R. (eds.), Methods and 
Applications of Quantitative Linguistics – Selected papers of the 8th 
International Conference on Quantitative Linguistics (QUALICO). 
Belgrade: Academic Mind, 143–151.
Dębowski, Ł. 
(2013b) Preadapted Universal Switch Distribution for Testing Hilberg’s 
Conjecture. http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.8511.
Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Elvevåg, B. 
(2010) Random texts do not exhibit the real Zipf ’s law-like rank distribution. 
PLoS ONE 5, 3, e9411. 
Grunwald, P. D.
(2007) The Minimum Description Length Principle. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Mandelbrot, B. 
(1954) Structure formelle des textes et com munication. Word, 10, 1–27. 
Miller, G. 
(1957) Some effects of intermittent silence. American Journal of Psychology, 
70, 311–314.
Zipf, G. K.
(1965) The Psycho-Biology of Language: An Introduction to Dynamic 
Philology, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Ziv, J., Lempel, A.
(1977) A  universal algorithm for sequential data compression. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, 23, 337–343.
QUALICO 2014
38
Large-scale stylometry using network analysis 
Maciej Eder 
Keywords: stylometry, authorship attribution, compu-
tational stylistics, big data, network analysis
Stylometric methodology, developed to solve authorship problems, can easily be 
extended and generalized to assess different questions in the field of text analysis. 
Namely, the underlaying idea of tracing similarities between (anonymous) texts 
can be extended to map textual relations in large-scale approaches to literature. 
Explanatory multidimensional methods, relying on distance measures and supported 
with visualization techniques, are particularly attractive for this purpose. However, 
they are very sensitive to the number of features (usually: frequent words) analyzed. 
Even worse, they are either unable to fit dozens of texts on a single scatterplot 
(e.g. Multidimensional Scaling), or highly dependent on the choice of a linkage 
algorithm (e.g. Cluster Analysis). The technique introduced in this study combines 
the concept of network as a way to map large-scale literary similarities (Jockers 
2013), the concept of consensus (Lancichinetti and Fortunato 2012), and the 
assumption that textual relations usually go beyond mere nearest neighborship. 
Particular texts can be represented as nodes of a  network, and their explicit 
relations as links between these nodes. The procedure of linking is twofold. One 
of the involved algorithms computes the distances between analyzed texts, and 
establishes, for every single node, a  strong connection to its nearest neighbor 
(i.e. the most similar text), and two weaker connections to the 1st and the 2nd 
runner-up (i.e. two texts that get ranked immediately after the nearest neighbor). 
The other algorithm performs a large number of tests for similarity with different 
number of features to be analyzed (e.g. 100, 200, 300, ..., 1,000 MFWs). Finally, all the 
connections produced in particular “snapshots” are added, resulting in a consensus 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
39
network. Weights of these final connections tend to differ significantly: the strongest 
ones mean robust nearest neighbors, while weak links stand for secondary and/or 
accidental similarities. The validation of the results – or rather self-validation – is 
provided by the fact that consensus of many single approaches to the same corpus 
sanitizes robust textual similarities and filters out apparent clusterings. The idea 
discussed in this paper can be applied to map large collections of texts, such as the 
corpus provided by the “Perseus Project” database (1,127 texts), but also to represent 
similarities in smaller corpora. One of the examples includes an ad-hoc collection of 
124 Ancient Greek texts assessed with the aforementioned technique. The nodes and 
edges of the network have been computed using the “stylo” package for R (Eder et 
al. 2013) and visualized with Gephi. The ForceAtlas2 layout (Bastian et al. 2009) has 
been used to establish the spacial relations between the nodes, and the modularity 
detection algorithm (Blondel et al. 2008) to mark distinctive clusters with different 
colors. The obtained network reveals a  clear genre separation (prose, epic poetry, 
drama), as well as a chronological development of style. 
References
Bastian, M., Heymann, S., Jacomy, M. 
(2009) Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating net- 
works. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. 
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E. 
(2008) Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical 
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 10, P1000.
Eder, M., Kestemont, M., Rybicki, J. 
(2013) Stylometry with R: a  suite of tools. In: Digital Humanities 2013: 
Conference Abstracts. Lincoln: University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
487–489.
Jockers, M. 
(2013) Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. Champaign: 
University of Illinois Press. 
Lancichinetti, A., Fortunato, S.
(2012) Consensus clustering in complex networks. Scientific Reports, 2, 336, 1–7.
QUALICO 2014
40
Quantitative studies: the advantages for dialectology
Sheila Embleton, Dorin Uritescu, Eric S. Wheeler
Keywords: dialectology, dialect, Romanian, quanti-
tative, quantified gradations, advantages, quanti-
tative studies, palatalization, dental, Vulgar Latin, 
borrowing
Quantitative studies of texts have been established for a long time, but the advan-
tages of making such studies over large data sets hold in dialectology as well. 
Using some of the digital tools now available, it is possible to find and select 
a  wide range of data subsets, to count occurrences within the selected subsets, 
and to display the results as maps or other visible charts in such a  way that it is 
easy to understand the selected phenomena. We offer several examples where 
quantitative studies show results that could not readily be found in traditional 
printed formats. In one case, the phenomenon (dentals not palatalizing be- 
fore high front vowels in some geographic regions) was known and attributed 
to borrowing, but the quantitative study showed how much more widely it oc- 
curred, even in non-borrowed words, and how the traditional view was a matter 
of degree. In another case, we were able to select only those items that came from 
Vulgar Latin into Romanian, and uncover a relationship that was lost in other 
dialects. The phenomenon was not obvious except through a count of a large 
number of separate lexical items. These and other cases show that a large-scale 
quantitative approach could help uncover new territory even in comparatively 
well-studied Romanian dialectology. Quantitative dialectology is able to make 
much stronger claims than traditional dialectology because it can count all the 
occurrences of a phenomenon over a wider range of data; it can disprove claims 
that are based only on some or a few examples; and it can uncover relationships 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
41
that are not obvious until one looks at large amounts of data. Even the defini-
tion of “dialect” changes when it is expressed in terms of quantified gradations 
of change.
More quantitative studies of this sort, using current and future tools and data 
sets, will advance the study of dialects.
References
Embleton, S., Uritescu, D., Wheeler, E. S. 
(2008a) Digitalized Dialect Studies: North-Western Romanian. Bucharest: 
Romanian Academy Press.
Embleton, S., Uritescu, D., Wheeler, E. S. 
(2008b) Identifying Dialect Regions: Specific features vs. overall measures 
using the Romanian Online Dialect Atlas and Multidimensional 
Scaling. Leeds, UK: Methods XIII Conference. August 2008. In: 
Heselwood, B., Upton, C. (eds.), (2009). Proceedings of Methods XIII. 
Papers from the Thirteenth International Conference on Methods in 
Dialectology, 2008. Frankfurt/Main: Lang, 79–90.
QUALICO 2014
42
Quantitative data on monosyllabism: a  cross-
-linguistic study 
Gertraud Fenk-Oczlon, August Fenk
Keywords: monosyllabism, syllabic complexity, typolo-
gy, cross-linguistic correlations 
Monosyllabism has since long been considered a  typologically relevant 
phenomenon. Because of its gradual character it does not permit any clear-cut 
classification. Here, the interesting point is the distribution of languages along 
the continuum of “proportion of monosyllables” (A) and the interaction of that 
parameter with other linguistic features (B). 
(A) The proportion of monosyllables: In order to determine this parameter, 
Stolz (2007) analysed the so-called core lexicon of the extended version of the 
Swadesh lists. In a sample of 50 languages he found a proportion ranging from 
2% in Greenlandic to 87% in English and a strong dependency on areal factors. 
Maddieson (2009) points out several reasons for complementing such analyses of 
lexical entry forms by analyses of the word forms in matched wordlists and texts. 
He found a distribution ranging from 3% (Tamil) to 80% (Thai) and a mean of 
roughly a quarter.
(B) Interactions with other parameters: A  previous study by the authors 
(2008) revealed significant positive cross-linguistic correlations between the 
number of monosyllables, the number of syllable types, syllable complexity, and 
phonemic inventory size. In that study the data were collected and calculated 
from Menzerath’s  (1954) description of 8 Indo-European languages (English, 
German, Romanian, Croatian, Catalan, Portuguese, Spanish and Italian).
The present study differs from the one mentioned above in both the method 
and the sample. 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
43
Instead of statistical descriptions by Menzerath we now analyse “match-
ed texts”, i.e., the translations of a set of 22 English or German sentences pro-
duced by native speakers of 32 different languages (13 Indo-European, 19 
Non-Indo-European).
The main hypothesis: The larger a language’s proportion of monosyllables, the 
higher its syllabic complexity in terms of the number of phonemes per syllable. 
Results: The assumption of a positive correlation between the number of mono- 
syllables and syllabic complexity could be corroborated (r = + .62, p < .001) in 
our now extended and typologically more widespread sample, and despite the 
use of a different method. This indicates high robustness of that cross-linguistic 
correlation. Some more results: English (73), Welsh (74), Dutch (67) and German 
(57) showed the highest number of monosyllables in our textual material, while 
languages often classified as most typically monosyllabic had far less monosylla-
bles (Mandarin 41, Vietnamese 49).
Discussion: Further interactions will be discussed between the tendency to 
monosyllabism and phenomena such as a  tendency to homophony (Ke 2006), 
a tendency to a high proportion of idioms, formulaic speech and rigid word or-
der, and a tendency to stress-timed rhythm.
References
Ammann , A. (ed.)
(2006) Linguistic festival. Bochum: Brockmeyer, 96–133.
Fenk-Oczlon, G., Fenk, A. 
(2008) Complexity trade-offs between the subsystems of language In: 
Miestamo, M., Sinnemäki, K., Karlsson, F. (eds.), Language 
Complexity: Typology, Contact, Change, 43–65. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Ke, J.
(2006) A  cross-linguistic quantitative study of homophony. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics, 13, 129–159
QUALICO 2014
44
Maddieson, I. 
(2009) Monosyllables and syllabic complexity. Paper presented at the con-
ference Monosyllables: from Phonology to Typology, Festival of 
Languages, University of Bremen, Sept. 2009. 
Menzerath, P.
(1954) Die Architektonik des deutschen Wortschatzes. Bonn: Dümmler. 
(= Phonetische Studien, 3). 
Stolz, T. 
(2007) Being monosyllabic in Europe: an areal typological project in statu 
nascendi.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
45
Towards a mathematical theory of word order evo-
lution 
Ramon Ferrer-i-Cancho 
Keywords: word order, language principles, evolution 
of language, permutation ring 
The study of the evolution of word order has been fueled by the finding of 
a preference for subject-object-verb or its semantic correlate (actor-patient-action) 
in recently emerging languages and gestural experiments (Goldin-Meadow et 
al 2008, Langus and Nespor 2010). This raises two fundamental questions: (a) 
why is this ordering appearing? (b) why do all languages on earth not have it as 
dominant? Here we argue that the maximization of mutual information yields 
the subject-object-verb orderings and that this ordering is lost when sentences 
become more complex due to a  conflict with a  principle of online memory 
minimization promoting that the verb is placed at the center. We address various 
puzzles surrounding this general approach. First, among two orderings with 
the verb at the center, subject-verb-object is very frequent while object-verb-
subject is rare, apparently contradicting an attraction of the verb towards the 
center. Second, the preference for subject-verb-object arises in experiments 
with verbs corresponding to intensional events (Schouwstra et al 2011), which 
apparently contradicts the principle of mutual information maximization. Third, 
modifiers tend to precede nominal heads in languages having subject-verb-object 
as dominant, which apparently contradicts the principle of online memory 
minimization. Fourth, the rather uniform distribution of possible orderings of 
subject, object, verb that is naively expected from a fair battle among word order 
principles, which is contradicted by the rather skewed distribution of dominant 
word orders. The solutions to these puzzles requires viewing word orders as 
QUALICO 2014
46
products of cultural evolution and noticing that the most likely word order 
transitions from a  given word order follow a  ring structure (Ferrer-i-Cancho 
2013). Interestingly, the number of languages showing a certain dominant word 
order decays perfectly as one moves away from the initial subject-object-verb in 
a particular sense throughout that ring.
References
Ferrer-i-Cancho, R.
(2013) The placement of the head that minimizes online memory: a complex 
systems approach. Language Dynamics and Change. [in press]
Goldin-Meadow, S., So, W. C., Özyürek, A., Mylander, C.
(2008) The natural order of events: how speakers of different languages rep- 
resent events nonverbally. PNAS, 105, 27, 9163–9168.
Langus, A., Nespor, M.
(2010) Cognitive systems struggling for word order. Cognitive Psychology, 
60, 4, 291–318.
Schouwstra, M., Van Leeuwen, A., Marien, N., Smit, M., De Swart, H. 
(2011) Semantic Structure in Improvised Communication. In: Carlson, 
L., Hoelscher, C., Shipley, T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society, 
1497–1502.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
47
The study of text clustering based on Chinese depen-
dency treebank
Song Gao 
Keywords: text clustering, clustering feature, Depen-
dency Treebank, dependency relation, part of speech 
Text clustering is an important part of information retrieval. The method of 
applying the information of syntactic distribution to research text clustering is 
presented, in order to avoid using the complex clustering algorithm and inter-
pret clustering features and the results of clustering from the aspect of linguis-
tics. Ten dependency relations, which distribute distinctively between oral and 
written Chinese, are investigated based on Chinese Dependency Treebank. The 
similarity of spoken and written classes achieves 81.98% and 83.13% respectively 
by using 5 dependency relations as a clustering feature. The experiment result 
shows that this method using dependency relations to research text clustering is 
feasible and effective.
QUALICO 2014
48
Modelling multidimensional polysemy networks. 
The case of /over/. 
Dylan Glynn 
Keywords: corpus linguistics, logistic regression, 
manual annotation, multivariate statistics, polysemy 
The statistical modelling of a semasiological structure, which is also sensitive to 
morpho-syntactic and socio-pragmatic context, remains a  fundamental goal of 
semantics. To these ends, a  promising method under development is the mul-
tifactorial usage-feature analysis (Geeraerts et al. 1999, Gries 2003, Glynn and 
Fischer 2010, Glynn and Robinson 2013) (also termed the profile-based analysis or 
sentiment analysis). This method has been used to model near-synonymous rela- 
tions successfully (Glynn 2009, Divjak 2010, et al.) and constructional alternations 
(Heylen 2005, Bresnan et al. 2007 et alii), but its application to lexical polysemy 
has, thus far, been limited to an exploratory analysis (Gries 2006, Glynn 2009). 
The principle problem lies in the fact that, in usage-profile polysemy research, the 
lexical ’sense’ is neither discrete nor measurable, instead its profile is operationali-
sed as a cluster of usage-features. To date, no confirmatory statistical method has 
been successfully applied to this research problem. The current study proposes 
a method to overcome this hurdle in a case study on the polysemy of the lexeme 
over. The proposal consists of adding two statistical steps to the analysis of the 
results of the usage-feature analysis. In the previous research, a combination of 
multiple correspondence analysis and hierarchical cluster analysis has been used 
to identify the complex usage-patterns that are believed to represent the semasio-
logical structure. The first step is to delineate the clusters of features in such a way 
that discrete senses can be proposed. The study uses k-means cluster analysis to 
determine the best number of clusters of these features and principle components 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
49
analysis upon the results of the correspondence analysis in order to determine 
which of the features contribute the most to structuring those clusters. This pro-
duces a small set of lexical ‘senses’, determined by key features. Importantly, these 
senses are relative to a  range of morpho-syntactic and sociolinguistic contexts. 
The second step is to submit these senses to confirmatory modelling. Here, the 
senses are treated as the independent variable in the multinomial logistic regres- 
sion analysis. This step determines the predictive accuracy of the analysis and the 
model based upon it. In order to test the proposal, 800 occurrences of the prepo-
sition over are extracted from British and American Literature (BNC and ANC) 
and on-line personal diaries (LiveJournal Corpus). The semantic structure of the 
preposition over represents a contentious example of a polysemy research within 
Cognitive Linguistics (Lakoff 1987 et alii). This rich tradition of an introspec- 
tion-based research offers an extensive range of semantic (conceptual-functional) 
dimensions to include in the feature analysis. The results will offer a falsifiable, 
quantitative, and frequency-based description of the semantic structure of the lex- 
eme. More over, the goodness of fit and predictive accuracy of regression models, 
based on the analytical categories proposed by the introspection studies listed 
above, will determine which of these ’theoretical’ models is the most accurate.
References
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A. Nikitina, T., Baayen, H. 
(2007) Predicting the dative. In: Bouma, G., Krämer, I., Zwarts, J. (eds.), 
In: Cognitive foundations of interpretation alternation. Amsterdam: 
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 69–94.
Divjak, D.
(2010) Structuring the lexicon: A clustered model for near-synonymy. Berlin, 
New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Geeraerts, D., Grondelaers, S., Speelman, D.
(1999) Convergentie en Divergentie in de Nederlandse Woordenschat. 
Amsterdam: Meertens Instituut. 
Glynn, D., Fischer, D. (eds.)
(2010) Quantitative Cognitive Semantics: Corpus-driven approaches. Berlin, 
New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
QUALICO 2014
50
Glynn, D., Robinson, J.
(2013) Corpus Methods for Semantics. Quantitative studies in polysemy and 
synonymy. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Glynn, D.
(2010) Synonymy, lexical fields, and grammatical constructions. A study in 
usage-based Cognitive Semantics. In: Schmid, H.-J., Handl, S. (eds.), 
Cognitive foundations of linguistic usage-patterns: Empirical stud- 
ies. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 89–118.
Glynn, D. 
(2009) Polysemy, syntax, and variation. A usage-based method for Cognitive 
Semantics. In: Evans, V., Pourcel, S. (eds.), In: New directions in 
Cognitive Linguistics. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 
77–106.
Gries, St. Th. 
(2003) Multifactorial analysis in corpus linguistics: A study of particle place-
ment. London: Continuum Press.
Gries, St. Th.
(2006) Corpus-based methods and Cognitive Semantics: The many sen-
ses of to run. In: Gries, St. Th., Stefanowitsch, A. (eds.), Corpora in 
Cognitive Linguistics: Corpus-based approaches to syntax and lexis. 
Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 57–99.
Heylen, K. 
(2005) A  quantitative corpus study of German word order variation. In: 
Kepser, St., Reis, M. (eds.), In: Linguistic evidence: Empirical, theoreti- 
cal and computational perspectives. Berlin, New York: Mouton de 
Gruyter, 241–264.
Lakoff, G. 
(1987) Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the 
mind. London: University of Chicago Press.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
51
Stylistic fingerprints, POS tags and inflected lan-
guages: a case study in Polish 
Rafał L. Górski, Maciej Eder, Jan Rybicki 
Keywords: stylometry, author attribution, grammar, 
classification 
In classical approaches to authorship attribution, frequencies of the most frequent 
words (MFWs) and character n-grams are claimed to outperform other types of 
style-markers (Koppel et al. 2009, Stamatatos 2009), even if their performance va-
ries significantly across different languages (Eder 2011, Eder and Rybicki 2013). 
Also, it has been proven that letter n-grams reveal a very high resistance to untidily 
prepared corpora (Eder 2013). Defined as simple strings of letter and non-letter 
characters, all these style-markers are easily extracted from input texts – in prac- 
tice, attribution tests can be flawlessly applied to any web-scraped plain text file. 
Very attractive as they are, these simple style-markers have also some limitations. 
Firstly, in inflected languages, different forms of the same word cannot be recog- 
nized using generic text processing (e.g. regular expressions); secondly, word endings 
play a prominent role (they are the equivalent of function words) and should not 
be ignored; thirdly, countless inflected word forms make word frequencies sparse, 
and this complicates most statistical procedures. The aim of this paper is to examine 
the possibilities and limitations of recognizing authorship in grammatical features 
of a text. It is true that extracting syntactic markers from parsed grammatical trees 
is still beyond our capabilities; however, a straightforward insight into grammar can 
be obtained using Part-of-Speech tags combined into n-grams. Attempts to solve 
this problem have already yielded promising results (Baayen et al. 1996, Hirst and 
Feguina 2007); yet, once again, mostly in English. Morphologically-rich languages 
with a relatively free word-order, such as Polish, are radically different from the 
QUALICO 2014
52
grammatical point of view. Rich morphology results with a much higher number 
of tag-types (over a  thousand, as compared to ca. 60 for English); free word or-
der makes one expect a considerably higher number of possible POS-tag trigrams. 
The basic question underlying this paper is not whether this approach outperforms 
authorial attribution based on lexis; rather, it tries to establish the degree of free-
dom of choice within lexis and grammar. Does a highly inflected language allow for 
more variation (which in turn allows for individual style) compared to a positional 
language as English? Morphologically rich languages are usually annotated with 
so-called positional tags, i.e. sequences of codes for all the values of grammatical 
categories which pertain to a word, where only one segment of a tag stands for Part 
of Speech. A secondary aim of this study is to test the extent to which particular 
segments of positional tags (analyzed separately and combined into n-grams) are 
the best features for authorial recognition. Thus, apart from the entire tags, their 
segments have also been assessed, e.g. n-grams of POS codes, n-grams of single ca-
tegories, combinations of two tag segments, etc. The corpus consists of several do-
zen Polish novels. All the texts have been automatically annotated, and the words 
removed, to operate exclusively on grammatical tags. The texts have been analyzed 
using standard multidimensional methods, including distance-based explanatory 
analyses (Cluster Analysis, Principal Components Analysis), and supervised tech-
niques such as Burrows’s Delta and Support Vector Machines. Even if using POS-
tags n-grams did not improve the attribution performance, interesting differences 
between different segments (types) of assessed POS tags could be observed.
References
Baayen, H., van Halteren, H., Tweedie, F. 
(1996) Outside the cave of shadows: using syntactic annotation to enhance 
authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 11, 121–132.
Eder, M. 
(2011) Style-markers in authorship attribution: a cross-language study of the 
authorial fingerprint. Studies in Polish Linguistics, 6, 99–114. 
Eder, M. 
(2013) Mind your corpus: systematic errors in authorship attribution. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28, 4, 603–14. 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
53
Eder, M., Rybicki, J.
(2013) Do birds of a feather really flock together, or how to choose training 
samples for authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
28, 2, 229–36. 
Hirst, G., Feiguina, O. 
(2007) Bigrams of syntactic labels for authorship discrimination of short 
texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 22, 4, 405–17. 
Koppel, M., Schler, J., Argamon, S.
(2009) Computational methods in authorship attribution. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60, 1, 9–26.
Stamatatos, E. 
(2009) A  survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60, 3, 
538–556.
QUALICO 2014
54
The Arens-Altmann Law: a matter of boundary con-
ditions or an ostensible success story? 
Peter Grzybek 
Keywords: Arens-Altmann Law, Menzerath-Altmann 
Law, sentence length, word length 
The Arens-Altmann Law concerns the relation between sentence length and 
word length. It has been formulated by Altmann (1983), based on earlier ob-
servations by Arens (1965). In his book Verborgene Ordnung, Arens calculated 
average sentence length and average word length for 117 literary prose texts 
and observed an increase of word length to go along with a regular increase of 
sentence length. After Arens had interpreted this relation to be of a linear kind, 
Altmann re-interpreted the findings in analogy with the Menzerath-Altmann 
Law, arguing in favor of a non-linear relation. Subsequent studies have not un- 
animously been able to corroborate these findings. One reason for this unclear 
situation is that the two Laws have not always been consequently distinguished, 
the Menzerath-Altmann Law having been designed for intra-textual relations, 
the Arens-Altmann Law, in contrast, being of inter-textual relevance. Those 
studies which have concentrated on the inter-textual relation of the Arens-
Altmann Law, arrived at contradictory results. Hug (2004), for example, on the 
basis of 103 French journalistic texts, found the expected tendency, the results 
appearing to be of a linear kind. As compared to this, the re-analysis of data 
from 380 text books from schools, published by Bamberger and Vanecek (1980), 
showed the expected tendency non-linear tendency. In contrast, the re-analysis 
of data by Fucks from the 1950s yielded no convincing results (Grzybek and 
Stadlober 2007); but with N = 54, the authors suspected the overall small sam-
ple to be a possibly disturbing factor. Yet, also the analysis of 199 Russian texts 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
55
also yielded no consistent results (Grzybek et al. 2007). Summarizing the state 
of the art, the conditions under which the Arens-Altmann Law functions, and 
the reasons why it may take different shape or even prove to fail under others, 
seem to be far from conclusive, the only possible reason thus far discussed be-
ing data heterogeneity which may eventually be an important factor, the role of 
which has hitherto remained unclear, however. The present contribution makes 
an attempt to shed new light on the uncertain situation. Analyzing and re-ana-
lyzing more than 500 texts (including Arens’s original data, 199 Russian and 
180 Croatian texts), some boundary conditions of the Arens tendency will be 
studied in detail, concentrating on possibly intervening third variables, which 
thus far have never been systematically controlled, such as (i) text type, (ii) time 
of origin, or (iii) grade level for which the texts under study were written.
References
Altmann, G. 
(1983) H. Arens «Verborgene Ordnung» und das Menzerathsche Gesetz. 
In: Faust, M., Harweg, R., Lehfeldt, W., Wienold, G. (eds.), Allgemeine 
Sprachwissenschaft, Sprachtypologie und Textlinguistik. Tubingen: Narr., 
31–39.
Arens, H.
(1965) Verborgene Ordnung: Die Beziehungen zwischen Satzlänge und 
Wortlänge in deutscher Erzählprosa vom Barock bis heute. Dusseldorf: 
Schwann.
Bamberger, R., Vanecek, E.
(1984): Lesen – Verstehen – Lernen – Schreiben. Die Schwierigkeitsstufen 
von Texten in deutscher Sprache. Wien: Jugend & Volk, Frankfurt/M: 
Diesterweg.
Grzybek, P., Stadlober, E., Kelih, E.
(2007) The Relationship of Word Length and Sentence Length. The Inter-
Textual Perspective. In: Decker, R., Lenz, H.-J. (eds.), Advances in 
Data Analysis. Berlin, Heidelnerg: Springer, 611–618.
QUALICO 2014
56
Grzybek, P., Stadlober, E. 
(2007) Do we have problems with Arens’ Law? A new look at the sentence-
word relation. In: Grzybek, P., Köhler, R. (eds.), Exact Methods in the 
Study of Language and Text. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter, 205–217.
Hug, M. 
(2004) La loi de Menzerath appliquée à un ensemble de textes, Lexicometrica, 
5, 1–10.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
57
On the robust measurement of inflectional diversity
Guillaume Guex, Aris Xanthos
Keywords: inflectional diversity, mean size of para-
digm, lexical diversity, robustness, random sampling 
Lexical diversity measures are notoriously sensitive to variations of the sample 
size. In order to deal with this issue, most recent approaches involve the compu-
tation of the resampled variety of lexical units, i.e. their average variety in ran-
dom subsamples of a fixed size drawn from the corpus. This technique, which has 
been shown to effectively reduce the influence of sample size variations, has been 
further applied to measures of inflectional diversity such as the average number 
of wordforms per lemma, also known as the mean size of paradigm (MSP) in-
dex. In this contribution we argue that, while random sampling can indeed be 
used to increase the robustness of inflectional diversity measures, setting a fixed 
subsample size is only justified under the hypothesis that there are no variations 
of lexical diversity between the corpora that we compare. In a more general case 
where they may have differing degrees of lexical diversity, a more sophisticated 
strategy can and should be adopted. This claim is supported by theoretical as well 
as empirical arguments. A novel approach to the measurement of inflectional di-
versity is proposed, aiming to cope not only with sample size variations, but also 
with lexical diversity variations. Experimental evaluation suggests that although 
there is still room for improvement, the proposed methodology attenuates the 
impact of lexical diversity discrepancies.
QUALICO 2014
58
References 
Johnson, W.
(1944) Studies in language behaviour: I. A program approach. Psychological 
Monographs, 56, pp. 1–15.
Malvern, D., Richards, B., Chipere, N., & Durán, P. 
(2004) Lexical diversity and language development: Quantification and as- 
sessment. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Tweedie, F.J. & Baayen, R.H. 
(1998) How Variable May a Constant be? Measures of Lexical Richness in 
Perspective. Computers and the Humanities, 32, 5, 323–352.
Xanthos, A.
(2013) L‘évaluation de l‘évaluation de la diversité lexicale. In: A. Prikhodkine 
& A. Xanthos (eds.), Mélanges offerts en hommage à Remi Jolivet. 
Cahiers de l‘ILSL, 36, pp. 231–252.
Xanthos, A. & Gillis, S. 
(2010) Quantifying the development of inflectional diversity. First Language, 
30, 2, 175–198.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
59
Cross-linguistic transference of authorship attribu-
tion 
Belinda Hasanaj, Erin Purnell, Patrick Juola 
Keywords: authorship attribution, cross-linguistic 
transference
Cross-linguistic transference is an important problem in statistical authorship 
attribution. Many studies have focused on attributing authorship in major 
languages but not on some of the less common languages. In this study, we 
performed experiments in Albanian (sole modern survivor of a subgroup of Indo-
-European languages) and Finnish (polysynthetic) and compared the performance 
of chosen methods with the methods’ performance on well-studied languages: 
English, Italian, and Greek. We had to build a corpus to be able to do this study. The 
Albanian corpus consists of forty 20th century prose documents by four authors 
of Albanian literature. The Italian corpus contains sixty-one 19th century novels 
by six authors from the Liber database. The Finnish corpus contains four student 
thesis papers from Finnish universities and consists of eighteen partial-documents. 
We used the English problems (A-H) from the Ad-hoc Authorship Attribution 
Competition (AAAC) corpus (Juola 2004). The corpus consists of thirteen problems 
of mixed genre and size. For Greek, we used a collection of one hundred blog posts 
by ten authors (Mikros 2013). The documents were divided into training/testing 
sets at roughly an 80/20 ratio. We used the Java Graphical Authorship Attribution 
Program with two different chosen analysis methods: Support Vector Machines 
using Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) and Nearest Centroid with three 
distances: Intersection, Manhattan and Cosine. These were combined with the 
following textual features: Words, Rare Words, Characters and CharN-Grams 
(N equal to 3, 4, 6 and 8) (JGAAP, 2005). The average accuracy obtained in the 
Albanian Corpus was 82.14% and the highest accuracy was obtained using SMO 
QUALICO 2014
60
combined with CharN- Grams. The average accuracy obtained for the Finnish 
Corpus was 87% and the highest accuracy 100% was obtained with multiple tests 
including each distance function with Rare Words and CharN-Grams, and SMO 
with CharN-Grams. The performances obtained in Albanian, English, Finnish, 
and Italian were not independent. This is supported by the Spearman’s product- 
-moment correlation. We display the Spearman correlation since the assumptions 
of normality, linearity, homoscedasticity (required for Pearson correlation) seem to 
be violated in some of the cases): 0.6895 (Albanian & Italian), 0.5605 (Albanian & 
English), 0.5029 (English & Italian), 0.4851 (Finnish & Albanian), 0.3005 (Finnish 
& Italian), 0.7996 (Finnish & English). The correlations between Albanian, Italian, 
Finnish, and English were highly significant (p << 0.01). The correlation is higher 
between Albanian and Italian, which might be a  result of both being rich in 
vocabulary and morphology. The interesting results were from Greek and Finnish 
experiments. The analysis methods did not perform as well in Greek as in the 
other languages, shown with the Spearman’s product-moment correlation: 0.4281 
(Albanian & Greek), 0.6952 (Italian & Greek), 0.1586 (English & Greek), -0.0505 
(Fin & Greek). Finnish performed extremely well which might be due to the small 
sample size or the fact that the samples came from the same thesis papers but did 
not overlap. This is a work in progress; we will be running more experiments in 
Greek and Finnish and hope to add an additional polysynthetic language.
References
JGAAP, 
(2005) Documention: http://evllabs.com/jgaap/w/index.php/Main_Page.
Juola, P.
(2004) Ad-hoc Authorship Attribution Competition, ALLC/ACH 2004 
Conference Abstracts, Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg.
Mikros, G. K.
(2013) Authorship Attribution and Gender Identification in Greek Blogs. 
In: Obradović, I., Kelih, E., Köhler, R. (eds.), In: Selected papers of 
the VIIIth International Conference on Quantitative Linguistics in 
Belgrade, Serbia, April 16–19, 2012. Belgrade: Academic Mind, 21–32.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
61
Distribution pattern of given and new information 
in written English
Wang Hua 
Keywords: information distribution, quantitative lin-
guistics, sentence length, syntactic complexity 
“Given information” and “new information” are two vitally important notions in 
the information structure of language. They have been investigated from differ- 
ent perspectives in many linguistic fields. Among these fields, the distribution 
and position of them are the most basic and interesting one. However, the current 
investigations merely provide qualitative methods and explanations with sever- 
al examples or some experiments but without any quantitative description and 
evidence from large corpus. This paper investigates the distribution of given and 
new information using the method of quantitative linguistics and the written 
part of British Component of the International Corpus of English (ICE-GBW), 
associating it with length and syntactic complexity of the sentence-initial and 
sentence-final constituents. Length and complexity of a linguistic construct play 
a very important role in quantitative linguistics and are two essential compo-
nents in synergetic linguistics. Results show that, no matter if in the overall cal-
culation of all sentences into the separate calculation of sentences with different 
length and complexity, the sentence-final constituents are both longer and more 
complex than the sentence-initial constituents or in the comparison of each sen-
tence, which confirms quantitatively that the new information is often at the end 
of the sentence and the given is at the beginning of the sentence
QUALICO 2014
62
References
Arnold, J. E., Losongco, A., Wasow, T. and Ginstrom, R.
(2000) Heaviness vs. newness: The effects of structural complexity and dis-
course status on constituent ordering. Language 76, 28–55.
Halliday, M. A. K. 
(1994) An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.
Ji, S. 
(2007) A  textual perspective on Givón‘s  quantity principle. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 39, 2, 292–304.
Köhler, R. 
(1999)  Syntactic structures: Properties and interrelations. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics 6, 1, 46–57.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. N., Svartvik, J.
(1972) A grammar of contemporary English. London: Longman.
Vallduví, E., Engdahl, E. 
(1996) The linguistic realization of information packaging. Linguistics, 34, 3, 
459–520.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
63
Word frequency distribution in genres of modern 
Chinese
Wei Huang 
Keywords: word frequency distribution, Chinese, gen- 
res 
Word frequency has been an essential discussion topic in quantitative linguistics 
for a long time. It has been widely studied in many languages, in different ways 
and angles. The researches presented by Popescu and others (Popescu et al. 2009) 
are good examples of a multidimensional study. Based on the quantitative analysis 
that was carried on 20 languages, they discussed and concluded some quantitative 
characteristics of word frequency in different languages. For instance, they found 
that the word frequency distributions of these 20 languages follow, all or some of, 
the Zipf, Zipf-Mandelbrot, zeta, geometric, negative hypergeometric distribution 
while all parameters have been given for reference. Two questions were brought 
out and highlighted after their research: the conclusion needed to be tested in 
more languages; the parameters they found showed differences in texts that were 
written by different authors or belong to different genres. However, the word 
frequency distribution of modern Chinese has been studied by few linguists in 
China. Some researches show that the word frequency distribution follows Zipfian 
Laws. Nevertheless, the diversity of the texts which these studies used should 
be enhanced. Moreover, the question whether there is some difference of the 
word frequency distributions between genres of Chinese is still left not replied. 
Therefore, we collected texts and took some quantitative exploration of modern 
Chinese. 360 texts within 12 genres in modern Chinese, including both the written 
texts, such as news report, news review, academic articles, and the transcriptions 
of an oral speech, were collected for exploring the word frequency distribution. 
QUALICO 2014
64
Each text was segmented automatically and revised manually. And then the word 
frequency (spectrum) distribution of each text was examined and every parameter 
of the distribution formulas was estimated. The mean values of these genres were 
compared statistically. On the explorations and comparison in texts we found that: 
1) the word frequency in texts follow the Zipf distribution, zeta distribution, Zipf-
Mandelbrot distribution or negative hypergeometric distribution, while the word 
frequency spectrum abides by the Waring distribution, zeta distribution, Johnson-
Kotz distribution, Yule distribution or Zipf-Mandelbrot distribution, which shows 
that there is no difference in the word frequency (spectrum) distribution between 
Chinese and other languages. 2) The parameters of the word frequency (spectrum) 
distribution as a quantitative characteristic of a  text have statistically significant 
difference in certain genres. For example, the parameter ‘a’ of the zeta distribution 
in word frequency distinguishes the news reports from other written texts fairly. 
We suggest that the quantitative characteristics of the word frequency (spectrum) 
distribution should be applied in the Chinese text classification as genre indicators.
References
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G., Grzybek, P., Jayaram, B.D., Köhler, R., Krupa, V., 
Mačutek, J., Pustet, R., Uhlířová, L., Vidya, M.N. 
(2009) Word Frequency Studies. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
65
Loan words: a quantitative linguistics perspective 
Emmerich Kelih 
Keywords: Piotrowski’s  Law, language contact, loan 
words, borrowing 
In quantitative linguistics language contact is mainly devoted to problems of 
the diachronic development of the adaption and adoption of loan words and 
borrowings. In this context the Piotrowski’s  Law is a  well-known tool for the 
modelling of the frequency of loan words. Furthermore, Piotrowski’s Law is used 
for the statistical description of different development processes in languages 
(changes at all levels from phonemics to semantics, language acquisition with 
children etc.). Complementary to this fundamental question the presentation 
tackles the question of the frequency distribution of loan words (borrowings) 
within particular predefined semantical classes (body parts, religion, animals, 
plants etc.). Alongside with descriptive findings about the distribution of the loan 
words within languages the question of the theoretical modelling the rank-fre-
quency distribution will be discussed in detail. The empirical findings are based 
on Mandarin Chinese, Slovene, Iraqw, Sakha (Yakut), Lower Sorbian, Thai, 
Kanuri, British English, Tarifiyt Berber, Selice Romani, which have, according 
to “Loanwords in the world’s languages“ (Haspelmath and Tadmor 2009) quite 
different borrowing rates, resp. loan word frequency profiles.
References
Altmann, G.
(1983) Das Piotrowski-Gesetz und seine Verallgemeinerungen. In: Best, 
K.-H., Kohlhase, J. (eds.), Exakte Sprachwandelforschung. Göttingen: 
Herodot, 54–90. 
QUALICO 2014
66
Altmann, G.
(1985) On the dynamic approach to language. In: Ballmer, T.T. (ed.), 
Linguistic Dynamics. Berlin, New York: de Grutyter, 181–189. 
Haspelmath, M., Tadmor, U. (Hg.)
(2009) Loanwords in the world’s languages. A comparative handbook. Berlin: 
de Gruyter.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
67
The Menzerath-Altmann Law in film analysis 
Veronika Koch, Peter Grzybek 
Keywords: film analysis, Menzerath-Altmann Law, 
shot length/duration, film length/duration 
The Menzerath-Altmann Law, initially formulated by Altmann (1980), has been 
repeatedly corroborated in linguistics for units of adjacent linguistic levels (cf. 
Cramer 2005); and although the statistical formulation of this Law does not imply 
transitivity, a relation between units from non-adjacent levels (e.g., sentence and 
word length) could empirically be shown to exist as well (cf. Grzybek 2013). 
However, for this condition (i.e., leapfrogging one level) a  more complex level 
of Wimmer and Altmann’s Unified Theory is needed, of which the Menzerath- 
-Altmann Law is but a  special case (cf. Wimmer/Altmann 2005, 2006). The 
present contribution attempts to transfer the theoretical framework outlined to 
the realm of quantitative film analysis, concentrating on the relation between 
shot length and film length. A shot represents a basic unit of a moving picture, 
its length usually being defined as the time interval between two transitions (cut, 
wipe, fade out, etc.). In the field of film analysis, shot length is usually measured in 
time units (i.e., seconds, or deciseconds), or, more rarely, in the number of frames 
per shot; as compared to this, film length is measured either in minutes, or in the 
number of shots per film. At closer sight, it might be reasonable to conceptually 
and terminologically juxtapose shot / film duration (namely, when time units are 
used for measuring) to shot / film length (referring to the number of constituting 
units). Since both measures can, in principle, be mutually translated, the present 
contribution will initially follow the ambiguous, but established usage of the 
term ’length’. An attempt will then be made to analyze the relation between 
shot length / duration to film length / duration. It will be tested if a systematic 
QUALICO 2014
68
relation exists, and if so, if it follows the Menzerath-Altmann Law or, by way 
of an alternative, a more complex model from the Unified Theory. It will be of 
particular importance to see if the definition of length vs. duration (and the 
choice of measuring units resulting from this definition) is relevant for modeling 
the relations under study. By way of an example, 70 Soviet feature films from the 
1920s till the end of the 1980s will be analyzed. 
References
Altmann, G. 
(1980) Prolegomena to Menzerath’s  law. In: Glottometrika 2. Bochum: 
Brockmeyer, 1–10.
Cramer, I. M. 
(2005) Das Menzerathsche Gesetz. In: Köhler, R.; Altmann, G.; Piotrowski, 
R.G. (eds.), Quantitative Linguistik – Quantitative Linguistics. Ein 
Internationales Handbuch – An International Handbook. Berlin, New 
York: de Gruyter, 650–688. 
Grzybek, P.
(2013) Close and Distant Relatives of the Sentence: Some Results from Russian. 
In: Obradović, I., Kelih, E., Köhler, R. (eds.), Methods and Applications 
of Quantitative Linguistics. Belgrade: Academic Mind, 44–58. 
Grzybek, P., Koch, V. 
(2012) Shot Length: Random or Rigid, Choice or Chance? An Analysis of Lev 
Kulešov’s Po zakonu [By the Law]. In: Hess-Lüttich, E. W. B. (ed.) Sign 
Culture. Zeichen Kultur. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann, 169–188.
Wimmer, G., Altmann, G.
(2005) Unified derivation of some linguistic laws. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, 
G., Piotrowski, R. G. (eds.): Quantitative Linguistik: Ein internationa-
les Handbuch // Quantitative Linguistics: An International Handbook. 
Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter, 791–807.
Wimmer, G., Altmann, G.
(2006) Towards a unified derivation of some linguistic laws. In: Grzybek, P. 
(ed.): Contributions to the Science of Text and Language. Word Length 
Studies and Related Issues. Dordrecht, NL: Springer (Text, Speech 
and Language Technology, 31), 329–337.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
69
Quantitative index text analyser (QUITA) 
Miroslav Kubát, Vladimír Matlach 
Keywords: text analysis, stylometry, frequency 
structure, software, statistical testing, graphical 
visualization 
The poster will present a new software for quantitative text analysis. Quantitative 
Index Text Analyser (QUITA) covers the most common indicators, especially 
those connected with the frequency structure of a text. In addition to comput- 
ing results of the indicators, QUITA provides also statistical testing and graphi-
cal visualization of the obtained data. QUITA is a versatile tool with many uses 
designed for researchers from various disciplines (linguistics, literary criticism, 
history, sociology, psychology, politics, biology, etc.). The program enables basic 
text processing functions like creating word lists, text lemmatizing or creating 
n-grams. The program also provides more advanced tools such as a random text 
creator or a binary file translator. However, the main part of the software is an 
indicator computing. Although the authors focused mainly on the indicators con- 
nected to the frequency structure of a text (e.g. h-point, entropy, repeat rate, ad-
justed modulus, Gini’s coefficient, lambda), there are also several other character- 
istics such as thematic concentration, activity and descriptivity or writer’s view. 
The main purpose of QUITA is to provide a user-friendly tool of the quantita-
tive text analysis for researchers (especially from the humanities) without deep- 
er knowledge of quantitative linguistics, statistics and programming. Apart from 
generating results, QUITA also enables simple statistical comparisons and creat- 
ing charts. There is no need to use any additional software such as spreadsheet 
applications or special statistical programs. In sum, QUITA is a program that 
combines all important parts of any quantitative research: obtaining results, 
QUALICO 2014
70
statistical testing and graphical visualization. The indicators included in QUITA 
were mostly selected in accordance with the following books: Word Frequency 
Studies (Popescu et al. 2009), Aspects of Word Frequencies (Popescu et al. 2009) 
and Metody kvantitativní analýzy (nejen) básnických textů (Čech et al. 2013). 
References 
Čech, R., Popescu, I. I., Altmann, G.
(2013) Metody kvantitativní analýzy (nejen) básnických textů. Olomouc: 
Univerzita Palackého v Olomouci. (in press) 
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G., Grzybek, P., Jayaram, B. D., Köhler, R., Krupa, V., 
Mačutek, J., Pustet, R., Uhlířová, L., Vidya, M.N. 
(2009) Word Frequency Studies. Berlin-New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Popescu, I.-I., Mačutek, J., Altmann, G. 
(2009) Aspects of Word Frequencies. Lüdenscheid: RAM.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
71
Quantitative psycholinguistic analysis of formal 
parameters of Czech text 
Dalibor Kučera, Jiří Haviger 
Keywords: psycholinguistics, text, psychodiagnostics, 
computational linguistics, quantitative text analysis 
The paper deals with the use of metric analysis of texts for the processing of 
Czech verbal communication within psycholinguistic disciplines and its descrip-
tion. It focuses on the application of a computer-assisted procedure, which aims 
to classify and quantify formal characteristics (FPT) of recorded texts. This sys-
tem enables the analysis of vast amounts of content data and it also facilitates the 
comparison of the results with other data, in particular with information about 
the communicators, such as their personal characteristics. The paper also brief- 
ly presents the research P-QPA-FPT, which was carried out in 2013-2014 at the 
University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice (Department of Pedagogy and 
Psychology) and which aims at enriching the current state of knowledge of the 
psycholinguistic analysis of texts, to enhance computer-assisted methods of text 
analysis, and to provide data for a possible application of the procedure within 
diagnostic and psychological disciplines.
References 
Cheng, K. H. C. 
(2011) Further Linguistic Markers of Personality: The Way We Say Things 
Matters. International Journal of Psychological Studies, 3, 1, 2–16.
QUALICO 2014
72
Mehl, M. R. 
(2006) Quantitative text analysis. In: Eid, M., Diener, E. (eds.), Handbook 
of Multimethod Measurement in Psychology. Washington: American 
Psychological Association, 141–156.
Pennebaker, J. W.
(2011) The secret life of pronouns. New Scientist, 3, 50–53.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
73
Towards generalization of sociolinguistic distribu-
tions: English loanwords in contemporary written 
Japanese
Aimi Kuya
Keywords: loanwords, lexical variation, language-
-external factors, corpus study, sociolinguistics
This paper examines the influence of language-external factors on lexical 
alternation between English loanwords and their Japanese equivalents found in 
contemporary written Japanese. Adopting the variationist approach, this study 
recognizes a  loanword as a  lexical variant of its native equivalents when they 
share the same meaning. Kuya (2013) identified several statistically significant 
factors (i.e. author’s age, level of education, type of media) that play distinctive 
roles where the loan noun keesu (‘case’) rivals with its native equivalents. This 
paper attempts to prove that these factors are also important in predicting the 
occurrence of other loanwords.
Several most frequently adopted loanwords are examined with respect to their 
distributions according to the author’s age, the gender and level of education and 
the type of media. The data are collected from the corpora of books and maga- 
zines published between 2001 and 2005 (30 million words) in the Balanced 
Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (National Institute for Japanese 
Language and Linguistics 2011). 
The statistical analyses show that (i) the author’s age, (ii) the author’s level of 
education and (iii) the type of media all have an impact on the occurrence of 
most loanwords surveyed as is expected from my previous work. First, the ten-
dency for the younger generation to use the loanwords more often proves that 
there has been a lexical change over time in favor of the loanwords as opposed 
QUALICO 2014
74
to their Japanese counterparts. The ‘apparent time’ approach has succeeded 
here in grasping a clearer picture of the language change in favor of loanwords 
than the ‘real time’ approach. Second, the loanwords are disfavored by more 
educated authors contrary to a popular assumption, or the claim in other opin- 
ion-based sociolinguistic studies (cf. NINJAL 2004, Tanaka 2007), that more 
educated people have more positive attitudes towards loanwords and therefore 
are heavier users of them. Third, loanwords are used less often in books than in 
magazines, because books seem to be stylistically more formal than magazines 
in general. Lastly, the gender factor is newly attested with respect to half of 
the lexical items investigated, with female authors employing loanwords more 
frequently.
   Overall, among the factors examined, the statistical significance of the 
author’s level of education and the type of media are more consistent than that 
of their age and gender. This implies that the use of loanwords well attested 
across the generation or gender is still influenced by educational factors and/or 
stylistic factors such as formality/casualness. In that sense, the status of loan- 
words in contemporary written Japanese remains peripheral, although some 
studies point out that many loanwords have been fully developed in terms of 
grammar and frequency to be recognized as part of ‘basic’ Japanese vocabulary 
(cf. Kim 2011).
References
Haugen, E.
(1950)  The analysis of linguistic borrowing. Language, 26, 2, 210–231.
Kim, E.
(2011) Shift of the loanwords to basic words in the Japanese newspaper vo- 
cabulary in the second half of the 20th century: Monograph on Handai 
Japanese Studies, 3. PhD thesis. Osaka University.
Kuya, A.
(2013) Synchronic Distribution of Loanwords in Contemporary Written 
Japanese: A Case Study of keesu (‘case’), NINJAL Research Papers, 6, 
45–65.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
75
Lavandera, B. 
(1978) Where does the sociolinguistic variable stop? Language in Society, 7, 
171–183.
Loveday, L.
(1996) Language contact in Japan: A socio-linguistic history. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL)
(2004) An opinion survey on the use of loanwords (nationwide) (in Japanese).
Tokyo: NINJAL.
National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL)
(2011) The Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese: Version.1.0 
[DVD]. Tokyo: NINJAL.
Tanaka, M. 
(2007) Attitudes towards loanwords as opposed to Kango and Wago. NINJAL 
Report 126: Loanwords in public media: research in favor of the propos- 
al for changing the wording of loanwords (in Japanese). 302–310.
Weinreich, U. 
(1968) Languages in contact: Findings and problems. The Hague: Mouton.
QUALICO 2014
76
Type-token relation for length motifs in Ukrainian texts 
Ján Mačutek 
Keywords: length motif, type-token relation, Ukrainian 
The type-token relation is a ratio of the number of different units to the num-
ber of all units used in a text. There are several mathematical expressions of the 
relation (cf. Wimmer 2005). In this presentation it will be applied to length mo-
tifs (a length motif is a relatively new linguistic unit described shortly by Köhler 
2008). Ukrainian texts from seven different genres (prose, drama, blog, sport 
reportage, sermon, scientific papers - humanities, scientific papers - physics) will 
be used (the data are described by Kelih et al. 2009). It will be shown that data 
from almost all texts can be modelled by a  simple power Law. The parameter 
values seem to be dependent on a text genre, hence they could perhaps be used 
for an automatic text classification (which was successfully applied to German 
and Russsian texts in Köhler 2006 and Köhler and Naumann 2008). A relation of 
parameter values to text lengths will be discussed.
References
Wimmer, G. 
(2005) The type-token relation. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, G., Piotrowski, 
R.G. (eds.), Handbook of Quantitative Linguistics. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
361–368.
Kelih, E., Buk, S., Grzybek, P., Rovenchak, A.
(2009) Project description: Designing and constructing a typologically bal- 
anced Ukrainian text database. In: Kelih, E., Levickij, V., Altmann, 
G. (eds.), Methods of Text Analysis. Chernivtsi: ChNU, 125–132.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
77
Köhler, R.
(2006) The frequency distribution of the lengths of length sequences. In: 
Genzor, J., Bucková, M. (eds.), Favete Linguis. Studies in Honour of 
Viktor Krupa. Bratislava: Slovak Academic Press, 145–152.
Köhler, R.
(2008) Sequences of linguistic quantities. Report on a new unit of investiga-
tion. Glottotheory, 1, 1, 115–119.
Köhler, R., Naumann, S.
(2008) Quantitative text analysis using L-, F- and T-segments. In: Preisach, 
Ch., Burkhardt, H., Schmidt-Thieme, L., Decker, R. (eds.), Data 
Analysis, Machine Learning and Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer, 635–646.
QUALICO 2014
78
Gender identification in Modern Greek tweets
George Mikros, Kostas Perifanos
Keywords: gender identification, author profiling, 
authorship attribution, Twitter, machine learning
Since its launch in 2006 Twitter has expanded rapidly and become one of the 
most active social networking sites worldwide. Last usage statistics for 2013 re-
vealed that approximately 5,700 tweets per second are sent from more than 231 
million registered accounts. Twitter, has transformed radically the ways infor-
mation is spread over the internet and created a new language genre with specific 
linguistic conventions and usage rules. Users form messages in 140 characters or 
less producing text that is semantically dense, has many abbreviations and often 
carries extralinguistic information using specific character sequences (smileys, 
interjections etc.) (Crystal 2008). 
Authorship attribution methods have already been applied to tweets, since 
Twitter is an extremely popular service and cybercrime frequently uses it for 
illegal activities (Boutwell 2011, Layton et al. 2010, Mikros and Perifanos 2013, 
Sousa-Silva et al. 2011). However, little attention has been paid to author profil- 
ing including gender identification. The present study aims to explore appro-
priate methods for gender identification in Twitter data. We utilized the Greek 
Twitter Corpus (Mikros and Perifanos 2013) and selected 10 users based on 
their popularity (number of followers) and their activity (number of tweets in 
a month). The selected subcorpus contained 12,973 tweets (4,473 from males / 
/ 8,500 from women) totaling 130,918 words (59,134 words from males / 71,784 
words from women). All data were preprocessed removing all @replies, #tags and 
manual retweets (RT’s) in order to focus on the clear text content of the tweets. 
We counted a vast array of stylometric features (including classic features like 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
79
lexical “richness” indices, word and sentence length statistics, frequent words 
and Author’s Multilevel Ngram Profiles (AMNP). The resulting data were used 
for the training of various Machine Learning Algorithms (Support Vector 
Machines - SVM, Random Forests and Naïve Bayes) using cross-validations pro-
cedures for overfitting avoidance. Preliminary results indicate that gender identi-
fication is highly accurate in Twitter data. Our SVM trained algorithm achieved 
a mean accuracy of 0.97 (s.d. 0.07) across different text-size blocks leading us to 
the conclusion that gender language differences, observed in everyday commu-
nication, persist even on micro-texts and can be reliably utilized for automatic 
author’s gender detection.
References
Boutwell, S. R. 
(2011) Authorship attribution of short messages using multimodal features. 
(MSc), Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California. 
Crystal, D.
(2008) Txting: The Gr8 Db8. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Layton, R., Watters, P., Dazeley, R.
(2010) Authorship Attribution for Twitter in 140 Characters or Less 2 nd 
Workshop on Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop 
(CTC), 19-20 July 2010, Ballarat, Australia, 1–8.
Mikros, G. K., Perifanos, K.
(2013) Authorship attribution in Greek tweets using multilevel author’s   
n-gram profiles. In: Hovy, E., Markman, V., Martell, C.H., Uthus, 
D. (eds.), Papers from the 2013 AAAI Spring Symposium „Analyzing 
Microtext“, 25-27 March 2013, Stanford, California, 17–23. Palo Alto, 
California: AAAI Press.
Sousa-Silva, R., Laboreiro, G., Sarmento, L., Grant, T., Oliveira, E., Maia, B.
(2011) ’twazn me!!! ; (’Automatic Authorship Analysis of Micro-Blogging Messages. 
In: Muñoz, R., Montoyo, A., Métais, E. (eds.), Natural Language Processing 
and Information Systems (Vol. 6716). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 161–168.
QUALICO 2014
80
Three models for the Menzerath’s Law 
Jiří Milička
Keywords: Menzerath’s Law, Menzerath-Altmann Law, 
structure information
The paper consists of four parts:
(1)  Short introducing to the Menzerath‘s Law and the Gabriel Altmann’s mod-
 els.
(2)  Presentation of the new model which is based on the idea that constructs
 contain regular constituents and structure information.
(3)  Presentation of another model which assumes that the Menzerath’s Law is
 related to the inhomogeneities in text.
(4)  The last part is dedicated to the reconciliation of these three models and
 further generalizing.
These models are both theoretically derived and tested against empirical data.
References
 Altmann, G. 
(1980) Prolegomena to Menzerath’s law. In: Grotjahn, R. (ed.), Glottomet- 
rika 2, 1–10. Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Milička, J.
(2014) Menzerath’s Law: The whole is greater than the sum of its parts. 
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 21, 85–99.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
81
Sentence semantics, word meaning, and nonlinear 
dynamics
Hermann Moisl
Keywords: sentence semantics, word meaning, nonli-
near dynamics
Sentence semantics in Turing-computational models of language such as gener- 
ative linguistics is based on Frege’s Principle of Compositionality: that the mean- 
ing of a sentence is a function of the meanings of its constituent words and of the 
manner of their combination. The ’manner of combination’ has been extensively 
studied for decades in linguistic modelling of natural language syntax. Word 
meaning has been far less well developed, but current understanding is that it is 
a semiotic relation between linguistic objects, that is, words, and non-linguistic 
ones, that is, mental representations of relevant aspects of the physical world and 
of mind-internal concepts derived from them. Because these representations are 
external to its domain, linguistics has not proposed well-defined models of them 
and therefore has little to say about how the relation between them and words is 
established. This limits linguistic semantics both scientifically and technologi-
cally. The scientific limitation is that a topic at the core of the study of language 
– how language encodes and communicates information about perceptions of 
the natural world – is only partially understood. The technological one is that 
the usefulness of linguistic models in such applications as language understand- 
ing components of artificial intelligence systems is compromised by the current 
vestigial understanding of how the (word, representation) relation can be imple-
mented, as the slow progress of such applications demonstrates. The present pa-
per proposes a nonlinear dynamical word meaning model in which representa- 
tions and their associations with words are fixed-point attractors in mental phase 
QUALICO 2014
82
space learned from a physical environment. The discussion is in four parts: the 
first part gives a brief introduction to nonlinear dynamics, the second motivates 
the application of dynamics to word meaning, the third describes the architec- 
ture of the model and presents results derived from an implementation of it, and 
the fourth articulates the implications of the model for how the ’manner of com-
bination’ in sentence semantics should be understood.
Burton-Roberts, N. 
(2013) Meaning, semantics, and semiotics. Perspectives on Philosophy and 
Pragmatics, ed. Capone, A., Lo Piparo, F., Carapezza, M., Berlin: Springer.
Fekete, T.
(2010) Representational systems. Minds and Machines, 20, 69–101.
Fresco, N.
(2012) The explanatory role of computation in cognitive science. Minds and 
Machines, 22, 353–80.
Geeraerts, D. 
(2009) Theories of Lexical Semantics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jackendoff, R.
(2003) Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kolen, J., Kremer, S.
(2001) Dynamical Recurrent Networks. New York: IEEE Press.
Strogatz, S.
(2000) Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos. Cambridge MA: Perseus Books.
Tino, P., Horne, B., Giles, C., Collingwood, P.
(1995) Finite state machines and recurrent neural networks – automata and 
dynamical systems approaches. Technical Report UMIACS-TR-95-1, 
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland.
Van Gelder, T.
(1998) The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive science, Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 21, 615–28.
Van Leeuwen, M. 
(2005) Questions for the dynamicist: the use of dynamical systems theory in 
the philosophy of cognition, Minds and Machines, 15, 271–333.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
83
Testing language units of written Chinese via Men-
zerath-Altmann Law
Tereza Motalová, Lenka Spáčilová
Keywords: language units, written Chinese, Menze-
rath-Altmann Law
Language units were determined on the basis of the graphical criterion in par-
ticular. The segmentation employing these units was tested via the Menzerath-
Altmann Law (MAL), more precisely parameters A, b of the MAL were calculated. 
The MAL was applied to several sample texts which were written in the simplified 
form of Chinese characters and in different stylistic styles. The outcomes of the 
analyses will be discussed and compared to those obtained by analysing of spoken 
Chinese.
References 
Ping, Ch.
(1999) Modern Chinese: History and Sociolinguistics. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Hřebíček, L.
(1997) Lectures on Text Theory. Prague: Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Republic.
Norman, J.
(2012) Chinese. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Vochala, J.
(1986) Chinese Writing System: Minimal Graphic Units. Prague: Charles 
University.
QUALICO 2014
84
Altmann, G.
(1980) Prolegomena to Menzerath’s law. Glottometrika 2, 1–10.
Andres, J., Benešová, M., Kubáček, L., Vrbková, J. 
(2012) Methodological Note on the Fractal Analysis of Texts. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics. 19, 1, 1–31.
GB/T 15834 – 2011. Zhongguo renmin gongheguo guojia biaozhun:
 Biaodian fuhao yongfa《中国人民共和国国家标准: 标点符号用法》
National Standards of People‘s  Republic of China: General rules for 
punctuation (2012). Beijing: Zhongguo biaozhun chubanshe (in 
Chinese).
Acknowledgment
This contribution could be realized thanks to specific university research MŠMT support 
allotted to Palacký University in Olomouc. The contribution is a is a part of the collective work 
IGA projects Segmentation for testing the Menzerath-Altmann law and the hypotheses related to 
it I (IGA_FF-2012_035) and Segmentation for testing the Menzerath-Altmann law and the hy- 
potheses related to it II (IGA_FF_2014_083).
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
85
Structural versus morphological coding. A  cross-
-linguistic study. 
Sven Naumann 
Keywords: syntactic complexity, coding requirements, 
treebanks, English, German, Hungarian
Köhler (2012) discusses a number of hypotheses addressing various properties 
(such as complexity, depth, length and position) of the syntactic structures found 
in human languages and their distribution. One of the requirements or principles 
used in several hypotheses he calls the requirement for minimization of the com-
plexity of a syntactic construction (R or minX for short). The complexity of an 
expression or constituent is taken to be the number of its immediate (sub) constit- 
uents. This principle, he argues, helps to limit the size of the (short-term) memo-
ry needed to process the constituent. But as there are quite a number of languages 
(like Japanese, Walpiri, etc.) which according to standard linguistic analysis dem- 
onstrate a rather flat structure with few, but complex constituents, it seems that 
there are other factors which have to be taken into consideration.
A simple hypothesis is that the size of minX depends on the way syntactic 
information is coded in a given language. Syntactic information can be coded 
structurally or morphologically. We should expect that the value of minX is 
much higher in languages where morphology does not play a vital role in the 
coding of syntactic information. This hypothesis is explored using syntactic data 
from various treebanks for English, German and Hungarian.
References
Köhler, R. 
(2012) Quantitative Syntax Analysis. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter. 
(= Quantitative Linguistics, 65)
QUALICO 2014
86
An exploration of the “Golden Section” in Chinese 
contemporary poetries
Xiaxing Pan, Hui Qiu 
Keywords: Chinese contemporary poetry, golden 
section, h-point, word-frequency distribution, 
Zip-Alekseev model, syllable
In mathematics, the ancient Greek letter φ represents one of the world’s most 
astonishing numbers: 1.61803…, which is named as Golden Section (GS). It has 
been proved that this number is all around us (Fett 2006). The present study 
tends to explore the GS of Chinese contemporary poetries. Poetries are visually 
realized onto paper as texts. Many studies (Martináková et al. 2008, Popescu 
et al. 2009, 2012, Tuzzi et al. 2010) on GSs of texts concentrate on the so-called 
“h-point” in the sequence of the word-frequency curves. Cited from Hirsch 
(2005), the “h-point” is introduced into linguistics by Popescu and Altmann 
(2007, 2009). The three points P1 (1, f(1)), P2 (1, f(V)) or (V, f(V)), H (h, h) on any 
rank-frequency curve can form a triangle, in which the ∠α (∠P1HP2) of “h-point” 
is metaphorically called as the “writer’s view”, whose value converges on the 
GS (i.e. 1.618). The collected data in Tuzzi (2010: 95-106) fit this trend well. For 
instance, the value of ∠α on the distribution curve of the 60 Italian texts fits 
the function: 
y=1.618+8.7094/x0.5 (R²=0.833). However, GS in Chinese contemporary poetry 
texts acts differently. The data in the present study consists of 297 poems pub-
lished since 1917. Fitting the corresponding data about the 297 poems into the 
function: 
y=1.618+a/x0.5, we get a=4.0934, R²=0.39534, which means an unsatis-
factory result. And then we fit the data into this function: y=a+b/x0.5, and get 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
87
a=1.58916, b=5.02352, R²=0.40518, which still says an unsatisfactory result. 
Accordingly, we may draw a  conclusion that the radian of ∠α sitting on the 
“h-point” cannot tell the GS of Chinese contemporary poetry texts well. 
We then turn to the study of rhythm and find out that the word-frequency 
distribution of the poems act differently when we fit them into the Zipf-Alekseev 
model: x(a+b*lnx). When the lines of a poetry are less than 20, and word types less 
than 76 at the same time, it fits the model quite well, but fails if any one of the 
condition changes. Meanwhile, the number of syllables plays an important role 
in the fitting process. To measure the Chinese contemporary poems’ rhythm, the 
basic unit “foot” is discussed. Mostly, one “foot” is considered to be composed by 
two to three Chinese syllables (generally, a syllable is a Chinese character), and 
one line of one poem is composed by three to five “feet”. Thus, we suppose that 
the GS of Chinese contemporary poetry texts may hides in the arrangement of 
the syllables, especially the proportion between the monosyllables and multisyl-
lables (including the disyllables), the so-called “foot” in the verses, etc.
We are looking forward to the certification in the study. 
Even Tuzzi (2010: 40) concludes: “The assumption that the tendency to the GS 
does exist but except for text size no other causes of differences could be found”, 
when we are seeking the GS of Chinese contemporary poems, it is a good attempt 
to take rhythm into account.
References
Tuzzi, A., Popescu, I.-I., Altmann G. 
(2010) Quantitative Analysis of Italian Texts. Lüdenscheid: RAM-Verlag.
Fett, B. 
(2006) An In-depth Investigation of the Divine Ratio. The Montana 
Mathematics Enthusiast, 3, 2, 157–175.
Hirsch, J. E. 
(2005) An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output. PNAS, 
102, 46, 16569–16572.
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G. 
(2007)  Writer’s view of text generation. Glottometrics, 15, 71–81.
QUALICO 2014
88
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G. 
(2009) A modified text indicator. In: Kelih, E., Levickij, V., Altmann, G. (eds.), 
Problems of Quantitative Text Analysis. Černivci: RUTA. 208–229. 
Popescu, I.-I., Mačutek, J., Altmann, G. 
(2009) Aspects of Word Frequencies. Lüdenscheid: RAM-Verlag.
Popescu, I.-I., Čech, R., Altmann, G. 
(2012) Some Geometric Properties of Slovak Poetry. Journal of Quantitative 
Linguistics, 19, 2, 121–131.
Martináková, Z., Mačutek, J., Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G. 
(2008) Some problems of musical texts. Glottometrics, 16, 80–110. 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
89
Modelling proximity in a  corpus of literary re-
translations: a methodological proposal for cluster- 
ing texts based on systemic-functional annotation 
of lexicogrammatical features 
Adriana Pagano, Giacomo Figueredo, Annabelle Lukin 
Keywords: cluster analysis, translated text, literary 
translation, retranslation, systemic functional gram- 
mar, lexicogrammatical features 
This paper seeks to contribute to a  model for quantitative exploration of 
literary translations by adopting clustering techniques to search for patterns 
of comparability in a corpus of retranslations (Oakes and Ji 2012). Drawing on 
systemic functional grammar (Halliday and Matthiessen 2004) as a framework 
for text analysis, it reports on an exploratory study aimed at investigating source 
– target text relations as computed through statistical methods for a manually 
annotated representative text sample. Unlike approaches based on frequency 
of the most frequent words, the frequency of values attributed to text samples 
for pre-defined number of variables was used in order to obtain clusters to map 
proximity relations as visualized in a dendrogram (Ke 2012). The main purpose 
of our study was to develop a useful analytical framework for comparing source 
and target texts on the basis of theory-informed categories of functions realized 
by choices in the grammar of each language system. As the categories refer to 
functions description under a common general theory, they apply to variation 
in the functional organization across language systems, each language having 
its particular lexicogrammatical realizations. Comparability was thus ensured 
between texts written in different languages to which equivalence is assigned 
QUALICO 2014
90
because they stand in a relation of translation to one source text. Additionally, our 
study sought to explore the claim that retranslations – literary works translated 
more than once into the same language by different authors over a  period of 
time – tend to be more source-oriented than first translations (Berman 1990). 
Orientation was interpreted as proximity between texts in a cluster relation or, 
in other words, the distance between the source and target texts as computed 
through cluster analysis. The results point to the productivity of the methodology 
used. The clusters obtained at each step point out that similarities between texts 
computed on the basis of categories ascribed to the lexicogrammatical choices 
made by each author within the grammatical systems analysed. These pertain to 
the metafunctional organization of the meanings construed and enacted, which 
we argue is relevant to the theme of the short story. As regards the retranslation 
hypothesis, our results corroborate findings by researchers who used other 
methodologies (Desmidt 2009, O’Driscoll 2009). While they seem to confirm 
the relative distance of a  first translation from the source text, retranslations 
show varied degrees of proximity to the source text and are sometimes further 
away from it than first translations. In the case of Katherine Mansfield, from 
the perspective of norms or the factors conditioning text rewriting, more recent 
retranslations would be expected to be closer to the source text in that literary 
criticism has brought rereadings of Mansfield’s  work and the significance of 
her use of language to craft her texts. However, there are other factors at play 
in retranslation (publishing house agendas, target readers) and the retranslation 
hypothesis did not prove sufficiently sensitive to them.
References
Berman, A. 
(1990) La retraduction come espace de la traduction. Palimpsestes, 4, 1-7.
Desmidt, I.
(2009) (Re)translation Revisited. Meta, 54, 669-683.
Halliday, M. A. K., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (eds.) 
(2004) An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Arnold.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
91
Ke, S.-W.
(2012) Clustering a  translational corpus. In: Oakes, M.P., Meng, J. (eds.) 
Quantitative Methods in Corpus-Based Translation Studies: 
A  Practical Guide to Descriptive Translation Research. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
O’Driscoll, K.
(2009) Around the World in Eighty Changes: A diachronic study of the mul-
tiple causality of six complete translations (1873-2004), from French 
to English, of Jules Verne’s novel Le Tour du Monde en Quatre-Vingts 
Jours. PhD diss., Dublin City University.
Oakes, M. P., Meng J. (eds.)
(2012) Quantitative Methods in Corpus-Based Translation Studies: 
A  Practical Guide to Descriptive Translation Research. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
QUALICO 2014
92
The Krylov Law as a tool for comparative lexicology. 
The example of Polish 19th century dictionaries.
Adam Pawłowski 
Keywords: Krylov Law, Polish lexicography, Polish dic-
tionaries, quantitative lexicology, polysemy, homony-
my
Statistical laws of language can be divided into two categories: those describing 
dependencies between frequencies of linguistic units and other measurable va-
riables observed in texts (e.g. Menzerath-Altmann or Zipf Laws), and those de- 
fining dependencies of measurable variables in the system of language. The Krylov 
Law belongs to the latter group. In general terms it describes systemic polysemy in 
the lexicon of a given language (Krylov 1982). It stipulates that if in the lexicon of 
a given language y is the number of lexemes having x meanings, the relationship 
y=f (x) will be a discrete and strictly decreasing, monotonic function, approximat- 
ed by some continuous function. It is of interest that this relationship had been 
noted by Zipf, who, however, did not develop it into a  fully-fledged law. There 
have been several theoretical models of the Krylov Law (Kułacka 2009, cf. also 
Ruszkowski 2010). In one of its most basic versions, it was hypothesized that if x1 
is the number of single-sense lexemes, the number xi of lexemes having i mean- 
ings will follow the geometric series: x_(i+1)=x_1/2^i
Very few researchers have noticed, however, that the fundamental difficulty in 
interpreting the Krylov Law is the way lexeme meanings are defined and quan-
tified. The majority of available analyses have relied on the data selected from 
contemporary dictionaries. Unfortunately, each dictionary represents a network 
of meanings that reflects its author’s lexicographical knowledge and approach to 
lexicon, but not necessarily the real polysemy of language, observed in specific 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
93
utterances. One should also observe that the difference between polysemy and 
homonymy is often unclear. For these reasons, at this stage of research, the 
Krylov Law should be regarded as an efficient quantitative tool for comparative 
lexicology rather than as a universal law of language. 
The objective of this presentation is to compare, using the Krylov Law, four 
general dictionaries of Polish, published in the 19th and 20th centuries. Since the 
overall number of entries in these dictionaries is enormous, the representative 
method will be applied and approximately 4,000 random entries per dictionary 
will be analysed. The hypothesis to be tested is that every dictionary represents 
its own, specific structure of polysemic words. 
References
Krylov, J. K. 
(1982) Eine Untersuchung statistischer Gesetzmäßigkeiten auf der para-
digmatischen Ebene der Lexik natürlicher Sprachen. In: Guiter H., 
Arapov M.V. (eds.), Studies on Zipf ś  law. Bochum: Brockmeyer, 
234–262.
Kułacka, A.
(2009) Procedura weryfikacji prawa Kryłowa [Verification procedure of the 
Krylov Law]. LingVaria 2, 8, 10–20. 
Ruszkowski, M.
(2010) Prawo Kryłowa w polskich badaniach językoznawczych [Krylov Law 
in Polish linguistic research]. Respectus Philologicus 18, 23, 58–63.
QUALICO 2014
94
Evolutionary derivation of laws for polysemic and 
age-polysemic distributions of language signs en-
sembles
Vasiliy Poddubny, Anatoly Polikarpov
Keywords: associative semantic potential of linguistic 
signs, dissipative stochastic model, derivation of laws 
for polysemic and age-polysemic distributions
The proposed continuous dissipative stochastic model is based on the assump- 
tion of the dissipative character of language signs’ polysemy development. (Some 
other aspects of the model one may see in works (Poddubny and Polikarpov 
2011, 2013; 2013; Polikarpov, 2013). This means that each linguistic sign at the 
moment of its birth has a personal limit G (called associative semantic poten-
tial, ASP) of the possible maximum number of meanings for acquisition during 
its life-span. ASP is gradually wasted in the process of meanings acquisition by 
a sign. The rate of formation of new meanings (as a rule, each next being rela-
tively more abstract) is assumed to be at each moment proportional to the still 
untouched part of the ASP. Due to this the emergence rate of new meanings 
is gradually slowing down. At the same time, but with a lag time τ0, starts to 
flow a  similar and significantly slower process of losses of initially acquired 
relatively more specific meanings. The actual polysemy of the sign at any mo-
ment of time t of its life cycle is expressed by the difference x(t) = x1(t) – x2(t) of 
the processes of acquiring x1(t) and loss of meanings x2(t). Continuous model 
assumes that these processes are continuous and subject to linear differential 
equations of the type:
dx1(t)/dt = (G – x1(t))/τ1, x1(t ≤ 0) = 0, dx2(t)/dt = (G – x2(t))/τ2, x2(t – τ0 ≤ 0) = 0,
where τ1 = a1/G, τ2 = a2/G – are inversely proportional to the ASP time constants 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
95
of the growth and decline of polysemy, respectively, and τ1<<τ2. The model as- 
sumes further that the values G in the signs’ ensemble and lag τ0 are independent 
exponentially distributed random variables with parameters (mathematical ex-
pectations) <G> and <τ0> respectively. The flow of signs’ births is assumed to be 
a stationary Poisson process with intensity λ=1/<τ>, so that the intervals of time 
between the emergence of adjacent signs in the flow are assumed to be indepen- 
dent exponentially distributed random variables with a parameter (mathematical 
expectation) <τ>. The value of <τ> in the model is considered as a unit of time. 
Positions of signs in the stationary Poisson thread have the uniform distribution. 
Thus, the proposed model is described by four parameters: <G>, <τ0>, a1, a2. 
The individual life cycle curve of sign’s polysemy development x(t, G, τ0) in the 
time t, dependent also on G and τ0, is obtained from the solution of the above 
differential equations. Conditional density distribution of polysemy x for an 
individual sign, depending on time (on a sign’s age) t, G and a lag τ0, is present 
by Dirac delta-function p(x|t, G, τ0) = δ(x – x(t, G, τ0)). Averaging the δ-shaped 
conditional density on distributions of lag τ0 and G we obtain the conditional 
distribution density p(x|t) of polysemy x for an ensemble of signs of the same 
age t. By subsequent averaging on the uniform distribution of t we can get un-
conditional density p(x) for the distribution of signs’ polysemy in an ensemble 
regardless to the age of signs. By comparing theoretically derived polysemy 
distribution with the empirical distributions for Russian and English we can 
define the parameters of the model <G>, <τ0>, a1, a2. The relevance of the model 
was tested by the polysemyage data.
References
Poddubny V. V., Polikarpov A. A. 
(2011) Dissipative Stochastic Dynamic Model of Development of Linguistic 
Signs. Computer Research and Simulation, 3, 2, 103–124. (In Russian).
Poddubny V. V., Polikarpov A. A. 
(2013) Stochastic Dynamic Model of Evolution of Language Sign Ensembles. 
In: Obradović, I., Kelih, E., Köhler, R. (eds.), Methods and Applications 
of Quantitative Linguistics - Selected papers of the 8th International 
Conference on Quantitative Linguistics (QUALICO). Belgrade: 
Academic Mind, 69–83.
QUALICO 2014
96
Polikarpov A. A. 
(2013) Life-cycle Model for a  Sign: Theoretical Foundations of Historical 
Lexicology and Word Formation In: Chernyshova M.I., Azbukovnik, 
M. (eds.), Slavic Lexicography. International collective monograph, 
679–702. (In Russian).
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
97
Quantitative studies in the corpus of Nko periodicals
Andrij Rovenchak
Keywords: Nko script, Maninka language, Manding 
languages (West Africa), text corpus, Zipf’s  Law, 
Menzerath-Altmann Law
Nko is an alphabet created in 1949 by Solomana Kantε as a writing system for 
the Manding languages of West Africa. Presently, the script is mainly used 
for the Guinean Maninka (Maninka-Mori) promoting the establishment of the 
literary norm. Nko is the only modern indigenous African script, in which 
a significant body of literature exists (not counting the Ethiopic script, which 
is of an ancient origin). Moreover, a lot of materials are available electronically 
facilitating the task of automatic text processing. The corpus of Nko periodicals 
has been compiled. The following journals and newspapers were included: Dalu 
Kεndε (ca. 225 thousand words), Yereya fɔbɛ (ca. 122 thousand words), Sinjiya 
fɔɔbɛ (ca. 76 thousand words), Jansan (ca. 40 thousand words), Yelen (ca. 23 
thousand words), Mandenka (ca. 9 thousand words), and Sekutureya Kibaro 
(ca. 4 thousand words). The total size of the corpus is above 500,000 running 
words. 
The Nko script is now a part of the Unicode standard but most of the periodi-
cals were produced using pre-Unicode fonts, often with different encodings. At 
least four encodings were discovered and convertors to the Unicode were crea-
ted for them. Statistical properties of Nko texts are analyzed. In particular, two 
regimes in the rank–frequency dependence are observed, which suggest a pos- 
sible fuzzy border between core and marginal vocabulary. Preliminary analy-
sis demonstrates the size of the core vocabulary of about 1,000 most frequent 
words. In particular, the Zipf exponent for ranks 10–1,000 is (–1.132 ± 0.003), 
QUALICO 2014
98
while for ranks 1,000–10,000 its value is already (–1.225 ± 0.001). Note that the 
final numbers can change slightly as the frequency list is checked for some most 
typical errors. Frequency studies are made for phonemes, tonal patterns, syllable 
co-occurrences, etc. The Menzerath–Altmann Law is checked and suggestions to-
wards a proper unit to measure syllable length in the Maninka language are made. 
The present study is the first quantitative analysis of a Manding language, where 
an electronic corpus of such a large size is used. On the basis of the obtained list 
of types the work towards the creation of the Maninka dictionary in the Toolbox 
format has been started. The work on the Maninka corpus, with periodicals as its 
part, is planned within the program LabEx EFL, Strand 6, opération “Corpora for 
Manding Languages”.
References 
Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Solé, R. V. 
(2001) Two regimes in the frequency of words and the origins of complex 
lexicons: Zipf ’s law revisited. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 8, 3, 
165–173.
Rovenchak, A.
(2011) Phoneme distribution, syllabic structure, and tonal patterns in Nko 
texts. Mandenkan, 47, 77–96.
Vydrin, V.
(2012) Une bibliographie préliminaire des publications maninka en écriture 
N’ko. Mandenkan, 48, 59–121.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
99
Translations in networks: the (in)visibility of 
translator styles
Jan Rybicki
Keywords: stylometry, authorship attribution, autho-
rial signal, cluster analysis, Burrows’s Delta, network 
visualization 
Methods based on statistical analyses of the most frequent word frequency series 
are well-established in authorship attribution; it is usually enough to compare 
frequencies of several dozen most frequent words in a corpus to order the texts 
comprised therein by author. When the same stylometric methods are applied 
to corpora of translations, the results continue to present the domination of the 
authorial signal, somewhat counterintuitively when one considers the obvious 
fact that they are now based on very different frequencies of the most frequent 
words in another language, and that corresponding most-frequent-word lists in 
the source and target languages exhibit little one-on-one correspondence be-
tween individual lexical items. The translatorial signal is sometimes visible in 
two cases: 1. when a given translation is known to depart from others in its style, 
quality and/or chronology; and/or 2. when translations of the same work of the 
same author are compared. Also, individual variations in a translator behaviour 
can also be observed. This phenomenon is presented in this paper using the stylo 
package for the statistical programming environment R. The package processes 
the texts to produce word frequencies; these are converted into text size-indepen-
dent distance measures (in this case, Burrows’s Delta), which in turn serve as an 
input for the cluster analysis; finally, the results obtained for different values of 
several parameters (word frequency list length; pronoun deletion; selectiveness 
of the wordlist) are pooled for better consistency and processed in the GEPHI 
QUALICO 2014
100
network visualization programme. This approach allows a more complete image 
of patterns of similarity and difference between individual texts, original authors 
and translators, with numerous linkages possible, in contrast to the simple bi-
nary character of nearest-neighbour associations in traditional cluster analysis 
trees. The material analysed here includes novel-size literary texts in English, 
French and Polish; texts in one language are compared to their translations into 
the other two. Apart from the more immediate insight into patterns of similari-
ty and difference between texts and authors of interest to literary scholars, this 
phenomenon is of significance for translation studies as an unexpected vindica-
tion of Venuti’s “translator’s invisibility.” After all, most practitioners of literary 
translation (including the author of this paper) would probably agree that they 
suspected their own “stylistic fingerprint” to be visible rather than concealed in 
the usage of the most frequent words, most of them “synsemantic.” While there is 
no theory yet behind the empirical success of most-frequent-word-based author-
ship attribution methods, the possible explanations might include references to 
the model of language and meaning as proposed by cognitive linguistics.
References 
Bastian, M., Heymann, S., Jacomy, M. 
(2009) Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating net- 
works. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
Burrows, J. 
(1987) Computation into Criticism: a Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an 
Experiment in Method. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Burrows, J. 
(2002) Delta: a measure of stylistic difference and a guide to likely author-
ship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17, 3, 267–87.
Eder, M.
(2011) Style-markers in authorship attribution: a cross-language study of the 
authorial fingerprint. Studies in Polish Linguistics, 6, 99–114.
Eder, M., Kestemont, M., Rybicki, J. 
(2013) Stylometry with R: a suite of tools, Digital Humanities 2013 Conference 
Abstracts. Lincoln: University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 487–489.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
101
Hoover, D. L.
(2004a) Testing Burrows’s delta. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19, 4, 453–75. 
Hoover, D. L.
(2004b) Delta prime? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19, 4, 477–95.
Jockers, M. L., Witten, D. M.
(2010) A comparative study of machine learning methods for authorship 
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 25, 2, 215–23.
Luyckx, K., Daelemans, W. 
(2011) The effect of author set size and data size in authorship attribution. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26, 1, 35–55.
Mosteller, F., Wallace, D.
(1964) Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist. Addison-Wesley, 
Reading.
R Core Team. 
(2013) A language and environment for statistical computing. Wien: R Foundation 
for Statistical Computing, http://www.R-project.org/ [1.1.2014].
Rybicki, J. 
(2009) Translation and Delta revisited: when we read translations, is it the author 
or the translator that we really read? Digital Humanities 2009: Conference 
Abstracts. University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 245–47.
Rybicki, J. 
(2012) The Great Mystery of the (Almost) Invisible Translator: Stylometry 
in Translation. In: Oakley, M. Ji, M. (eds.) Quantitative Methods in 
Corpus-Based Translation Studies. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 
231–248.
Rybicki, J., Eder, M.
(2011) Deeper delta across genres and languages: do we really need the most 
frequent words? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26, 3, 315–21.
Rybicki, J., Heydel, M. 
(2013) The stylistics and stylometry of collaborative translation: Woolf’s Night 
and Day in Polish. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28, 4, 708–717.
Venuti, L.
(1995) The Translator’s Invisibility. A history of translation. London-New 
York: Routledge.
QUALICO 2014
102
A co-occurrence and an order of the valency in Japa-
nese sentences
Haruko Sanada
Keywords: valency, co-occurrence, word order, post-
position, Japanese
Japanese is known as the language with less restrictions of the word order. Many 
postpositions express a role of the case or the complement in the sentence, and 
ellipses of any valencies can be possible to avoid a redundancy. However, in the 
recent studies it is discussed that there are broad rules for co-occurrences of post- 
positions and for an order of valencies. 
In this paper we use a valency database which shows sample sentences with 
(a) cases and complements as the deep case and (b) postpositions as the surface 
case. We studied following problems from the point of view of the deep case and 
the surface case respectively: 
1) Is there a tendency of co-occurrences of postpositions? 
2) Is there a tendency of the order of postpositions in the sentence? 
2) Method and data 
Employing the valency database (Ogino et al. 2003), we focused on the 6 verbs in 
1,051 sentences of which the following are the same as employed in our last studies 
(Sanada 2012, 2014) „au“ (meet), „hataraku“ (work), „yaburu“ (tear, break), „uma-
reru“ (be born, arise), „ugoku“ (move), and „ataeru“ (give). We extracted 621 pairs 
of cases and complements as the deep case and 601 pairs of postpositions as the 
surface case and analyzed them. 
3) Results 
We observed the following points for the co-occurrence of complements or 
postpositions:
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
103
- The frequency of the pairs of complements or postpositions is individual by verb. 
- Considering the order of complements or postpositions, the frequency of the 
pairs is not symmetric. For example, the frequency for the pair of „ga“ (subject) 
and „ni“ (direct object) for the verb „au“ (meet) is 38, while the frequency for the 
pair of „ni“ (direct object) and „ga“ (subject) is 0. 
To measure the tendency of the order of complements or postpositions in the 
sentence, we give the score of 2 points to the first complement or postposition 
of the pairs and a  score of 1 point to the other one, and calculate the average 
scores by complement or postposition. We obtained the order of complements 
or postpositions sorted by their average scores, and used t-test to evaluate the 
significance of the difference. It is confirmed that postpositions for the theme 
and the subject have a „higher“ position in the sentence and the postposition for 
the direct object has a „lower“ position. However, the order of postpositions is 
individual by verb.
References
Ogino, T., Kobayashi, M., Isahara, H. 
(2003) Nihongo Doshi no Ketsugoka (Verb valency in Japanese). Tokyo: 
Sanseido. 
Sanada, H. 
(2012) Joshi no Shiyo Dosu to Ketsugoka ni Kansuru Keiyoteki Bunseki 
Hoho no Kento (Quantitative approach to frequency data of Japanese 
postpositions and valency) (in Japanese). Rissho Daigaku Keizaigaku 
Kiho (The quarterly report of economics of Rissho University), 62, 2, 
1–35.
Sanada, H. 
(2014, to appear) The choice of postpositions of the subject and the ellipsis of the 
subject in Japanese. In: Uhlířová, L., Altmann, G., Čech, R., Mačutek, 
J. (eds.), Issues in Quantitative Linguistics. Lüdenscheid: RAM-Verlag.
QUALICO 2014
104
Authorship attribution using political speeches
Jacques Savoy
Keywords: authorship attribution, discourse analysis, 
political speeches
In this communication we describe a  lexical study over the State of the Union 
addresses from 1790 through 2014 corresponding to 225 speeches uttered by 41 
US presidents. We view each address as a  compound signal that includes the 
author’s style and the topics (speech content). Moreover, since all these speeches 
have the same audience, context, and genre, they form an interesting corpus 
for authorship attribution. They are also freely available and correctly spelled. 
However, if we can assume that many US presidents who lived in the 18th or 
19th century were in fact the real authors of their own speeches, this hypothesis 
is wrong for the last presidencies (e.g., T. Sorensen was the ghost writer for J. F. 
Kennedy, and J. Fraveau is behind B. Obama). In the latter case, we can assume 
that the same person was in charge of the State of the Union addresses for a given 
president. 
After applying a POS tagger, we represent each speech by its lemmas (entry in 
the dictionary) instead of directly using the surface words. According to previous 
studies in authorship attribution, we have taken into account the k most frequent 
lemmas (with k varying from 100 to 500) to define the style. We then present a set 
of experiments on authorship attribution trying to assign each speech to the as-
sumed author achieving a success rate around 85% (using KLD (Zhao and Zobel 
2007), Labbé’s (2007) distance, naïve Bayes (Mitchell 1997), or the Delta method 
(Burrows 2002)). Using only the POS tags, the resulting success rate was lower 
and the combination of lemmas with POS information does not always present 
better performance levels. In these experiments, we found a set of speeches that 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
105
were always difficult to assign correctly. A deeper analysis reveals interesting rea- 
sons explaining the underlying difficulty to assess these cases.  
In the second set of experiments, we have assigned each address based on 
their contents. In this perspective, we assume that each presidency wants to im-
pose its own political agenda and thus will focus on some particular questions 
distinct from problems presented by other presidents. These objectives will there-
fore be present in their speeches and in the choice made to express its intents (e.g., 
in the vocabulary). In this perspective, we represent each speech by their lemmas, 
ignoring the most frequent ones (e.g., 100 to 500), and the lemmas appearing 
once or twice. The success rate was interesting (around 75%) but lower than when 
considering only the author’s style. This high success rate tends to indicate that 
our underlying assumption is correct and each presidency tends to have a set of 
distinctive issues that they focus on (e.g., health care reform, new jobs, or clean 
energy with Obama). 
Finally, we propose to combine the style and the content to improve the quali-
ty of the authorship attribution scheme. The resulting performance shows mixed 
results, depicting in some cases a small improvement, and degradation in other 
cases. The idea that combining different sources of evidence will always provide 
a better result is not always true. 
References
Burrows, J. F. 
(2002) Delta: A  Measure of Stylistic Difference and a  Guide to Likely 
Authorship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17, 3, 267–287. 
Labbé, D. 
(2007) Experiments on Authorship Attribution by Intertextual Distance in 
English. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 14, 1, 33–80. 
Mitchell, T. M. 
(1997) Machine Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Zhao, Y., Zobel, J. 
(2007) Entropy-Based Authorship Search in Large Document Collection. 
In: Proceedings ECIR. Berlin: Springer, 381–392 (LNSC 4425).
QUALICO 2014
106
Testing language units of spoken Chinese via 
Menzerath-Altmann Law 
Jana Ščigulinská, Denisa Schusterová 
Keywords: language units, spoken Chinese, Menzerath-
-Altmann Law 
Language units were primarily determined on the basis of the phonetic criterion. 
The segmentation employing these units was tested via the Menzerath-Altmann 
Law (MAL), more precisely parameters A, b of the MAL were calculated. The 
MAL was applied to several samples which were produced by native speakers 
who represented different musical genres. The outcomes of the analyses will be 
discussed and compared to those obtained by analysing of written Chinese.
References
Altmann, G.
(1980) Prolegomena to Menzerath‘s law. Glottometrika, 2, 1–10.
DeFrancis, J.
(1990) The Chinese Language Fact and Fantasy. Taipei: The Crane Publishing 
co., LTD.
Hřebíček, L.
(1997) Lectures on Text Theory. Prague: Oriental Institute.
Ping, Ch.
(1999) Modern Chinese. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
107
Švarný, O. (et al.)
(1998) Hovorová čínština v příkladech 3. Olomouc: Vydavatelstvo Univerzity 
Palackého.
Acknowledgment
The contribution is a  part of the collective work IGA projects Segmentation for testing 
the Menzerath-Altmann Law and the hypotheses related to it I  (IGA_FF-2012_035) and 
Segmentation for testing the Menzerath-Altmann Law and the hypotheses related to it II 
(IGA_FF_2014_083).
QUALICO 2014
108
Comparative rates of change as a diagnostic of vowel 
phonologization 
Betsy Sneller 
Keywords: language change, spoken corpora, sociolin-
guistics 
Problem: The mechanism of vowel change, particularly of phonological changes 
like vowel splits and mergers, has largely been a matter of ideological speculation. 
Whether phonological reanalysis is the result of incremental sound changes (e.g., 
Ohala 1981) or the result of phonologization ex nihilo (e.g., Janda and Joseph 
2003, Fruehwald 2013) has been more of a theoretical debate than an empirical 
one. Using large-scale corpora of spoken interviews, it becomes possible to actu-
ally test these two competing hypothesis. 
Background: It is common to examine the formant space of different 
allophones, as a diagnostic of distinct phonological targets. When two allophones 
have similar long-term trajectories across F1-F2 space, they are often analyzed as 
being a single phonological target. This paper aims to expand on the traditional 
analysis, adding comparative rates of change as an additional dimension for 
analysis.
Methods: Data for this study are drawn from two large-scale corpora of 
spontaneous sociolinguistic interviews: the Philadelphia Neighborhood Corpus 
(PNC), which consists of 30-60 minute interviews with 214 speakers with dates 
of birth ranging from 1888-1996, and the Origins of New Zealand English 
(ONZE) corpus, which consists of 30-60 minute interviews with 512 speakers 
with dates of birth ranging from 1851-1987. Vowel tokens from each speaker were 
extracted using the FAVE suite (Rosenfelder et al. 2012), and normalized using 
z-scores. Using these two corpora which are stylistically similar but from distinct 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
109
populations allows us to make stronger generalizations about the usefulness of 
rate of change as a diagnostic of phonologization. Rates of change were calculated 
as the first derivative of a  locally weighted smoothed regression model of the 
individual vowel tokens. 
Predictions: If two allophones are different only due to phonetic coarticulation, 
their rates of change will be identical (if coarticulation has a  linear effect on 
vowel quality) or linearly related (if coarticulation has a quadratic effect on vowel 
quality). Similarly, if two allophones are becoming distinct from each other due 
to incremental phonetic changes, then their rates of change should also be related, 
since the same phonological process is acting on both phonological targets. 
When reanalysis occurs, however, each target is open for distinct phonological 
targets. In this case, we should expect the rates of change for each phoneme to be 
unrelated. 
Results: We test this hypothesis on several sound changes in the PNC which 
are known to be phonetic (the fronting of [o][n] compared to [o]; [t][u] com- 
pared to [u]), as well as several which are known to be phonological ([ey] in closed 
syllable compared to open; [ay] before a voiceless segment compared to voiced) 
and find that comparing rates of change is a useful diagnostic of phonological 
distinctness. We then use this as a tool for showing a new phonological reanalysis 
in the ONZE corpus of [u] following [j], as well as corroboration of the [ir]-[er] 
merger in New Zealand English. We find that in cases of phonological split or 
merger, the comparative rates of changes suggest that reanalysis occurs almost 
immediately, supporting a `Big Bang’ theory of phonologization.
References 
Fruehwald, J.
(2013) The phonological influence on phonetic change. PhD dissertation: 
University of Pennsylvania.
Janda, R., Joseph, B.
(2003) Reconsidering the Canons of Sound-Change: Towards a „Big Bang“ 
Theory. In: Blake, B., Burridge, K. (eds.), Historical Linguistics. 
Selected Papers from the 15th International Conference on Historical 
Linguistics, Melbourne. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 
205–219. John Benjamins.
QUALICO 2014
110
Ohala, J.
(1981) The listener as a source of sound change. In: Masek, C., S., Hendrick, 
R., A. and Miller, M., F.  (eds.), Papers from the Parasession on 
Language and Behavior. Chicago: Chicago Ling. Soc, 178–203.
Rosenfelder, I., Fruehwald, J., Evanini, K., Jiahong Y.
(2011) FAVE (Forced Alignment and Vowel Extraction) Program Suite. 
http://fave.ling.upenn.edu.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
111
Diversification in the noun inflection of Old English 
Petra Steiner 
Keywords: diversification, integer partitions, Old Eng-
lish, inflectional paradigms, system, langue 
The inventory of the means for inflection in synthetic languages is relatively small, 
compared to the means of derivation. For most Indo-European languages, the set 
of inflectional morphemes can be listed on one page, while derivational affixes 
usually take up more space. If the number of inflectional morphemes is restricted, 
the number of paradigms is so too. Additionally, the frequency distributions of 
inflectional morphemes within inflectional paradigms are even more limited due to 
the principles of diversification. Evidence for this was found for both German and 
Icelandic noun inflection in Steiner and Prün (2007) and Steiner (2009). Hence, 
investigations of inflectional morphology in Quantitative Linguistics can provide 
interesting insights into the language system. In addition, they are feasible, as the 
data can be easily obtained. The hypotheses and methods can be transferred from 
other usage-oriented investigations. This study is concerned with the inflectional 
paradigms of Old English in regard to the frequency distributions of their inflectional 
affixes. For Modern German and Icelandic, it could be shown in the above-
mentioned investigations that typical distributions occur with a small number of 
forms which occurred often and many forms that occurred rarely, leading to typical 
distributions showing steep beginnings and long tails. The distribution of case 
syncretism is another interesting aspect. Counting and sorting the different forms 
of inflectional suffixes lead to so-called unordered integer partitions of the numbers 
of the elements of an inflectional paradigm. For example, the integer partition for 
the Old English noun cyning (see Table 1) comprising the suffixes -, -as, -e, -um, -es 
and -a, would be (2 2 2 2 1 1).
QUALICO 2014
112
Table 1: Inflectional suffixes of the Old English noun cyning
Singular Plural
Nominative - -as
Accusative - -as
Genitive -es -a
Dative -e -um
Instrumental -e -um
These integer partitions can be described as urn models, leading to typical 
distributions. 
References
Steiner, P. 
(2009) Diversification in Icelandic Inflectional Paradigms. In: Köehler, R., 
(ed.) Issues in Quantitative Linguistics. Lüdenscheid: RAM-Verlag, 
126–154. (= Studies in Quantitative Linguistics, 5).
Steiner, P., Prün, C.
(2007) The effects of diversification and unification on the inflectional para-
digms of German nouns. In: Grzybek, P., Köhler, R. (eds.), Exact me-
thods in the study of language and text: dedicated to Professor Gabriel 
Altmann on the occasion of his 75th birthday. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
623–631.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
113
Quantitative verification of constancy measures of 
texts
Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii, Shunsuke Aihara
Keywords: Yule’s K, entropy, Zipf’s Law
In this talk, we  will present  mathematical and empirical verifications of com-
putational constancy measures for natural language text. A  constancy measure 
characterizes a  given text by having an invariant value for any size larger than 
a certain amount. The study of such measures has a 70-year history dating back to 
Yule’s K, with the original intended application author identification. We exam- 
ine various measures proposed since Yule and reconsider reports made so far, 
thus overviewing the study of constancy measures. We then explain how K  is 
essentially equivalent to both an approximation of the second-order Renyi entro-
py and the correlation integral, thus indicating its profound significance within 
language science. We then empirically examine the constancy candidates within 
this new, broader context. The approximated higher-order entropy exhibited sta-
ble convergence across different languages and kinds of text. We also show, how- 
ever, that it could not identify authors, contrary to Yule’s  intention. Lastly, we 
apply K  to two unknown scripts, of the Voynich manuscript and Rongorongo, 
and show how the results support previous hypotheses about these scripts.
Rényi, A. 
(1961) On measures of entropy and information. Proceedings of the Fourth 
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematics, Statistics and Probability, 1, 
547–561.
Shannon, C. 
(1948) A  mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical 
Journal, 27, 379–423, 623–656.
QUALICO 2014
114
Tweedie, F. J., Baayen, R. H. 
(1998) How variable may a constant be? measures of lexical richness in per-
spective. Computers and the Humanities, 32, 323–352.
Yule, G. U. 
(1944) The Statistical Study of Literary Vocabulary. Cambridge University 
Press.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
115
History of words II – types of historical developments
Arjuna Tuzzi, Reinhard Köhler 
Keywords: chronological corpora, Piotrowski-
-Altmann Law, presidential addresses, word frequen-
cies
The development of the frequencies of Italian words was observed on data from 
a corpus including the end-of-year speeches of the 10 Presidents of the Italian 
Republic (1949-2012).
The data used for this study were organised in two ways: For each word (lem- 
ma-types), the frequencies were collected in (1) 10 subcorpora (one for each presi- 
dent) and in (2) 64 subcorpora (one for each year within the period, i.e. one for 
each presidential address).
The Piotrowski-Altmann Law, which was developed and used so far as a mo-
del also of the diffusion of new elements in a linguistic population, was consid- 
ered as an appropriate model of the frequency dynamics over time. Fitting the 
corresponding function to the data sets yielded very good results in most cases 
after smoothing the data by calculating moving averages. The words could be 
ascribed to several categories of dynamics and the parameters of the Piotrowski-
-Altmann Law proved a good way to cluster words portraying a similar temporal 
evolution.
References 
Altmann, G.
(1983) Das Piotrowski-Gesetz und seine Verallgemeinerungen. In: Best, K.-
H., Kohlhase, J. (eds.): Exakte Sprachwandelforschung. Göttingen: 
QUALICO 2014
116
Edition Herodot, 59–90.
Trevisani, M., Tuzzi A.
(2013) Shaping the history of words. In: Obradović I., Kelih E., Köhler R. 
(eds), Methods and Applications of Quantitative Linguistics: Selected 
papers of the VIIIth International Conference on Quantitative 
Linguistics (QUALICO), Belgrade, Serbia, April 16–19, 2012. Belgrade: 
Akademska Misao, 84–95
Tuzzi, A., Popescu, I.-I., Altmann G.
(2010) Quantitative analysis of Italian texts. Studies in Quantitative 
Linguistics, 6, Lüdenscheid, RAM-Verlag.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
117
Defying Zipf’s Law 
Marjolein Van Egmond, Sergey Avrutin
Keywords: Zipf’s Law, word frequency distributions, lex- 
ical words, text judgments 
All natural language texts are claimed to conform to Zipf ’s Law. But would it be pos- 
sible to create a text that does not conform to Zipf ’s Law? And, more importantly, 
how would people judge such a text? These are the questions that we addressed in 
the current study. We chose to adapt an existing text, namely the first 958 words 
of the Dutch novel Ik ben omringd door debielen en ik voel me goed by Stevan 
Nieuwenhuis (2005). The original text conformed to Zipf ’s Law both in all words 
and in lexical and grammatical words separately. An important criterion while 
adapting the text was to keep it grammatical. We therefore chose to change the 
word frequencies of the lexical words but not the grammatical words to prevent 
the creation of a text with a deviant syntax. The word frequency distribution of 
the adapted text had the same number of tokens as the original. The number of 
types per frequency class, however, did not follow a log-linear distribution, but 
a normal distribution, in which the average frequency of the original text had the 
highest probability. The adapted text did not differ from the original text in terms 
of sentence length, clause length, number of clauses or number of sentences. 
Two groups of students were recruited. Each group judged one version of the 
text by filling out a  questionnaire addressing a  wide range of textual aspects. 
In general, the adapted text was judged lower on aspects such as how pleasant, 
natural and varied it was. Also, reading ease and structure were rated lower. 
Interestingly, on the question ‚this text contains aberrant choices of words’ and 
‚the author uses words that I normally wouldn’t use in that way’ no difference was 
found. In addition, readers judged the original text as having a better rhythmical 
QUALICO 2014
118
pattern. Finally, respondents were explicitly asked for judgments of the variation 
in verbs, nouns, and adverbs and adjectives. For all, the variation in choice of 
words in the adapted text was rated lower than in the original text, in line with 
the adaptations that were made. From this study, we can draw two conclusions. 
The first is that it is indeed possible to construct a readable and grammatically 
correct text that does not conform to Zipf ’s Law, at least for lexical words and to 
a lesser extent to all words. For a law that is claimed to apply to any natural lan-
guage text of sufficient length this is no obvious outcome. The second conclusion 
is that readers are sensitive to this adaption, and prefer a text that does conform 
to Zipf ’s Law: they have an unconscious intuition about Zipf ’s Law in texts. We 
argue that this finding provides evidence that Zipf ’s  Law in language is a  re-
sult of the organization of the human language faculty, and not just a statistic 
idiosyncrasy.
References
Nieuwenhuis, S.
(2005) Ik ben omringd door debielen en ik voel me goed. Groningen, Uitgeverij 
Passage.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
119
Opinion target identification using thematic con-
centration of the text 
Kateřina Veselovská, Radek Čech 
Keywords: thematic concentration, opinion target 
identification, sentiment analysis, word frequency 
Opinion target identification, the task in which the evaluated entities need to be 
identified in natural language texts, is in the long term one of the crucial problems 
in the field of sentiment analysis, i.e. the task which aims to determine the attitude 
of a speaker or a writer with respect to some topic (cf. Pang and Lee 2008). In this 
paper we apply the analysis of thematic concentration of text (cf. Popescu et al. 
2009, Popescu and Altmann 2011) to detect particular targets of evaluation within 
specific domains. The promising results show that our approach has a potential to 
improve the state-of-the art sentiment classifiers significantly. The paper is based 
on the assumption that the target of the evaluation is of a hierarchical nature, 
i.e. that every target is composed of many different aspects (notebook: display, 
battery etc.), see Liu (2010). The  purpose of this contribution is to construct 
a short list of such aspects for given evaluative text. Since the current methods 
fail to find these aspects within a random text span (see e.g. Ruppenhofer et al. 
2008), it might be beneficial to consider target identification within narrowly 
focused domains, namely various product reviews. The goal of the paper is to 
implement and evaluate the quantitative method for automatic identification of 
the targets of evaluative texts within such domains. For this purpose, we decided 
to use thematic concentration of the text. This method enables us, besides other 
things, to detect words representing the main topic (or topics) of the text and, 
moreover, to quantify its (or their) thematic weight. The method is based on 
a frequency structure of text and h-point (cf., Popescu et al. 2009, chapter 6). 
QUALICO 2014
120
The actual valuation of the target is extracted using available resources, namely 
various retail servers. Since reviews of consumer products usually fall into two 
classes, full-text reviews and brief summaries of pros and cons, we can evaluate 
precision of our target detection method using simple comparison of the former 
and the latter (e.g. by intersection of sets). In other words, we confront the thematic 
words (determined by the thematic concentration analysis) obtained from the 
long reviews with the targets assigned by the customers in the short (usually one-
-word) reviews. The preliminary results concerning different reviews of cameras, 
notebooks and PC games indicate that, using thematic concentration of the text, 
the targets we obtain from the longer descriptions are the same as the ones we get 
from the users’ reviews. Having the opinion target identification task solved, we 
can easily assign corresponding polarity to the particular targets using existing 
methods and thus improve the fine-grained sentiment classification. Moreover, 
the outputs of the presented research can be applied in many other natural 
language processing tasks, such as e.g. summarization or question answering. 
References
Liu, B. 
(2010) Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. Handbook of natural language 
processing, 2, 568.
Pang, B., Lee, L.
(2008) Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends in 
information retrieval, 2, 1–2, 1–135. 
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G., Grzybek, P., Jayaram, B.D., Köhler, R., Krupa, V., 
Mačutek, J., Pustet, R., Uhlířová, L., Vidya, M.N.
(2009) Word Frequency Studies. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G. 
(2011) Thematic concentration in texts. In: Kelih, E., Levickij, V., Matskulyak, 
Y. (eds.), Issues in Quantitative Linguistics, 2. Lüdenscheid: RAM-
Verlag, 110–116. 
Ruppenhofer, J., Somasundaran, S., Wiebe, J. 
(2008) Finding the Sources and Targets of Subjective Expressions. In: Proceedings 
of LREC.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
121
Grammar efficiency and the idealization of  
parts-of-speech systems 
Relja Vulanovič, Tatjana Hrubik-Vulanovič
Keywords: parts-of-speech systems, grammar efficien-
cy, sign test
Any attempt to establish a  classification of languages based on some criteria 
has to involve a  certain level of idealization. Hengeveld’s  (1992) classification 
of parts-of-speech (PoS) systems is no exception. Regarding the seven PoS sys-
tem types he proposes, Hengeveld states that “languages at best show a strong 
tendency towards one of the types.” Hengeveld’s original classification has been 
extended to 13 types in Hengeveld, Rijkhoff, and Siewierska 2004 by the addi- 
tion of six intermediate types. Fifty languages, representing a genetically, geo- 
graphically, and typologically diverse sample, are classified in that paper. Two 
2010 papers by Hengeveld and van Lier consider 20 of those languages and describe 
their PoS systems in more detail. The description is in some cases the same as in 
(Hengeveld et al. 2004), but in some other cases there are differences which do not 
always seem to be negligible. Most of the differences are such that some parts of 
speech are omitted in the Hengeveld et al. 2004 description. A natural question 
is then whether the idealization accompanying the classification in Hengeveld et 
al. 2004 has significantly changed the overall features of the sample. In our paper, 
we answer this question by calculating grammar efficiency for each PoS system of 
interest. We choose grammar efficiency to quantitatively represent the structure 
of PoS systems because it is known that grammar efficiency correlates with PoS 
system types and, on the other hand, PoS system types correlate with other lin-
guistic properties. Therefore, we discuss 20 languages such that the PoS system of 
each is described in two, not necessarily different, ways. We calculate the grammar 
QUALICO 2014
122
efficiency of each PoS system described and get two sets of data. Then we analyze 
statistically whether the two sets of data are significantly different or not. Since 
the data are neither normally nor symmetrically distributed, we use the non- 
parametric sign test.
References
Hengeveld, K. 
(1992) Parts of speech. In: Fortescue, M., Harder, P., Kristoffersen, L. 
(eds.), Layered Structure and Reference in Functional Perspective. 
Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 29–55.
Hengeveld, K., Rijkhoff, J., and Siewierska, A. 
(2004) Parts-of-speech systems and word order. Journal of Linguistics, 40, 
527–570.
Hengeveld, K., van Lier, E.
(2010a) An implicational map of parts of speech. Linguistic Discovery, 8, 
129–156.
Hengeveld, K., van Lier, E. 
(2010b) Parts of speech and dependent clauses in functional discourse gram- 
mar. In: Ansaldo, U., Don, J., and Pfau, R. (eds.), Parts of Speech: 
Empirical and Theoretical Advances. Amsterdam, Philadelphia. John 
Benjamins, 253–285.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
123
Polyfunctionality and polysemy in Chinese
Lu Wang 
Keywords: polyfunctionality, polysemy, Chinese, parts 
of speech 
This paper makes the  first attempt to study the relationship between 
polyfunctionality (the number of parts of speech of a word) and polysemy. When 
a word acquires a new part of speech, it will have a new meaning, and maybe new 
synonyms, antonyms and associated words. Then, it has more connections with 
other words in the concept network. Such words are more activated in developing 
new meanings than monofunctional words. We hypothesize that: the more 
polyfunctionality, the more polysemy. This hypothesis is tested on data from 
Modern Chinese Dictionary (5th Edition), which includes 51,156 words (47,414 
monofunctional words, 3,742 polyfunctional words). We obtain polyfunctionality 
and the corresponding polysemy as shown in the following table. Considering that, 
if a new part of speech adds only one new meaning to the word, the relationship 
should be linear. But as seen from the table it is obviously not. Then, we remove 
the linear-like relation by dividing the polysemy with its polyfunctionality (i.e. 
polysemy per part of speech) as shown by the 3rd column of the table. The results 
show that both relationships are non-linear, and abide by power Law: a = 0.636, 
b = 1.6479, R² = 0.987 and a  = 1.1391, b = 0.3472, R² = 0.9272 respectively. 
Therefore, we can conclude: the more polyfunctionality, the more polysemy of 
each part of speech.
QUALICO 2014
124
Polyfunctionality Polysemy Polysemy / polyfunctionality
1 1.1965 1.1965
2 2.6059 1.3030
3 5.2473 1.7491
4 7.5667 1.8917
5 9.7647 1.9529
Further, we investigate the relationship between polyfunctionality and po-
lysemy of each part of speech. Words are classified into 12 parts of speech in 
Chinese: adjective, adverb, auxiliary, conjunction, interjection, noun, number, 
onomatopoeia, preposition pronoun, quantifier and verb. The data of adjective, 
adverb, auxiliary, noun, number and verb show monotonous increasing shape 
similar with the above result. However, the data of conjunction, pronoun and 
quantifier demonstrate a convex shape, and that of preposition is concave. Such 
difference indicates the meaning expansion behaviors of different parts of speech 
are not uniform. For example, verb polysemy is always dominant in polyfunc-
tional words, while conjunction contributes the least number of meanings. The 
former 6 parts of speech abide by power law y = axb. The latter four abide by Zipf-
Alekseev function y = ax(-b-cln(x)), which mathematically can transform to power 
function when parameter c = 0. Therefore, it is reasonable to adopt Zipf-Alekseev 
function as a general function. Onomatopoeia and interjection gain only 2 data 
points respectively, which are impossible to fit with.
References 
Fan, F., Altmann, G.
(2008) On meaning diversification in English. Glottometrics, 17, 69–81.
Köhler, R. 
(1986) Zur linguistischen Synergetik. Struktur und Dynamik der Lexik. 
Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Tuldava, J. 
(1998) Probleme und Methoden der quantitativ-systemischen Lexikologie. 
Trier: WVT.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
125
Hřebíček, L.
(2005) Text Laws. In: Köhler, R., Altmann, G., Piotrowski, R.G. (eds), 
Quantitative Linguistics. An International Handbook. Berlin, New 
York: de Gruyter, 348–361. 
QUALICO 2014
126
Structural complexity of Chinese characters and 
Zipf’s Law
Yanru Wang, Xinying Chen 
Keywords: structural complexity of Chinese charac-
ters, Zipf’s Law, stroke, component, Chinese 
The closest Chinese, the default example of an isolating language, gets to morphol- 
ogy is the morphemic combination of characters into words and the placement 
of aspectual markers. There is, however, another rarely explored aspect of the 
Chinese writing system: the inner structural complexity of the Chinese charac-
ters. The question addressed in this paper is how this inner-character complexity 
relates to measures that were taken by Köhler et al. (2005) and Wang (2011) the 
morphology of flectional languages. So far, the structural complexity of Chinese 
characters has been the subject of little theoretical research. The interest in charac-
ter complexity is mainly due to the need of applications of computer processing of 
Chinese characters and Chinese teaching (Bunke and Wang 1997, McBride-Chang 
et al. 2003). Most of these studies are oriented towards non-linguistics goals and 
conclusions, such as improvement in algorithms and in teaching methods or the 
difficulty of characters recognition. The rare studies addressing character com-
plexity from a theoretic point of view lack sufficient data and a sound theoretical 
standpoint (Wang 2007). The synergetic model proposed by Köhler et al. (2005) 
described the relationship between different language features, such as language 
units’ structure complexity, number of meanings, and frequency, and it has been 
proved applicable to many languages. For Chinese, Wang (2011) proved that the 
relationship between Chinese words’ polysemy and word length fits the model. If 
the same principles work for the characters, the frequency of Chinese characters 
should decline as the structural complexity of Chinese characters increases, and 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
127
the curve should fit Zipf ’s Law. Based on this hypothesis, we tested the relation bet 
-ween frequency of Chinese characters and two most common characters com-
plexity measurements. We used the information of the number of strokes and 
the number of components of the most common 3,061 Chinese characters, which 
cover about 99.43% of the original corpus in Chinese Characters’ Frequency 
Dictionary. From Dictionary of Chinese Characters’ Information and The Table 
of Basic Components of Chinese Characters, we calculated the average frequency 
of Chinese characters that share the same number of strokes or components and 
tried to use Zipf ’s, Mandelbrot’s or Joos’ function to do linear fitting. We found 
that the frequency-strokes and frequency-components relation is fitted into Joos’ 
function (respectively C=0.0096, b=1.8497, R²=0.2012; C=0.0012, b=1.6784, 
R²=0.9554). However, the former fitting is of poor quality with the small R², while 
 the latter is of good quality with a  significant R². The frequency-components 
curve is well fitted into three functions while the frequency-strokes curve is not. 
Since we believe that the frequency-structural complexity curve should follow 
Zipf ’s Law, we may conclude that the number of components, rather than stro-
kes, is a better measurement for the structural complexity of Chinese characters. 
The results of this paper can be used or tested for finding the rules of simplificati-
on of Chinese characters. We also see that the often neglected inner structure of 
Chinese characters, even without any direct relation to the phonological form of 
the character, follows linguistic patterns. This shines new light also on the exten-
sion of linguistic approaches to other domains of human cognition.
References
Bunke, H., Wang, P. S. 
(1997) Handbook of character recognition and document image analysis. 
World Scientific.
McBride-Chang, C., Shu, H., Zhou, A., Wat, C. P., Wagner, R. K. 
(2003) Morphological awareness uniquely predicts young child- 
ren’s  Chinese character recognition. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 95, 4, 743–751.
QUALICO 2014
128
Wang, G. A. 
(2007) A Handbook for 1,000 Basic Chinese Characters. Chinese University 
Press.
Köhler, R., Altmann, G., Piotrowski, R.G. (eds.)
(2005) Quantitative Linguistics. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter.
Wang, L. 
(2011) Polysemy and word length in Chinese. Glottometrics, 22, 73–84.
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
129
The influences of the word unit and the sentence length 
on the ratio of the parts of speech in Japanese
Makoto Yamazaki 
Keywords: ratio of parts of speech, sentence length, 
word unit, register, Japanese 
Kabashima (1954) pointed out that the ratio of parts of speech is determined 
by the register of the text. The details of the measurement were not given in the 
paper, but we assure that he used only one word unit and he did not include 
functional words. In this study, we tested his assertion again by a large, multi 
genre corpus – the balanced corpus of contemporary written Japanese – and 
following results were obtained. 
1) Proportions of parts of speech vary depending on the kinds of a  word 
unit. We measured the ratio of parts of speech both by a short word unit 
and a long word unit. From the observation by these two types of a word 
unit, the ratio of noun is lower when measured by a long word unit than by 
a short word unit.
2) In many registers, the ratio of parts of speech showed a similar curve 
when sentence length varies between 1 and around 10, after that area 
the curve becomes stable to a fixed ratio of each register. 
3) In the register of best-selling books and minutes of the Diet, the ratio of 
particle (functional word) is higher than the one of noun. 
4) In the correlation of the tokens of parts of speech and the sentence length, 
particle, noun, verb and auxiliary showed a high correlation coefficient 
values whereas conjunction showed a low correlation coefficient.
QUALICO 2014
130
5) The correlation of the tokens of parts of speech and the sentence varies 
depending on the register. In comparison with newspaper, the best-se-
lling books, most of which are novels, pronoun, adverb, adnominal and 
adjective have high correlation coefficient values. 
References
Kabashima, T. 
(1954) On the Ratio of Parts of Speech in Present-day Japanese and the 
Cause of its Fluctuation. Studies in the Japanese language, 18, 15–20.

 
 
 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
131
Adresses Qualico 2014
Aihara, Shunsuke
Kyushu University
Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering
744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka city 
819-0395, Fukuoka, Japan
e-mail: aihara@cl.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Andreev, Sergey 
Smolensk State University
Bakuin str.13, apt.3
214000 Smolensk, Russia
e-mail: smol.an@mail.ru
Andres, Jan
Palacký University
Faculty of Science
Dept. of Mathematical Analysis
17. listopadu 12
771 46 Olomouc, Czech Republic 
e-mail: jan.andres@upol.cz
Avrutin, Sergey
Utrecht University
UiL OTS
Trans 10
3512 JK, Utrecht, The Netherlands
e-mail: S.Avrutin@uu.nl
Bel-Enguix, Gemma 
Aix Marseille Université
CNRS-LIF
UMR 7279
Marseille, France
e-mail: gemma.belenguix@gmail.com
QUALICO 2014
132
Beliankou, Andrei 
Universität Trier
Computational Linguistics and Digital Humanities
Universitätsring 6
54294, Trier, Germany
e-mail: a.beliankou@uni-trier.de
Benešová, Martina 
Palacký University
Philosophical Faculty
Dept. of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
771 80 Olomouc, Czech Republic 
e-mail: martina.benesova@upol.cz 
Biryukov, Denis 
Palacký University
Philosophical Faculty
Dept. of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
771 80 Olomouc, Czech Republic 
e-mail: denis.biryu@gmail.com 
Bohn, Kirsten
Department of Biology
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-3258 
USA
e-mail: kbohn@bio.tamu.edu
Čech, Radek 
University of Ostrava
Faculty of Arts
Department of Czech language
Reální 5
Ostrava 701 03, Czech Republic
e-mail: cechradek@gmail.com 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
133
Charzyńska, Edyta
Uniwersytet Śląski w Katowicach
Wydział Pedagogiki i Psychologii
ul. Grażyńskiego 53/420
40-126 Katowice, Poland
e-mail: edyta.charzynska@us.edu.pl 
Chen, Heng
No.148 Tianmushan Rd., 
Xihu District, Hangzhou 310028, 
Zhejiang Province,
P.R.China.
e-mail: chenheng1003@163.com 
Chen, Xinying
Xi’an Jiaotong Universiy
School of International Study
No 28 Xianning West Road
Xi’an 710049, Shaanxi, China 
e-mail: chenxinying@mail.xjtu.edu.cn 
Dębowski, Łukasz 
Instytut Podstaw Informatyki
Polskiej Akademii Nauk
ul. Jana Kazimierza 5
01-248 Warszawa, Poland
e-mail: ldebowsk@ipipan.waw.pl
Eder, Maciej 
Pedagogical University in Kraków
Institute of Polish Studies
ul. Podchorążych 2
30-084 Kraków, Poland
e-mail: maciejeder@gmail.com
QUALICO 2014
134
Embleton, Sheila 
York University
Languages, Literatures and Linguistics
S561 Ross Building
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M3J 1P3
e-mail: embleton@yorku.ca
Fenk-Oczlon, Gertraud
Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt
Universitätsstrasse 65-67
9020 Klagenfurt, Austria
e-mail: gertraud.fenk@uni-klu.ac.at
Fenk, August
Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt
Universitätsstrasse 65-67
9020 Klagenfurt, Austria
e-mail: august.fenk@uni-klu.ac.at
Ferrer-i-Cancho, Ramon
Complexity and Quantitative Linguistic Lab,
LARCA Research Group,
Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informatics
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (UPC)
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
e-mail: rferrericancho@lsi.upc.edu
Figueredo, Giacomo P.
Departamento de Letras 
Federal University of Ouro Preto, Brazil 
Rua do Seminário, s/n 
35420-000 Mariana, Minas Gerais, MG, Brazil 
e-mail: giacomojakob@yahoo.ca
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
135
Gao, Song
School of Chinese Language and Literature
HeiLongjiang University,
China Faculty of Humanities
No.74, XueFu Road, NanGang District
Harbin City, HeiLongjiang Province
China IJKL Road 10
Harbin 150080, China
e-mail: gaos_0808@163.com
Glynn, Dylan 
University of Paris VIII 
Linguistique Anglaise, Psycholinguistique (LAPS)
2 Rue de la Liberté
93200 Saint-Denis cedex 
France
e-mail: dglynn@univ-paris8.fr
Górski, Rafał L. 
Institute of Polish Language 
Polish Academy of Sciences 
Al. Mickiewicza 31, Kraków
Poland
e-mail: rafalg@ijppan.krakow.pl
Grzybek, Peter 
Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz
Institut für Slawistik
Merangasse 70/I
8010 Graz, Austria
e-mail: peter.grzybek@uni-graz.at
Guex, Guillaume 
University of Lausanne
Faculty of Arts
Department of language and information sciences
CH-1015 Lausanne
e-mail: guillaume.guex@unil.ch
QUALICO 2014
136
Hasanaj, Belinda 
Duquesne University
EVL Lab
600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA
e-mail: hasanajb@duq.edu 
Haviger, Jiří 
Department of informatics and quant. methods
Faculty of informatics and management
University Hradec Králové
Hradecká 1249/6, Hradec Králové
e-mail: jiri.haviger@uhk.cz
Hrubik-Vulanović, Tatjana 
Kent State University at Stark
Department of Mathematical Sciences
6000 Frank Ave NW
North Canton, Ohio 44720, USA
e-mail: thrubik@kent.edu
Hua, Wang
Zhejiang University 
School of International Studies
No.866 Yuhangtang Road
Hangzhou, CN-310058, China 
e-mail: wanghuazju@163.com 
Huang, Wei
Institute of Chinese Proficiency Test and Educational Measurement 
Beijing Language and Culture University 
No. 15 Xueyuan Rd. 
Haidian District 
Beijing, 100083, China 
e-mail: huangwei@blcu.edu.cn
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
137
Juola, Patrick 
Duquesne University
EVL Lab
600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA
e-mail: juola@mathcs.duq.edu
Kelih, Emmerich 
University of Vienna
Institute for Slavic Studies 
Spitalgasse 2, Hof 3
1090 Wien, Austria
e-mail: emmerich.kelih@univie.ac.at 
Koch, Veronika 
Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz
Institut für Slawistik
Merangasse 70/I
8010 Graz, Austria
e-mail: veronik.koch@edu.uni-graz.at
Köhler, Reinhard 
University of Trier
Computerlinguistik und Digital Humanities
Universitätsring 15
Postfach 3825
54286 Trier, Germany
e-mail: koehler@uni-trier.de
Kubát, Miroslav 
Palacký University 
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: miroslav.kubat@gmail.com 
QUALICO 2014
138
Kučera, Dalibor 
Department of Pedagogy and Psychology  
Faculty of Pedagogy  
Jihočeská University in České Budějovice
Dukelská 9 (U Tří lvů)
e-mail: dkucera@pf.jcu.cz
Kuya, Aimi
Faculty of Linguistics, Philology & Phonetics
University of Oxford
Clarendon Press Centre
Walton Street
Oxford 
HG, UK
e-mail: aimi.kuya@new.ox.ac.uk
Lukin, Annabelle 
Department of Linguistics 
Faculty of Human Sciences 
Macquarie University NSW 2109 
Australia
e-mail: annabelle.lukin@mq.edu.au
Mačutek, Ján 
Comenius University
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Mlynská dolina
84248, Bratislava, Slovakia
e-mail: jmacutek@yahoo.com
Matlach, Vladimír
Palacký University 
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: v.matlach@seznam.cz
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
139
Mikros, George K. 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Department of Italian
Language and Literature
School of Philosophy
Lemesou 45
GR-15669, Athens, Greece
e-mail: gmikros@isll.uoa.gr
Milička, Jiří
Charles University
Institute of Comparative Linguistics
Faculty of Arts
Velenovského 2
Praha 10 Záběhlice 10600, Czech Republic
e-mail: milicka@centrum.cz
Moisl, Hermann 
Newcastle University
School of English
Percy Building
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU
RU, UK
e-mail: hermann.moisl@ncl.ac.uk
Motalová, Tereza 
Palacký University 
Philosophical Faculty
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: tereza.motalova@gmail.com 
Naumann, Sven
Linguistische Datenverarbeitung
FB II
Universität Trier
D-54286 Trier
e-mail: sven.naumann@me.com
QUALICO 2014
140
Pagano, Adriana S. 
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Faculdade de Letras da UFMG
Av. Antonio Carlos
6627, Pampulha, 
31270901, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
e-mail: apagano@ufmg.br
Pan, Xiaxing 
Zhejiang University 
School of Humanities
Center for the Study of Language and Cognition 
Hangzhou, China
e-mail: sumloong@hotmail.com 
Pawłowski, Adam 
University of Wrocław
Instytut Informacji Naukowej i Bibliotekoznawstwa 
pl. Uniwersytecki 9/13
50-137 Wroclaw, Poland
e-mail: apawlow@uni.wroc.pl 
Perifanos, Kostas 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Department of Linguistics
School of Philosophy
Panepistimiopoli Zografou
GR-15784 , Athens, Greece
e-mail: kostas.perifanos@gmail.com
Poddubny, Vasiliy
Tomsk State University
1 Computer Science Faculty 
Tomsk, 634050, Russian Federation
e-mail: vvpoddubny@gmail.com
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
141
Polikarpov, Anatoly 
Lomonosov Moscow State University
Faculty of Philology
Laboratory for General and Computational Lexicology and Lexicography
Moscow, 119991, Russian Federation
e-mail: anatpoli@mail.ru
Purnell, Erin 
Duquesne University
EVL Lab
600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA
e-mail: purnelle@duq.edu 
Qiu, Hui 
Zhejiang University 
School of Humanities
Center for the Study of Language and Cognition 
Hangzhou, China
e-mail: sebastianqiu@hotmail.com
Rovenchak, Andrij 
Ivan Franko National University of Lviv
Department for Theoretical Physics
12 Drahomanov St.
79005 Lviv, Ukraine
e-mail: andrij.rovenchak@gmail.com
Rybicki, Jan
Jagiellonian University
Institute of English Studies 
Ul. Mikołajska 6/12 
31-027 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: jkrybicki@gmail.com 
QUALICO 2014
142
Sanada, Haruko
Rissho University
Faculty of Economics.
4-2-16, Osaki
Shinagawaku
Tokyo 141-8602, Japan
e-mail: hsanada@ris.ac.jp
Savoy, Jacques 
University of Neuchatel 
Computer Science Department 
Rue Emile-Argand 11 
CH-2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland 
e-mail: Jacques.Savoy@unine.ch
Schusterová , Denisa 
Palacký University 
Philosophical Faculty
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: schusterovad@gmail.com 
Ščigulinská, Jana 
Palacký University 
Philosophical Faculty
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: jana.scigulinska@gmail.com
Sneller, Betsy
University of Pennsylvania
Linguistics Lab
3810 Walnut St
Philadlephia, PA 19104, United States
e-mail: esnell@sas.upenn.edu
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
143
Spáčilová, Lenka 
Palacký University 
Philosophical Faculty
Department of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
Olomouc 771 80, Czech Republic 
e-mail: lenka.spacilova@gmail.com
Steiner, Petra
Technische Universität Chemnitz 
Philosophische Fakultät 
Angewandte Sprachwissenschaft/Technikkommunikation 
09107 Chemnitz, Germany 
e-mail: petra.steiner@phil.tu-chemnitz.de 
Tanaka-Ishii, Kumiko 
Kyushu University
Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering
744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka city 
819-0395, Fukuoka, Japan
e-mail: kumiko@cl.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Tuzzi, Arjuna 
Università di Padova 
Dipartimento di Filosofia, Sociologia, Pedagogia e Psicologia Applicata 
(FISPPA) 
via M. Cesarotti, 10/12 
35123 Padova, Italy
e-mail: arjuna.tuzzi@unipd.it 
Uritescu, Dorin
York University
Glendon College, Department of French Studies
Linguistics and Language Studies Programme
2275 Bayview Ave.
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M6
e-mail: dorinu@yorku.ca
QUALICO 2014
144
van Egmond, Marjolein 
Utrecht University 
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics
Trans 10, 3512 JK Utrecht
The Netherlands
e-mail: M.vanEgmond1@uu.nl
Veselovská, Kateřina 
Charles University in Prague 
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské náměstí 25 
118 00 Prague 1, Czech Republic 
e-mail: veselovska@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
Vulanović, Relja
Kent State University at Stark
Department of Mathematical Sciences
6000 Frank Ave NW
North Canton, Ohio 44720, USA
e-mail: rvulanov@kent.edu
Wang, Lu
University of Trier 
Am Trimmelterhof 95
Trier 54296, Germany 
e-mail: wanglu-chn@hotmail.com 
Wang, Yanru 
East China Normal University
School of Psychology and Cognitive Science
No 3663 Zhongshan North Road
Putuo District
Shanghai 200062, China 
e-mail: wangyanrupsyer@gmail.com 
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
145
Wheeler, Eric S. 
York University
Faculty of Arts
Department of Languages, Literatures and Linguistics
33 Peter Street
Markham, Ontario, Canada L3P 2A5
e-mail: wheeler@ericwheeler.ca
Xanthos, Aris
University of Lausanne
Anthropole
CH–1015 Lausanne
e-mail: aris.xanthos@unil.ch
Yamazaki, Makoto 
National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics
Department of Corpus Studies
10-2, Midori-cho
Tachikawa City, 190-8561, Japan
e-mail: yamazaki@ninjal.ac.jp
Zámečník, Lukáš H. 
Palacký University
Philosophical Faculty
Dept. of General Linguistics
Křížkovského 10
771 80 Olomouc, Czech Republic 
e-mail: lukas.zamecnik@seznam.cz
QUALICO 2014
146
Register
A
accuracy of calculations  17
Arens-Altmann Law  54, 55
authorship attribution  38, 51, 52, 53,  
 59, 78, 99, 100, 101, 104, 105
B
borrowing  40, 65, 74
Burrows’s delta  101
C
case distribution  101
Catalan  19, 42
Chinese  25, 32, 33, 34, 35, 47, 63, 64,  
 65, 83, 84, 86, 87, 106, 123, 124,  
 126, 127, 128, 135, 136
classification  15, 34, 35, 42, 51, 64,  
 76, 120, 121
clustering  34, 35, 38, 39, 47, 52, 89
coding requirements  85
component  25, 32, 33, 126
compression  19, 36, 37
computational linguistics  71
computational stylistics  38
constituent  23, 62, 81, 85
construct  23, 61, 118, 119
co-occurrence  35, 102
corpus  27, 39, 48, 50, 52, 57, 59, 61,  
 73, 89, 91, 97, 98, 99, 104, 108,  
 109, 115, 127, 129
cross-linguistic correlations  42
cross-linguistic transference  59
Czech  1, 2, 13, 24, 27, 71, 83, 131,  
 132, 137, 138, 139, 142, 143,  
 144, 145
D
dental  40
dependency relation  47
dialect  41
dialectology  40
discourse analysis  104
discriminant analysis  15, 16
dissipative stochastic model  94
diversification  27, 111, 112, 124
E
English  19, 21, 22, 29, 35, 36, 42, 43,  
 51, 52, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 73, 85,  
 91, 95, 100, 105, 108, 109, 111,  
 112, 124, 139, 141
entropy  29, 30, 37, 69, 113
Eugene Onegin  15
F
film analysis  67
French  19, 54, 91, 100, 143
frequency structure  69, 119
G
gender identification  78, 79
genre classification  34, 35
German  19, 21, 42, 43, 50, 76, 85,  
 111, 112
golden section  86
grammar efficiency  121
H
Hilberg’s conjecture  36, 37
homonymy  92, 93
h-point  69, 86, 87, 119
Hungarian  85
J
Japanese  25, 73, 74, 75, 85, 102, 103,  
 129, 130, 145
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS
147
K
Krylov Law  92, 93
L
language evolution  19
language change  74, 108
language principles  45
Latin  19, 21, 40
laws for polysemic and age-polysemic  
 distributions  94
length motif  76
lexical diversity  57, 58
lexical variation  73
lexicogrammatical features  73, 89
lexicology  92, 93. 96, 141
literary translation  89, 100
loan words  65
locus  15
logistic regression  48
M
machine learning  78, 101
Manding languages (West Africa)  97
Maninka language  97, 98
manual annotation  48
Menzerath-Altmann Law  17, 18, 23,  
 24, 25, 54, 67, 68, 80, 83, 97,  
 106, 107
monosyllabism  42, 43
multivariate statistics  48
N
network analysis  34, 38
network visualization  99, 100
Nko script  97
nominality  15, 16
nonlinear dynamics  81, 82
noun  27, 73, 111, 112, 124, 129
O
Old English  111, 112
opinion target identification  119, 120
optimization of parameters  17
P
palatalization  40
part of speech  47, 123, 124
permutation ring  45
Piotrowski-Altmann Law  115
Polish  29, 51, 52, 92, 93, 100, 101,  
 133, 135
political  speech 104, 105
polyfunctionality  123, 124
polysemy  48, 49, 50, 92, 93, 94, 95,  
 123, 124, 126
postposition  102, 103
predicate-argument structure  21
presidential addresses  115
psycholinguistics  29, 71
Q
quantified gradations  40, 41
R
random sampling  57
random text  36, 69, 119
readability  29, 30, 31
register  129, 130
retranslation  89, 90
robustness  43, 57
Romanian  40, 41, 42
S
segmentation  23, 25, 83, 106
semantics  21, 27, 28, 48, 65, 81, 82
sentence length  29, 30, 54, 61, 79,  
 117, 129
semantic potential of linguistic signs  94
QUALICO 2014
148
sentence semantics  81, 82
sentiment analysis  48, 119, 120
shot length/duration  67
sign test  121, 122
sociolinguistics  73, 108
statistical testing  69, 70
stroke  32, 126
structural complexity of Chinese  
 characters  126, 127
structure information  80
style variation  32
stylometry  38, 51, 69, 99, 101
syllable  32, 33, 42, 43, 44, 86, 87,  
 98, 109
synergetic linguistics  23, 27, 32, 61
syntactic complexity  34, 61, 85
systemic functional grammar  89
T
text analysis  38, 69, 71, 72, 77, 88, 89
text judgments  117
thematic concentration  69, 119, 120
treebank  47
Twitter  78, 79
type-token relation  76
typology  42
U
Ukrainian  76
universal coding  36
V
valency  21, 102, 103
verse text  15
Vulgar Latin  40
W
word frequency  19, 20, 35, 63, 64, 65,  
 70, 99, 117, 119
word length  19, 29, 30, 32, 33, 54, 67,  
 126, 128
word meaning  81, 82
word order  43, 45, 46, 50, 52, 102,  
 122
Y
Yule’s K  113
Z
Zip-Alekseev model  86
Zipf ’s Law  19, 126
QUALICO 2014
Book of Abstracts 
Editors:
Martina Benešová
Emmerich Kelih 
Ján Mačutek
 
Executive Editor: Jiří Špička
Responsible Editor: Jana Kreiselová
Layout and Cover Design: Martina Šviráková
 
Published and printed by Palacký University, Olomouc
Křížkovského 8, 771 47 Olomouc
www.upol.cz/vup
e-mail: vup@upol.cz
 
Olomouc 2014
 
First Edition
 
ISBN 978-80-244-4096-5
č. z. 2014/315
 
Not for sale

