Using Function Words for Authorship Attribution:
Bag-Of-Words vs. Sequential Rules
Mohamed Amine Boukhaled, Jean-Gabriel Ganascia
To cite this version:
Mohamed Amine Boukhaled, Jean-Gabriel Ganascia. Using Function Words for Authorship
Attribution: Bag-Of-Words vs. Sequential Rules. The 11th International Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Processing and Cognitive Science, Oct 2014, Venice, Italy. DE GRUYTER,
Natural Language Processing and Cognitive Science Proceedings 2014, pp.115-122, 2015,
<10.1515/9781501501289.115>. <hal-01198407>
HAL Id: hal-01198407
http://hal.upmc.fr/hal-01198407
Submitted on 12 Sep 2015
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Using Function Words for Authorship Attribution: Bag-
of-Words vs. Sequential Rules 
Mohamed Amine Boukhaled, Jean-Gabriel Ganascia 
LIP6 (Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6), Université Pierre et Marie Curie and CNRS 
(UMR7606), ACASA Team, 4, place Jussieu,  
75252-PARIS Cedex 05 (France) , 
{mohamed.boukhaled, jean-gabriel.ganascia}@lip6.fr 
 
 
Abstract. Authorship attribution is the task of identifying the author 
of a given document. Various style markers have been proposed in the 
literature to deal with the authorship attribution task. Frequencies of 
function words have been shown to be very reliable and effective for this 
task. However, despite the fact that they are state-of-the-art, they basi-
cally rely on the invalid bag-of-words assumption, which stipulates that 
text is a set of independent words. In this contribution, we present a 
comparative study on using two different types of style marker based on 
function words for authorship attribution. We compare the effectiveness 
of using sequential rules of function words as style marker that do not 
relay on the bag-of-words assumption to that of the frequency of func-
tion words which does. Our results show that the frequencies of function 
words outperform the sequential rules. 
1 Introduction 
    Authorship attribution is the task of identifying the author of a given doc-
ument. The authorship attribution problem can typically be formulated as 
follows: given a set of candidate authors for whom samples of written text are 
available, the task is to assign a text of unknown authorship to one of these 
candidate authors (Stamatatos, 2009). 
This problem has been addressed mainly as a problem of multi-class dis-
crimination, or as a text categorization task (Sebastiani, 2002). Text categori-
zation is a useful way to organize large document collection. Authorship at-
tribution, as subtask of text categorization, assumes that the categorization 
scheme is based on the authorial information extracted from the documents. 
Authorship attribution is a relatively old research field. A first scientific ap-
proach to the problem was proposed in the late 19th century, in the work of 
Mendenhall in 1887, who studied the authorship of texts attributed to Bacon, 
Marlowe and Shakespeare. More recently, the problem of authorship attribu-
tion gained greater importance due to new applications in forensic analysis, 
humanities scholarship (Stamatatos, 2009). Current authorship attribution 
methods have two key steps: (1) an indexing step based on style markers is 
performed on the text using some natural language processing techniques such 
as such as tagging, parsing, and morphological analysis; then (2) an identifica-
tion step is applied using the indexed markers to determine the most likely 
authorship. An optional features selection step can be employed between these 
two key steps to determine the most relevant markers. This selection step is 
done by performing some statistical measures of relevance such us mutual in-
formation or Chi-square testing. 
The identification step involves using methods that fall mainly into two cate-
gories:  the first category includes methods that are based on statistical analy-
sis, such as principle component analysis (Burrows, 2002) or linear dis-
criminant analysis (Stamatatos et al.,  2001); the second category includes 
machine learning techniques, such as simple Markov Chain (Khmelev and 
Tweedie, 2001), Bayesian networks, support vector machines (SVMs) (Koppel 
and Schler, 2004) , (Diederich et al., 2003)) and neural networks (Ramyaa and 
Rasheed, 2004). SVMs, which have been used successfully in text categoriza-
tion and in other classification tasks, have been shown to be the most effective 
attribution method (Diederich et al., 2003). This is due to the fact that SVMs 
are less sensitive to irrelevant features in terms of degradation in accuracy, 
and permit one to handle high dimensional data instances more efficiently. 
     To achieve high authorship attribution accuracy, one should use features 
that are most likely to be independent from the topic of the text. Many style 
markers have been used for this task from early works based on features such 
as sentence length and vocabulary richness  (Yule, 1944) to more recent and 
relevant works based on function words (Holmes et al., 2001), (Zhao and 
Zobel, 2005)), punctuation marks (Baayen et al., 2002), part-of-speech (POS) 
tags (Kukushkina et al., 2001), parse trees (Gamon, 2004) and character-based 
features (Kešelj et al., 2003).   
     There is an agreement among different researchers that function words are 
the most reliable indicator of authorship. There are two main reasons for us-
ing function words in lieu of other markers. First, because of their high fre-
quency in a written text, function words are very difficult to consciously con-
trol, which minimizes the risk of false attribution. The second is that function 
words, unlike content words, are more independent from the topic or the gen-
re of the text, so one should not expect to find great differences of frequencies 
across different texts written by the same authors on different topics (Chung 
and Pennebaker, 2007).  
However, despite the fact that function word-based markers are state-of-the-
art, they are basically relying on the bag-of-words assumption, which stipu-
lates that text is a set of independent words. This approach completely ig-
nores the fact that there is a syntactic structure and latent sequential infor-
mation in the text. De Roeck (2004) has shown that frequent words, including 
function words, do not distribute homogeneously over a text. This provides 
evidence of the fact that the bag-of-words assumption is invalid. In fact, cri-
tiques have been made in the field of authorship attribution charging that 
many works are based on invalid assumptions (Rudman, 1997) and that re-
searchers are focusing on attribution techniques rather than coming up with 
new style markers that are more precise and based on less strong assumptions.  
In an effort to develop more complex yet computationally feasible stylistic 
features that are more linguistically motivated, (Hoover, 2003) pointed out 
that exploiting the sequential information existing in the text could be a 
promising line of work. He proved that frequent word sequences and colloca-
tions can be used with high reliability for stylistic attribution.  
     In this contribution, we present a comparative study on using two differ-
ent types of style marker based on function words for authorship attribution. 
Our aim is to compare the effectiveness of using a style marker that do not 
relay on the bag-of-words assumption to that of the frequency of function 
words which does. In this study, we used sequential rule of function words as 
style marker relying on the sequential information contained in structure of 
the text. We first give an overview of the sequential rule mining problem in 
section 2 and then describe our experimental setup in section 3. Finally, the 
results of the comparative study are presented in section 4. 
2 Sequential rule extraction 
    Sequential data mining is a data mining subdomain introduced by 
(Agrawal et al., 1993) which is concerned with finding interesting characteris-
tics and patterns in sequential databases. Sequential rule mining is one of the 
most important sequential data mining techniques used to extract rules de-
scribing a set of sequences. In what follows, for the sake of clarity, we will 
limit our definitions and annotations to those necessary to understand our 
experiment. 
     Considering a set of literals called items, denoted by   = {, … , }, an 
itemset is a set of items 
	 ⊆ .  A sequence  (single-item sequence) is an 
ordered list of items, denoted by 	 =	< 		. . .  >  where . . .  are items. 
 Table 1. Sequence database SDB. 
 
 
 
 
 
A sequence database  is a set of tuples	(, 	), where  is the sequence 
identifier and  a sequence. Interesting characteristics can be extracted from 
such databases using sequential rules and pattern mining  
Sequence ID Sequence 
1 
2 
3 
< a, b, d, e > 
< b, c, e > 
< a, b, d, e > 
A sequential rule :	
 ⇒ 	 is defined as a relationship between two itemsets 
 
and 	 such that  
 ∩  = ∅ . This rule can be interpreted as follow:  if the 
itemset 
  occurs in a sequence, the itemset   will occur afterward in the 
same sequence. Several algorithms have been developed to efficiently extract 
this type of rule, such as (Fournier-Viger and Tseng, 2011). For example, if 
we run this algorithm on the  containing the three sequences presented in 
Table 1, we will get as a result sequential rules, such us  ⇒ ,  with support 
equal to 2, which means that this rule is respected by two sequences in the 
 (i.e., there exist two sequences of the  where we find the item , we 
also find  and  afterward in the same sequence). 
     In our study, the text is first segmented into a set of sentences, and then 
each sentence is mapped into a sequence of function words appearing with 
order in that sentence. For example the sentence “J'aime ma maison où j'ai 
grandi.” will be mapped to < 	,,  ù, 	 > as a sequence of French function 
words, and “ ⇒  ù"  ; “ ⇒  ù, "	 are examples of sequential rules re-
spected by this sequence. The whole text will produce a sequential database. 
The rules extracted in our study represent the cadence authors follow when 
using function words in their writing. This gives us more explanatory proper-
ties about the syntactic writhing style of a given author than just what fre-
quencies of function words can do. 
2.1 Classification Scheme 
    In the current approach, each text was segmented into a set of sentences 
based on splitting done using the punctuation marks of the set 
{‘. ’, ‘! ’, ‘? ’, ‘: ’, ‘ … ’}, then function words were extracted from each sentence to 
construct a sequence. The algorithm described in (Fournier-Viger and Tseng, 
2011) was then used to extract sequential rules of function words sequences 
from each text. Each text is then represented as a vector '( of supports of 
rules, such that '( = {), )*, … , )(} is the ordered set by decreasing normalized 
frequency of occurrence of the top + rules in terms of support in the training 
set. Each text is also represented by a vector of normalized frequencies of oc-
currence of function words. The normalization of the vector of frequency rep-
resenting a given text was done by the size of the text.   
Given the classification scheme described above, we used SVMs classifier to 
derive a discriminative linear model from our data. To get a reasonable esti-
mation of the expected generalization performance, we used common 
measures: precision (,), recall (), and - score based on a 5-fold cross–
validation as follows:  
, =
./
./01/
                   (1) 
 
 =
./
./012
                   (2) 
 
-1 =
*4/
40/
                     (3) 
 
where 5, are true positives, 56 are true negatives, -6 are false negatives, and 
-, are false positives. 
3 Experimental Setup 
3.1 Data Set 
For the comparison experiment, we use texts written by: Balzac, Dumas, 
France, Gautier, Hugo, Maupassant, Proust, Sand, Sue and Zola. This choice 
was motivated by our special interest in studying the classic French literature 
of the 19th century, and the availability of electronic texts from these authors 
on the Gutenberg project website 1and in the Gallica electronic library2.  
Table 2. Statistics for the data set used in our experiment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We collected 4 novels for each author, so that the total number of novels is 
40. The next step was to divide these novels into smaller pieces of texts in 
order to have enough data instances to train the attribution algorithm.   
Researchers working on authorship attribution on literature data have been 
using different dividing strategies. For example, Hoover (2003) decided to take 
just the first 10,000 words of each novel as a single text, while Argamon and 
Levitan (2005) treated each chapter of each book as a separate text. Since we 
are considering a sentence as a sequence unit, in our experiment we chose to 
slice novels by the size of the smallest one in the collection in terms of number 
                                                          
1 http://www.gutenberg.org/ 
2 http://gallica.bnf.fr/ 
Author Name # of 
words 
# of 
texts 
Balzac, Honoré de 
Dumas, Alexandre 
France, Anatole 
Gautier, Théophile 
Hugo, Victor 
Maupassant, Guy de 
Proust, Marcel 
Sand, George 
Sue, Eugène 
Zola, Émile 
548778 
320263 
218499 
325849 
584502 
186598 
700748 
560365 
1076843 
581613 
20 
26 
21 
19 
39 
20 
38 
51 
60 
67 
of sentences.  
More information about the data set used in the experiment is presented in 
Table 2.      
4 Results 
     Results of measuring the attribution performance for the different feature 
sets presented in our experiment setup are summarized in Table 3. These re-
sults show in general a better performance when using function words fre-
quencies, which achieved a nearly perfect attribution, over features based on 
sequential rules for our corpus. 
Our study here shows that the SVMs classifier combined with features ex-
tracted using sequential data mining techniques can achieve a high attribution 
performance (That is, F1 = 0.947 for Top 400 FW-SR ). Until certain limit, 
adding more rules increases the attribution performance. 
Table 3. 5-fold cross-validation results for our data set. FW-SR refers to Sequential 
Rules  of  Functions Words. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But contrary to common sense, function-word-frequency features, which fall 
under the bag-of-word assumption known to be blind to sequential infor-
mation, outperform features extracted using sequential rule mining technique. 
In fact, they achieved nearly a perfect performance. We believe that this due 
to the presence of some parameters affecting the attribution process. These 
parameters, that need to be more deeply studied, depend on the linguistic 
character of the text, such as the syntactic and the lexical differences between 
narrative and dialogue texts.  Finally, these results are in line with previous 
works that claimed that bag-of-words-based features are very effective indica-
tor of the stylistic character of a text that can enable more accurate text at-
tribution (Argamon and Levitan, 2005). 
Feature set P R F1 
Top 100 FW-SR 0.901 0.886 0.893 
Top 200 FW-SR 0.942 0.933 0.937 
Top 300 FW-SR 0.940 0.939 0.939 
Top 400 FW-SR 0,951 0,944 0,947 
Top 500 FW-SR 0,947 0,941 0,943 
FW frequencies 0.990 0.988 0.988 
5 Conclusion 
     In this contribution, we present a comparative study on using two differ-
ent types of style marker based on function words for authorship attribution. 
We compared the effectiveness of using sequential rules of function words as 
style marker that do not relay on the bag-of-words assumption to that of the 
frequency of function words which does. To evaluate the effectiveness of these 
markers, we conducted an experiment on a classic French corpus. Our results 
show that contrary to common sense, the frequencies of function words out-
performed the sequential rules.  
     Based on the current study, we have identified several future research 
directions. First, we will explore the effectiveness of using probabilistic heuris-
tics to find a minimal sequential rule set that still allows good attribution 
performance, which can be very useful for stylistic and psycholinguistic analy-
sis. Second, this study will be expanded to include sequential patterns (n-
grams with gaps) as sequential style markers. Third, we intend to experiment 
with this new type of style markers for other languages and text sizes using 
standard corpora employed in the field at large. 
Acknowledgment 
This work was supported by French state funds managed by the ANR within 
the Investissements d'Avenir programme under reference  ANR-11-IDEX-
0004-02.  
 
References 
Agrawal, R., Imieli’nski, T., and Swami, A. (1993). Mining association rules 
between sets of items in large databases. In ACM SIGMOD Record 
(Vol. 22, pp. 207–216). 
Argamon, S., and Levitan, S. (2005). Measuring the usefulness of function 
words for authorship attribution. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference 
of the Association for Computers and the Humanities and the Associa-
tion for Literary and Linguistic Computing. 
Baayen, H., van Halteren, H., Neijt, A., and Tweedie, F. (2002). An experi-
ment in authorship attribution. In 6th JADT (pp. 29–37). 
Burrows, J. (2002). “Delta”: A measure of stylistic difference and a guide to 
likely authorship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267–287. 
Chung, C., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). The psychological functions of 
function words. Social Communication, 343–359. 
De Roeck, A., Sarkar, A., and Garthwaite, P. (2004). Frequent Term Distri-
bution Measures for Dataset Profiling. In LREC. 
Diederich, J., Kindermann, J., Leopold, E., and Paass, G. (2003). Authorship 
attribution with support vector machines. Applied Intelligence, 19(1-2), 
109–123. 
Fournier-Viger, P., and Tseng, V. S. (2011). Mining top-k sequential rules. In 
Advanced Data Mining and Applications (pp. 180–194). Springer. 
Gamon, M. (2004). Linguistic correlates of style: authorship classification with 
deep linguistic analysis features. In Proceedings of the 20th international 
conference on Computational Linguistics (p. 611). 
Holmes, D. I., Robertson, M., and Paez, R. (2001). Stephen Crane and the 
New-York Tribune: A case study in traditional and non-traditional au-
thorship attribution. Computers and the Humanities, 35(3), 315–331. 
Hoover, D. L. (2003). Frequent collocations and authorial style. Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 18(3), 261–286. 
Kešelj, V., Peng, F., Cercone, N., and Thomas, C. (2003). N-gram-based au-
thor profiles for authorship attribution. In Proceedings of the conference 
pacific association for computational linguistics, PACLING (Vol. 3, pp. 
255–264). 
Khmelev, D. V, and Tweedie, F. J. (2001). Using Markov Chains for Identifi-
cation of Writer. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 16(3), 299–307. 
Koppel, M., and Schler, J. (2004). Authorship verification as a one-class classi-
fication problem. In Proceedings of the twenty-first international confer-
ence on Machine learning (p. 62). 
Kukushkina, O. V, Polikarpov, A. A., and Khmelev, D. V. (2001). Using lit-
eral and grammatical statistics for authorship attribution. Problems of 
Information Transmission, 37(2), 172–184. 
Ramyaa, C. H., and Rasheed, K. (2004). Using machine learning techniques 
for stylometry. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine 
Learning. 
Rudman, J. (1997). The state of authorship attribution studies: Some prob-
lems and solutions. Computers and the Humanities, 31(4), 351–365. 
Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization. 
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 34(1), 1–47. 
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technolo-
gy, 60(3), 538–556. 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., and Kokkinakis, G. (2001). Computer-based 
authorship attribution without lexical measures. Computers and the 
Humanities, 35(2), 193–214. 
Yule, G. U. (1944). The statistical study of literary vocabulary. CUP Archive. 
Zhao, Y., and Zobel, J. (2005). Effective and scalable authorship attribution 
using function words. In Information Retrieval Technology (pp. 174–
189). Springer. 
 
