Combining Relevance and Genre-Related Rankings:  
an Exploratory Study 
Pavel Braslavski 
Institute of Engineering Science, RAS  
Komsomolskaya 34 
620219 Ekaterinburg, Russia 
pb@imach.uran.ru 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we examine whether it is possible to effectively 
incorporate document genre features into document relevance 
ranking. First, a method for extracting ‘seriousness’ score of a 
document using canonical discriminant analysis applied to a 
sample of functional styles is proposed. Second, effects of 
aggregating genre-related and text relevance ranks are 
considered. Evaluation of the results shows moderate positive 
effects. 
Keywords 
Relevance ranking, genre analysis, readability. 
1. Introduction 
Recent years have shown a growing interest to automatic 
genre analysis of Web documents, especially in the context 
of Web search.  
One of the possible research tasks is automatic genre 
categorization, i.e. automatic classification of documents 
into predefined set of genres (see our early study [2] and a 
comprehensive survey of the field [13]). When the genre 
palette is not very fine-grained and controversial, the 
problem can be solved with acceptable quality. However, 
when thinking of applying genre categorization to a 
commercial general-purpose search engines, the main 
problem could be to adapt or invent a suitable genre palette 
that is intuitively clear, complete, and not ambiguous for 
the majority of users. Moreover, the appropriate interface 
should be presented. Meanwhile a simple search box and a 
sorted list of search results is a standard de facto for 
millions of search engine users. The experiments [11] show 
that though most users expect genre information to be 
helpful for their Web search tasks, a straightforward 
implementation of genre-related hints doesn’t improve user 
search effectiveness significantly.  
Research on readability has its roots in 
psycholinguistics but in fact is very similar to automatic 
genre analysis. The aim is to obtain a simple measure to 
compare the comprehension complexity of texts conveying 
similar meaning using surface cues [3]. 
The paper reports on ongoing experiments aimed at 
embedding genre information into relevance ranking, 
which makes use of genre analysis transparent for the end-
user. The idea is to obtain a simple measure of document’s 
genre (similar to readability score) and embed it into 
ranking. The idea can be seen in the context of static 
ranking: to incorporate diverse page-level features that are 
independent from query into ranking scheme [10]. 
In contrast to our previous study [1] when we used 
unsupervised approach, in the current study we employ 
supervised methods for extracting genre-related scores. 
A related study is described in [6]: a ‘familiarity 
classifier’ is build upon several hundreds of documents 
manually tagged as ‘introductory’ or ‘advanced’. However, 
the method doesn’t consider topic relevance: top-20 
documents returned by a search engine are all assumed to 
be relevant to the query, which seems to be a very strong 
assumption. 
2. Data 
In this study we used two datasets of Russian documents: 
1) a small corpus of five functional styles as learning 
sample for extracting genre-related score and 2) a subset of 
reference ROMIP Web collection for experimentation and 
evaluation purposes. ROMIP stands for Russian 
Information Retrieval Evaluation Seminar which is a 
Russian TREC-like initiative [12].   
2.1 Functional Styles Sample 
We draw on the well-established in Russian linguistics 
concept of functional styles. There are five basic functional 
styles: official style, academic style, journalistic style, 
literary style, and everyday communication style. We use 
this sample only for building a genre-related score. 
We re-use a sample of 305 documents in Russian that 
was employed in our previous experiments. This sample of 
documents consisted of 50 federal acts, 54 scientific papers 
in natural sciences, 61 online news articles, 79 short stories 
by modern Russian authors, and 61 fragments of online 
chats. More details on the sample can be found in [2]. 
 
2.2 ROMIP Collection 
ROMIP Web collection contains about 600,000 HTML 
pages in Russian from the free Web hosting narod.ru and 
reflects well the diversity of Web genres. The collection is 
used in the ROMIP ad hoc retrieval track and is freely 
available upon request.  
Along the documents the collection contains a list of 
about 20 000 queries taken from a real-life search engine 
query log. Each participating system performs the whole 
set of queries over ROMIP collection. A small selection of 
queries is evaluated manually using pooling method each 
year. To increase assessors’ agreement each query is 
provided with an extended description which represent one 
of the possible query interpretations (Fig. 1). Most 
descriptions imply detailed and informative documents. 
This fact suggests that we could improve the overall search 
quality within the ROMIP framework by ranking ‘serious’ 
documents higher. We implement this approach in our 
experimental framework, however it won’t suit all real-life 
information needs obviously. (For example, homepage of 
the Sexologies journal published by Elsevier wouldn’t 
satisfy the vast majority of users asking one of the most 
frequent queries sex.) 
 
Query rb4095: common spruce 
Description: A relevant page must contain information 
about common spruce – e.g. main characteristics of 
this tree type, natural habitat, industrial use, etc.  
 
Query arw13494: memory training 
Description: Documents containing advices for human 
memory improvement, diverse techniques for memory 
training. Documents containing recipes of food 
supplements are useful. Especially important are 
documents containing detailed and precise 
instructions for those who want to train their memory. 
 
Query arw19003: are we alone in the universe? 
Description: The page must contain information on 
extraterrestrial intelligence research, existing 
hypotheses as well as different opinions on this issue. 
Figure 1. Sample ROMIP tasks: query and its description 
(originally in Russian, descriptions are used for evaluation 
purposes only) 
For our experiment, we took the results of one of the 
ROMIP’2006 participating systems which utilizes only text 
relevance methods [4]. All ROMIP documents were 
converted to plain text; no other pre-processing was 
performed. 
Our ROMIP subset contains 6,906 documents 
corresponding  to 70 evaluated search tasks. The majority 
of these documents have relevance judgments: 5393 
documents (420 relevant + 4973 non-relevant) with so-
called ‘strong’ judgments (i.e. all assessors agreed on 
judgment) and 5416 documents (1105 relevant + 4311 non-
relevant) with ‘weak’ relevance judgments (i.e. at least one 
assessor judged a document as ‘relevant’). Some tasks have 
no corresponding relevant documents (13 in case of 
‘strong’ relevance and three in case of ‘weak’ relevance). 
The rest of the documents have tag ‘can’t be judged’ or 
didn’t fall into the evaluated document pool. 
We re-ranked ROMIP subset in different ways to find 
if we can achieve a better relevance ranking if we take 
genre-related document score into account.  
3. Methods and Results 
3.1 Functional Styles and Genre Score 
Extraction 
Unfortunately, there is no widely accepted and use-proven 
readability score for Russian that would be appropriate for 
our aims. So we opted for building a ‘seriousness’ score 
based on our previous research. 
We employed the concept of functional styles, which 
is well-established in Russian linguistics. The main idea of 
the functionalist approach is the distinction between the 
language (as a symbolic system) and the speech (as the 
very process of discourse generation). According to the 
theory, the style of a text is determined mainly by the 
communication context. Five functional styles are usually 
defined: official style, academic style, journalistic style, 
everyday communication style, and literary style (although 
some scholars consider literary style, or fiction, to be a 
special case that is able to incorporate all other styles). 
More details on the theory of functional styles can be found 
in [5]. Functional styles have been subject of an early  
study on automatic stylistic analysis [8]. 
We consider five functional styles as text classes of 
gradually decreasing ‘seriousness’. The quantitative 
characteristics of the functional styles sample confirm our 
intuition (Fig. 2). Such features as average word length 
(one of the most commonly used features in different 
readability formulae) and POS distribution change 
monotonically over five styles.  
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,12
0,14
0,16
law science publ liter chat
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
6,5
7,0
7,5
adjective ratio
adverb ratio
word length
 
Figure 2. Selected characteristics  
of the functional styles sample   
Our approach is rather operational. Though it is not 
quite correct we don’t make distinction between genre and 
style assuming that both concepts relate to a higher-level 
notion of “how a given piece of information is presented” 
[9].  
We use canonical discriminant analysis to extract the 
‘seriousness’ score. The method is illustrated in Fig. 3: we 
perform feature space transformation in order to find a 
direction (a weighted sum of initial features) with the best 
separating ability between classes. The method is similar to 
principal components analysis (PCA); the difference is that 
we take class structure into account.  
 
 
Figure 3. The idea of canonical discriminant analysis  
 
 
Figure 4. Scatter-plot of the learning sample in the 1st and 2nd 
canonical roots 
We carried out trails with different genre-related easily 
computable text features. After a series of trials we opted 
for a combination of nine features. The formula for the first 
canonical root that we treat as ‘seriousness’ score is as 
follows (standardized values):  
S = -0.49x1 + 0.27x2 + 0.46x3 + 0.04x4 + 
 + 0.24x5+0.32x6 – 0.48x7 + 0.32x8 – 0.11x9,  
where 
x1 – average word length; 
x2 – smiley count; 
x3 – finite verb count; 
x4 – adjective count; 
x5 – first person pronoun count;  
x6 – expressive punctuation count; 
x7 – neuter noun count; 
x8 – adverb count; 
x9 – genitive chain count. 
The first canonical root explains 84% of sample’s 
variance (Fig. 4). 
The obtained index is similar to a readability score. 
Such corpus-based approach is low-cost, flexible, and 
easily adjustable compared to traditional methods for 
building readability scores based on reading tests. Our 
approach is similar to one described in [14]. However, we 
don’t utilize lexical features, which leads to much lower 
computational costs.  
3.2 Ranks Aggregation 
We calculated genre-related scores for our ROMIP subset. 
Relevant documents appeared to be somewhat ‘more 
serious’: averaged normalized genre scores for our ROMIP 
subset are 0.62 and 0.59 for relevant and non-relevant 
documents, respectively (the difference is significant at 
p<0.005). Then, we ranked all evaluated documents that 
were longer than five sentences according to the genre-
related score (‘serious’ documents on the top); all other 
documents preserved their initial positions.  
Next, we aggregated the obtained genre-related ranks 
(RG) with the initial keyword-relevance ranks (RY) (see [4] 
for details on RY). We used a straightforward approach to 
aggregation: new rank was computed as a linear 
combination of text relevance and genre-related ranks, i.e. 
RY +αRG. This scheme can be referred to as a simple case 
of weighted Borda method that is widely used in different 
areas, including rank aggregation for metasearch. 
It is important to note that we didn’t aim at finding an 
optimal α for the rank combination.  Although the number 
of processed documents is big enough, the number of 
document sets  (57 and 67 for ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ 
relevance, respectively) didn’t allow us to test our results 
properly and generalize well. 
For evaluation of the aggregated ranks we used rank 
displacement of relevant documents (DR). DR sums the ups 
and downs of relevant documents in the new list in 
comparison to the original one (Fig. 5). Furthermore, we 
counted up tasks with positive and negative values of DR.  
The most illustrative results were obtained on weak 
relevance judgments. Fig. 6 shows both macro- and micro-
averaged DR values depending on genre rank’s weight. The 
best macro-averaged value (0.48) is achieved at α=0.18, 
while micro-averaged DR reaches its maximum (0.26) at 
α=0.14. Fig. 7 shows the absolute numbers of tasks in the 
sample with positive vs. negative changes depending on α. 
The best relation (42 vs. 18) is achieved at α=0.07. 
1. NR 
2. R 
3. R 
4. NR 
5. NR 
1. R 
2. NR 
3. NR 
4. NR 
5. R 
+1 
–2 
 
 
Figure 5. Rank displacement of relevant (R) documents  
(for this example DR = –1) 
 
-1,5
-1,25
-1
-0,75
-0,5
-0,25
0
0,25
0,5
0
0,0
5 0,1 0,1
5 0,2 0,2
5 0,3 0,3
5 0,4 0,4
5 0,5 0,5
5 0,6 0,6
5 0,7 0,7
5 0,8 0,8
5 0,9 0,9
5 1
alpha
macro-averaged
micro-averaged
 
 
Figure 6. Averaged rank displacement of relevant documents 
(weak relevance judgments, 4846 documents in 67 sets 
processed) 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 0,5 0,6 0,7 0,8 0,9 1
alpha
positive changes
negative changes
 
 
Figure 7. Number of tasks with positive and negative DR 
 
4. Conclusion and Future Work 
Our evaluation of the aggregated ranks shows that we can 
achieve moderate improvements on our experimental data 
set in average by mixing in a small fraction of genre-related 
rank. Notably, there is a subset of queries that is very 
receptive to mixing genre ranks with traditional keyword-
relevance ranks. This fact poses a much more difficult 
problem of how to define the expected genre (or genre 
range when thinking of continuous genre index) of the 
answer based on query preprocessing. To the best of our 
knowledge the sole study on predicting user’s education 
level based on a query is [7]. We will address the problem 
in the future. 
5. Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Mikhail Ageev and Andrei 
Tselishchev for their help with data processing. We also 
thank Yandex (www.yandex.ru) for providing us with the 
experimental data. 
We thank anonymous reviewers whose comments helped 
us to improve the paper.  
6. References 
[1] Braslavski, P. and Tselishchev, A. Style-Dependent 
Document Ranking. In Proc. of the 7th Russian Conference 
on Digital Libraries RCDL’2005, Yaroslavl, Russia, 2005. 
Available online: 
http://www.rcdl2005.uniyar.ac.ru/ru/RCDL2005/papers/sek7
_1_paper.pdf   
[2] Braslavski, P. Document Style Recognition Using Shallow 
Statistical Analysis. In Proc. of the ESSLLI 2004 Workshop 
on Combining Shallow and Deep Processing for NLP, 
Nancy, France, 2004. Available online: 
http://esslli2004.loria.fr/content/readers/36.pdf  
[3] DuBay, W. H. The Principles of Readability. Available 
online: http://www.nald.ca/fulltext/readab/readab.pdf  
[4] Gulin, A., Maslov, M., and Segalovich, I. Yandex’ 
Algorithm for Text Relevance Ranking at ROMIP’2006 
[Algoritm tekstovogo ranğirovanija Jandeksa na 
ROMIP’2006] (In Russian). In Proc. of ROMIP’2006, 
Suzdal, Russia, 2006. Available online: 
http://www.romip.ru/romip2006/03_yandex.pdf 
[5] Kožina, M.N. Foundations of the Functional Stylistics (in 
Russian). [K osnovaniyam funkcional’noi stilistiki], Perm, 
1968. 
[6] Kumaran, G., Jones, R. and Madani, O. Biasing Web Search 
Results for Topic Familiarity. In Proc. of CIKM’05, 2005. 
[7] Liu, X., Croft, W. B., Oh, P. and Hart, D. Automatic 
Recognition of Reading Levels from User Queries. In Proc. 
of SIGIR’2004. 
[8] Michos, S., Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N. and Kokkinakis, G. 
Categorizing Texts By Using a Three Level Functional Style 
Description. In A. M. Rasmsay (Editor): Artificial 
Intelligence: Methodology Systems, Applications, Frontiers 
in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, Vol. 35, 1996. 
Available online: 
http://slt.wcl.ee.upatras.gr/papers/michos2.pdf 
[9] Rauber, A. and Müller-Kögler, A. Integrating Automatic 
Genre Analysis into Digital Libraries. In Proc. of the 
JCDL’2001. 
[10] Richardson, M., Prakash, A., and Brill, E. Beyond 
PageRank: Machine Learning for Static Ranking. In Proc. of 
WWW '2006. 
[11] Rosso, M.A. Using Genre To Improve Web Search. PhD 
thesis, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 2005. 
[12] Russian Information Retrieval Evaluation Seminar, 
http://romip.ru 
[13] Santini, M. State-of-the-Art on Automatic Genre 
Identification. Technical Report ITRI-04-03, Information 
Technology Research Institute, Univ. of Brighton, UK, 2004. 
Available online: ftp://ftp.itri.bton.ac.uk/reports/ITRI-04-
03.pdf 
[14] Si, L. and Callan, J. A Statistical Model for Scientific 
Readability. In Proc. of CIKM ’2001. 
