What Does the Statistical Style
Analysis of Film Involve? A Review
of Moving into Pictures. More on
Film History, Style, and Analysis
............................................................................................................................................................
Warren Buckland
Oxford Brookes University, UK
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Barry Salt. Moving into Pictures. More on Film
History, Style, and Analysis, London: Starword, 2006.
444 pp. ISBN 978-0-9509066-4-5. £18.00.
(paperback).
An immediate answer to the question stated in
my title is: ask Barry Salt. For over 30 years he has
almost single-handedly established statistical style
analysis as a research paradigm in film studies.
In 2006, he published his collected essays under
the title Moving into Pictures (Salt, 2006). This is a
large-scale anthology of forty-three of Salt’s essays
on film history, film style and statistical style
analysis. It is a large-format (8.5 by 11 inches),
double-columned volume of 444 pages, weighing
3.5 pounds, lavishly illustrated with almost 600
stills taken directly from films. Many of the essays
were written and published for specific occasions
(conferences, anthologies) and others were gener-
ated from Salt’s personal curiosity in exploring
film style.
Moving into Pictures begins autobiographically.
Salt informs us of his unusual path to the statistical
style analysis of film: he was a ballet dancer, worked
in computing in the 1950s, and studied for a PhD in
theoretical physics under David Bohm. Salt tells
us that he researched superfluid Helium and
co-authored a paper with Bohm.1 But Salt realized
‘I could have gone on being a mediocre theoretical
physicist the rest of my life’ (2006, p. 11). Instead,
he turned to his other passion, filmmaking, which
he also taught and researched. Between each paper,
Salt offers more autobiography as well as back-
ground information on who published (or did not
publish) the paper, what kind of reaction he
received, the various London institutions in which
he taught, and the conferences at which he
presented his research.
In the following pages, I give an overview of
Barry Salt’s work, culminating in a review of the
statistical papers in Moving into Pictures.
1 Rational Reconstruction
To introduce a non-film studies audience to Barry
Salt, I shall first of all ‘rationally reconstruct’ his
essay ‘The Statistical Style Analysis of Motion
Pictures’ published in Film Quarterly (1974),
before reviewing Moving into Pictures. A rational
reconstruction involves examining the conceptual
structure of and assumptions underlying Salt’s
research. I use Rudolf Botha’s (1981) philosophical
study into the conduct of inquiry to analyse the
way Salt formulates conceptual and empirical
problems and how he resolves them.2 In terms of
Correspondence:
Warren Buckland
School of Arts and
Humanities
Oxford Brookes University
UK.
E-mail:
wbuckland@brookes.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
219
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm046 Advance Access Published on 12 December 2007
my reconstruction strategies, I shall rearrange the
parts of Salt’s essay according to the four central
activities Botha identifies in formulating problems:
(1) analysing the problematic state of affairs;
(2) describing the problematic state of affairs;
(3) constructing problems; and (4) evaluating
problems with regard to well-formedness and
significance. Salt’s work is amenable to this type of
reconstruction because it clearly constitutes pro-
blem-driven research.
Although Salt does not reprint ‘Statistical Style
Analysis of Motion Pictures’ inMoving into Pictures,
it is an early and seminal statement of statistical
style analysis applied to film. Salt subsequently
developed the framework presented in this essay in
his first book Film Style and Technology (1983;
second edition 1992). ‘Statistical Style Analysis’ is a
historically important essay that was published
against the grain of the theories prevalent in film
studies in the 1970s, which applied semiotics,
Althusserian Marxism, and Lacanian psychoanalysis
to film.
1.1 Analysing the problematic state of
affairs
Under this first heading, we need to understand
the problematic state of affairs Salt addresses in
‘The Statistical Style Analysis of Motion Pictures’.
We shall investigate: what is problematic; isolate
each component of the problematic state of affairs;
determine how they are interrelated; and identify
background assumptions.
In the opening paragraph of his essay, Salt states
what is taken to be a truism in a branch of film
studies called auteur criticism—that ‘many directors
have sharply different styles that are easily recog-
nized’ (1974, p. 13). He argues that style can be
recognized in terms of form as well as content,
although in this essay he delimits his research to
film form. He conveys the problematic state of
affairs in the same paragraph:
However, just what constitutes these indi-
vidualities of style has up to now been more a
matter of loose assertion than demonstration.
(1974, p. 13)
Salt, therefore, accepts that some film directors have
‘sharply different styles’ but he finds problematic
that this style is easily recognizable. The two
interrelated components of Salt’s identification of
a problematic state of affairs are: (1) existing studies
of individual style have been vague and superficial,
based on loose assertion; and, (2) a director’s
individual style is in fact harder to recognize than
previous studies acknowledge. In other words, for
Salt, the problem of identifying a director’s individ-
ual style has not been formulated and conducted on
the correct level. At the end of the paragraph he
offers his solution:
To lend some objectivity to this area, and also
in emulation of the statistical analyses of
features of literary and musical style that have
been in progress since the thirties, the prelim-
inary work reported here has been done.
(1974, p. 13; endnote omitted)
Salt’s solution to identifying an individual director’s
style is therefore to take the problem to a whole new
level—the objectivity of statistical style analysis.
This will overcome the loose assertions of previous
studies and will reveal that identification of a
director’s individual style is a more complicated
issue than previously assumed.
From the opening paragraph we can see that
auteur criticism constitutes a major background
assumption of Salt’s essay. Auteur criticism desig-
nates the director as the single source of a film’s
coherence, intentionality, value and meaning.
It was initially formulated in Paris in the 1950s,
around the influential journal Cahiers du cinema
(edited by André Bazin). Subsequently, auteur
criticism was taken up by Movie magazine
(London) and by Andrew Sarris (New York), who
published The American Cinema: Directors and
Directions 1929–1968 (Sarris, 1968)—the auteur
critic’s bible in the English-speaking world. Sarris
presents short entries on over 200 American
directors, outlining their thematic and stylistic
traits. He organized them into a hierarchy consisting
of eleven categories, with pantheon directors at the
top and minor directors at the bottom. Sarris’s
influential work constitutes Salt’s primary point of
comparison and opposition. For Salt, statistics can
W. Buckland
220 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
be used to make auteur criticism more rigorous—
that is, detached, systematic, and explicit—thereby
correcting the loose and vague assertions auteur
critics (especially Sarris) have made in the past. Salt
states this point again in the introduction to Moving
into Pictures:
Given my scientific background, I thought
that [Sarris’s] assertions about formal style
used by particular directors could do with
more solid and detailed empirical support, and
it seemed to me that this might be provided by
an adapted version of recent work on the
statistical style analysis of music. (2006, p. 13)
Salt, therefore, brought auteur criticism in line with
one of the major aspects of statistical style analysis—
authorship attribution, at least in the way it
describes an author’s style (rather than infers who
the author might be).
1.2 Describing the problematic state
of affairs
This stage involves the accurate recording and
formal description of each element of the proble-
matic state of affairs. Under this second section
heading, we shall discuss how Salt’s essay records
and formally describes the problematic state of
affairs identified in the previous section. Describing
involves collecting data, systematizing it, and
symbolizing the results. It is rare for humanities
scholars to formally collect, systematize, and
symbolize data—these stages of research are usually
carried out informally. In particular, data are rarely
symbolized, although film historians occasionally
use a timeline to formally represent film history and
its various stages. However, collecting, systematiz-
ing, and symbolizing represent the key stages of
Barry Salt’s work.
Statistical style analysis makes auteur criticism
more explicit and systematic by focusing on the
frequency of common stylistic parameters a director
uses, rather than on a few unusual stylistic traits of a
film. Salt’s study of the frequency of common
parameters brings film analysis in line with
statistical style analyses of language and literature.
Salt’s working hypothesis is to systematically collect
data from the formal parameters of shots.
1.2.1 Collecting data
Salt collects a wide variety of data from the film’s
formal shot parameters that are under the director’s
control, and then determines what is most sig-
nificant in identifying a director’s individual style.
For Salt, style designates a set of measurable patterns
that significantly deviate from contextual norms.
He, therefore, has to establish those norms before he
can define how a director deviates from them.
In this early essay, he delimits his data collection
to the following discrete shot parameters: duration
of the shot (measured either in terms of feet or
seconds); shot scale (seven categories, from big
close-up to very long shot); and camera movement
(six categories).3 For future research he recom-
mends collecting data on camera angles (three
categories: high, low, eye level) and the more diffuse
parameter he calls the strength of a cut, ‘the
nature of shot transition from each shot to the
next’ (1974, p. 13).
For the purpose of ‘Statistical Style Analysis of
Motion Pictures’, Salt examines the style of Jean
Renoir. He analyses four of his films from the 1930s
(La Chienne [1931], Boudu Savre des Eaux [1932],
Toni [1934], and Partie de Campagne [1936]), and
compares them to eight other films (from Europe
and Hollywood), ranging from 1917 to 1946. This is
a small corpus of films, but they nonetheless
establish a minimal context in which to compare
the Renoir films. In his book Film Style and
Technology, Salt carried out statistical tests on
several thousand films.
Finally, in terms of data collection, it is impor-
tant to note that Salt collected the data from 16
and 35mm prints of the films examined on a film-
viewing machine.
1.2.2 Systematizing data and symbolizing
the results
I shall discuss these two processes together, because
Salt organizes and represents his data in one go,
using three tables and one chart: Table 1: Shot
Length Distribution; Table 2: Average Shot Length;
Table 3: Camera Movement; Chart: Closeness of
Shot (Shot scale).
The purpose of tables and charts is not only to
display the data itself, but also to show patterns and
A Review of Moving into Pictures
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 221
exceptions in the data. Tables and charts are
therefore centrally relevant to addressing Salt’s
problematic state of affairs (of accurately identifying
a director’s individual style). Whereas tables report
actual figures, charts are designed to leave a general
impression, rather than communicate exact
numbers.
In Table 1 (shot length distribution) (1974,
p. 16), Salt defines shots by referring to the celluloid
itself—that is, to the film strip’s physical length,
measured in feet. This may be the most objective
(the most physical) way to represent the data, but it
is anti-intuitive. Very few film spectators or scholars
handle celluloid (even in 1974 when the essay was
published); only a few people therefore know (for
example) what a shot defined in terms of 8 foot of
35mm celluloid actually means. Defining shots in
terms of projection time using seconds is easy to
recognize.4 To say that a shot lasts 5 seconds is more
intuitive than saying it is 8 feet long. Furthermore,
35mm and 16mm films (the two standard widths in
which films are made and distributed) cannot be
compared directly; the values from one width must
be translated into the other. This leads Salt to devise
two separate scales for Table 1—one scale for 35mm
film, one for 16mm.
Furthermore, in Table 1, Salt did not represent
individual values for shot lengths. Instead, he
grouped together several values of shot length into
seventeen classes (for 16mm films).5 Grouped data
is still accurate, but less precise than ungrouped
data. Table 1 tells us, for example, that in the 16mm
print of Renoir’s Partie de Campagne, a total of 171
shots6 fall within the range of 1–3 ½ feet. This is an
extremely broad range, into which we find a large
number of values. The film as a whole contains 397
shots, which means 43% of all values are grouped
together in the same class.
In summary, Table 1 has to be studied carefully in
order to extract useful information from it, because it
is divided into two categories (16 and 35mm films),
the units measuring the data are too specialized, and
those units are organized in unsatisfactory group-
ings. Salt soon recognized the limitations of grouping
his data, for he dropped this way of representing it in
subsequent research. Only when the reader looks
closely and carefully at the Table 1 can he or she
discern patterns and exceptions in the data. Table 1
does, therefore, address the essay’s problematic,
although it is a less than ideal way. In Renoir’s
films, we can discern from Table 1 that his four films
under discussion contain a wide distribution of shot
lengths. All but Boudu reach the end of Salt’s scale
(46þ feet), and the number of shots in the lower
ranges (1–3 ½ and 4–6 ½ feet) are lower than the
other films in the table.
Table 2 (1974, p. 17) simply lists films in the
order they were made, and gives one statistical
variable—their ASL, or Average Shot Length (the
total number of shots in a film divided by the
length of the film in seconds). In Salt’s sample, ASL
ranges from 4 seconds (Battleship Potemkin) to 21
seconds (Le Crime de Monsieur Lange). This means
that, on average, there is a change of shot every
4 seconds in Battleship Potemkin and every 21
seconds in Le Crime de Monsieur Lange. In the
Renoir sample, we would expect from Table 1 that
Renoir’s ASL to be high. Table 2 confirms this, with
the four films ranging at the high end, from 14 to 19
seconds. (The film at the highest end of the scale—
Le Crime de Monsieur Lange—is in fact another
Renoir film.)
Table 3 (1974, p. 18) is a standard table cross-
tabulating films (in rows) and six types of camera
movement (in columns). Unlike Table 1, Table 3 is
easier to read, although Salt does not calculate the
total percentage of shots in a film that contain
movement. In Renoir’s films, I have calculated from
Salt’s table that camera movement is used in
22–24% of Renoir’s shots, except Boudu that has
only 13.6% moving shots. This compares with The
Public Enemy (19%) and Le Million (5%). Films can
also be compared in terms of individual camera
movements. Salt notes, for example, that ‘the large
number of tracks [tracking shots] in La Chienne
must be noted [9%], and the very small number
(for Renoir) in Boudu [1.5%]’ (p. 18; these figures
relate to tracking shots only). The percentage
of tracking shots in Renoir’s four films averages
out at 5%.
The representation of data in charts is more
visual, for it immediately reveals patterns and
exceptions in the data. It also makes comparison
easy. Salt uses bar charts when representing
W. Buckland
222 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
shot scale, which ranges over seven variables
from big close-up to very long shot (see note 3).
He places twelve bar charts on the same page.
This enables the reader at a glance to compare
the amounts of shot types distributed in a film
(that is, we can identify the proportion of
each shot type found in each film). It also
enables us to compare shot type distribution
between films.
1.3 Constructing problems
The researcher uses concepts to resolve the
problematic state of affairs. Constructing problems
involves: phenomenological concepts (intuitive data
about the problematic states of affairs); filmic
concepts (background assumptions concerning the
nature of individual films); cinematic concepts
(background assumptions concerning the general
nature of film); and metatheoretical concepts
(reflections on the aims and nature of theoretical
inquiry). Salt’s work aims to debunk phenome-
nological concepts in favour of filmic ones. He also
has a lot to say on metatheoretical considerations,
but does not need to use cinematic concepts.
1.3.1 Phenomenological concepts
Salt criticises attempts by previous auteur critics to
resolve the problematic state of affairs (to identify a
director’s individual formal style). He argues that
such attempts are based on weak intuitions—on
vague impressions of a director’s films usually
gained from attending one or two screenings. Salt
argues in particular that, when we test Andrew
Sarris’s impressions about a director’s style, they are
found to be lacking. Salt quotes Sarris’s comparison
of Lewis Milestone’s The Front Page with Howard
Hawks’s remake His Girl Friday:
Hawksian fluidity of camera movement and
invisibility of editing was actually faster than
in Lewis Milestone’s classical montage in The
Front Page. (Sarris, quoted in Salt, 1974, p. 18)
Salt challenges Sarris’s analysis on three counts.
First, the fluidity. To Sarris’s claim that Hawks’s
camera is more fluid and faster than Milestone’s,
Salt responds: ‘objectively [The Front Page] when
analyzed has a far greater fluidity of camera
movement’ (1974, p. 18). When we check the
tracking shots in Table 3 (for it is the camera
moving about on a track that gives a film its
fluidity), we note that The Front Page is listed with
thirty-nine tracking shots against His Girl Friday’s
twenty, and sixty-five track þ pan shots against
nine. Second, the cutting rate. To Sarris’s claim that
His Girl Friday’s editing is faster, Salt responds:
‘[t]he average shot length of both movies is the
same’ (1974, p. 18). The difference between the two
films’ cutting rates is that The Front Page achieves its
average via a number of very short and a number of
very long shots, whereas His Girl Friday’s cutting is
more evenly distributed over the middle values.
Third, the classicism. Salt challenges Sarris’s claim
that The Front Page is more classical than His Girl
Friday. This claim is less descriptive and more
inferential than the other two. The concept of
‘classicism’ is the bedrock in the study of Hollywood
cinema, so a lot is at stake in trying to define it from
a statistical point of view. In a somewhat tentative
interpretation, Salt defines His Girl Friday as more
classical because its cutting rate is more even. Salt
concludes: ‘Andrew Sarris is the most perceptive
writer on the style of films, but the indulgence of his
prejudices and his reliance on screenings only can
lead him to make serious mistakes’ (1974, p. 20).
Rather than merely watch a film a couple of
times, Salt advocates that the auteur critic must
examine films carefully on a viewing-machine, and
must note down the formal parameters of each shot.
(The viewing-machine is the pre-digital age’s
equivalent to the non-linear editing systems that
professionals now use to cut films.)
1.3.2 Filmic concepts
Salt’s essay is primarily about individual films and
especially groups of films (grouped around their
directors). He analyses parameters of the shot under
the director’s control, and determines which ones
are the most useful in resolving the problematic
state of affairs.
In terms of shot length distributions (represented
in Table 1), Salt notes that ‘a considerable similarity
of overall shape is apparent’ (1974, p. 15). He
implies that the director’s intentionality does not
overtly influence shot length distribution. However,
A Review of Moving into Pictures
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 223
Salt soon revises this reading and suggests that there
are small deviations from the norm, especially in the
way some directors use very short shots and others
(such as Renoir) tend towards long shots. This is
one indication of a director’s style. (As we have
already seen, The Front Page is also notable for the
way its director combines very short and very long
shots.) Salt also concludes that, in conjunction with
other parameters, ASL may be taken as a guide to a
director’s style.
In terms of shot scale, Salt concludes that
‘Renoir’s films are more like each other with respect
to this quantity, which we shall call closeness of shot,
than they are like other directors’ films’ (1974,
p. 15). Directors such as Renoir tend to use the same
distribution of shot scale in their films, giving their
films a certain unity and distinguishing them from
the films of other directors. In other words,
frequencies of shot scale in each director’s films
tend to cluster into groups.
In terms of camera movement, Salt concludes
that they ‘do not seem, on the evidence available
so far, to be so characteristic of a director’s work
as closeness of shot’ (1974, p. 18). Renoir’s lack of
camera movement in Boudu in comparison to the
other three films in Salt’s sample partly influenced
this reading.
Salt concludes this groundbreaking early study by
noting that combining parameters can sufficiently
address and resolve the problematic state of affairs
he set himself:
At this stage it seems possible that a sufficient
characterization of formal style for the films of
a director might be obtained from their
average shot length, plus two other distribu-
tions of numbers of shots according to types
of shot (by camera closeness and movement).
(1974, p. 21)
1.3.3 Metatheoretical concepts
For Salt, research should be guided by the scientific
ideals of objectivity. To achieve this ideal, the film
scholar should not limit him/herself to analysing a
handful or films he/she just happens to like. Instead,
a large number of films (both good and bad) need
to be examined and compared with one another.
Ideally, the sample of films analysed should be
chosen randomly.
The data collected should then be subjected to
statistical analysis. Salt also subjects his data to
statistical sampling, normalizing, and grouping
(as well as significance tests). We have already
discussed grouping. Salt samples data—he examines
the first 30–40 minutes of a film (which he regards as
a representative sample) (1974, p. 14). He also
normalizes his data. Shot lengths ‘[have] been
normalized to correspond to the number there
would be if the film was 90 minutes long’ (1974,
p. 14). ‘The distributions of types of shots are
analyzed in terms of number of each type per 500
shots’ (1974, p. 15). Normalizing is obviously
important because films are of different lengths.
But why not represent all values as percentages? Salt
does not formally apply significant tests to his data.
He simply notes that ‘differences in quantities have
to be well above 10% to be significant for style
considerations’ (1974, p. 15).
1.4 Evaluating problems with regard
to well-formedness and significance
Finally, under this heading we shall investigate:
the well-formedness of problems (whether they are
solvable, based on correct assumptions, and are
clearly formulated); and the significance of problems
(which expand our existing knowledge of film).
The problematic of identifying a director’s
distinct style is significant to the extent that auteur
criticism is viable—which is still a heavily contested
assumption in film studies. Salt does not simply
enter the fray but takes the debate to an entirely new
level of analysis and attempts to resolve it using
statistics. He does not entirely resolve the issue in
‘Statistical Style Analysis of Motion Pictures’—and
never meant to. Instead, this essay represents the
beginnings of Salt’s statistical approach to auteur
criticism and film form generally.
The rejection of auteur criticism would not
invalidate Salt’s statistical style analysis, for the data
he collects on individual directors can be recontex-
tualized into broader frameworks—to characterize
the style of films genres, national cinemas, or
historical periods, which Salt carried out in Film
Style and Technology. Salt does not abandon auteur
W. Buckland
224 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
criticism in this book; he wrote a long and detailed
chapter devoted to the statistical style analysis of the
films of Max Ophuls.
In relation to expanding upon existing knowl-
edge, Salt makes significant advances by adding a
level of precision and new data that has not existed
before in film studies. Salt has made film style
amenable to powerful statistical analysis. He does
not simply resolve traditional film studies problems
using statistics (although he does that as well—see
his discussion of Sarris), but generates new
problems, methods of film analysis, and data. He
creates a whole new paradigm of film study, one
that follows the tradition of statistical style analysis
of music, language and literature.
From these early, programmatic beginnings, Salt
has continued to collect and analyse data, identify
new types of data for resolving various problematic
state of affairs, and devising new methods to analyse
that data.
2 Moving into Pictures
Moving into Pictures consists of forty-three papers
organized on the whole according to the date Salt
wrote them, with some being published for the first
time. Although this allows the reader to experience
the development of Salt’s thinking, it occasionally
makes the book disjointed, as we jump from one
topic to the next. The papers could have been
organized thematically—perhaps a section on
national cinemas, one on individual director’s
styles, a section on lighting, and so on (although
some of the papers overlap these categories). Salt
has opted for a chronological timeline held together
by his autobiographical sections. I shall limit myself
to Salt’s statistical papers.
In 1980, Salt was commissioned to write a paper
on the director Josef von Sternberg. The result,
‘Sternberg’s Heart Beats in Black and White’ (2006,
pp. 64–75), offers a straightforward statistical style
analysis of this celebrated auteur’s films from the
1930s (he is one of Sarris’s pantheon directors),7 but
also presents a rather unusual thesis.
Salt uses bar charts to represent shot scale in
Sternberg’s 1930s films, with two other films for
comparison (2006, p. 73). From these charts, Salt
discovers that Sternberg rarely uses the extreme
values of shot scale—the big close-up and the very
long shot. He used the other shot-scale values at the
same rate throughout his career.
Most of the essay is devoted to analysing abstract
visual patterns in Sternberg’s films—or, at least, one
pattern in particular: the regular alternation of light
and dark in the centre of the frame. For a director of
narrative films devoted to telling conventional
stories, using this additional aesthetic rule in the
composition of his images (one that is completely
separate from the drama) is quite a feat. Salt quotes
Sternberg saying: ‘As if I were a computing machine,
I built scene after scene to form an exact pattern’
(quoted by Salt, 2006, on p. 72). Salt takes Sternberg
at his word. He analyses The Scarlet Empress
(1934) and argues that ‘at a fixed interval of 160
frames (6.7 seconds), you can see . . . a regular
alternation between mainly light and dark tones in
the centre of the frame’ (2006, p. 64). (The film runs
through a camera and a projector at the rate of 24
frames per second.) In one scene, the rhythmic
alternation doubles to 80 frames (2006, p. 64), while
in another it shifts to 127 frames (5.3 seconds)
(2006, p. 69).
Salt reproduces over 100 frame enlargements
from The Scarlet Empress to illustrate his thesis. He
finds this patterning in Sternberg’s other films as
well – only partly realized in Underworld (1927) but
almost continuous in Morocco (1930). He argues
that this pattern has a purely aesthetic function: ‘as
far as I can see the flow of dark and light in
Sternberg’s films has no meaning in any real sense of
the word’ (2006, p. 72).
Salt’s exact quantification of this pattern is
radically anti-phenomenological, and may alienate
readers (because it implies that von Sternberg thinks
in terms of individual film frames, which are on
screen for 1/24 of a second), especially since Salt
finds no expressive purpose to this patterning.
He does qualify his figures later on, saying that
‘the pulsation is not quite completely steady at 160
frames and 127 frames’ but that ‘even this much is
in itself quite remarkable and unique’ (2006, p. 72).
He suggests that we watch Sternberg’s films at high
speed (backwards and forwards), which will take us
A Review of Moving into Pictures
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 225
out of the story and instead draw our attention to
the film’s abstract visual patterning. After reading
Salt’s essay, I saw the film at normal speed. In a few
static shots – especially those in which groups of
soldiers in alternatively light and dark uniforms ride
through the shot – a marked pulsation is discern-
ible. But under normal viewing this pattern is not
noticeable in the rest of the film. Watching a film to
look for the alternating pattern of light and dark is
like trying to focus on phonemes when listening to
someone speak. But Salt’s work does not operate on
this phenomenological level. When I speeded up the
film, watching it backwards and then forwards,
I could only discern an intermittent pulsation
(in addition to the soldiers, fifteen minutes into
the film Princess Sophia Frederica in white and
Count Alexei wearing black are shown in alternating
shots, and then we see them move around in the
same shot; at the other times, the shift in tone in the
centre of the image appears random, just a few
moments of patterning before it disappears again
into a melange of black, white, and grey). Salt
mentions that he imposes a grid upon the film
(2006, p. 72). Perhaps that grid is too rigid.
In ‘Snow White Meets Giovanni Morelli’
(2006, pp. 140–50), Salt uses the scientific con-
noisseurship of the nineteenth century art connois-
seur Giovanni Morelli (1892) to analyse the drawing
styles in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1938).
For Morelli, artistic individuality exists in those
unique habits of visualization and technical execu-
tion that are free from tradition or convention.
A major domain of a painting, such as its overall
composition, is governed by convention; it is shared
amongst many artists, including the artist’s imita-
tors (pupils, assistants, or forgers), and is therefore
not relevant for identifying individuality. Morelli
instead examined tiny details that escape convention
(and imitation), such as a painter’s rendition of ears
and hands—or part thereof, such as the earlobe and
fingernails. In these small details, convention is
relaxed and the artist’s unique (and usually invo-
luntary) habits take over. Morelli argued that an
artist’s unique habits are more noticeable in their
drawings (for they are more spontaneous) than in
their paintings. Scientific connoisseurship is similar
to stylometry to the extent that it is an empirically
grounded method for objectively attributing art-
works to artists. It is based on precise examination
and exacting analysis of the individual styles internal
to an artist’s work.
Salt’s starting point is his impression that in
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ‘Snow White’s
appearance and movement changed from sequence
to sequence’ (2006, p. 141). In his close analysis,
he discovers slight variations in the shape and
proportions of Snow White’s face from scene to
scene, indicating that different animators worked on
different scenes. In particular, he finds variation in
the eyes (their size, the distance separating them,
the shape of the eyebrows, eyelashes drawn only
halfway or fully across the eyelid), cheeks (normal
or chubby), and her nose in profile (pointy or
round). The different animators also animated
Snow White differently: ‘The way her shoulders
give little jerks upward with excitement when she
discovers the dwarf’s cottage does not occur any-
where else in the film, and the swooping trajectories
separated by poised holds as she runs through the
forest led by the animals is likewise unique’ (2006,
p. 149). Salt’s analysis is also unique in film studies
scholarship.
In the following chapter (‘Counting in Ones &
Twos’, pp. 151–60), Salt presents a series of statistics
on animation. He adds new statistical measures he
did not discuss in ‘The Statistical Style Analysis of
Motion Pictures’: the number of reverse angles (RA)
in a film, and the number of point of view (POV)
shots. (Salt first introduced these measures in 1975–
76 in essays not reproduced inMoving into Pictures.)
RA cutting refers to a pair of shots in which the
camera is pointed in the approximate opposite
direction to the preceding shot. This cutting is very
common in narrative films, particularly in the
filming of people facing and talking to one another.
The POV shot is a subset of RA cutting, in which
one of the pair of shots is taken from the optical
position of the character in the other shot (and
thereby represents that character’s visual experi-
ence). Salt notes that
Snow White has an ASL of 6.1 seconds, which
is actually faster than the norm for American
live-action features of that date, while the
usage of true RA and POVs is comparable
W. Buckland
226 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
with the norms in those areas of scene
dissection in live-action films [21 and 7%,
respectively]. In contrast, the Warner Bros.
cartoon Katnip Kollege of 1938 has an ASL of
7.6 seconds and 27% reverse angles. There are
no POV shots in it, but they were not called
for, since the film has no plot to speak of.
(2006, p. 158)
Salt defines as ‘backward’ a cartoon that has a slower
ASL than live action films of the same time (for
cutting rate increases as filmmaking became more
sophisticated), so being comparable to a live action
film is a positive evaluation. Salt shows that Shrek
(2001) has an ASL of 3.5 seconds, 43% RA, and 8%
POV shots, close to the live action figures for this
period. Notice that Salt is expressing the values as
percentages in this essay.
In ‘Early German Film: The Stylistics in
Comparative Context’ (2006, pp. 240–9), Salt asks
‘why did German audiences in 1912 watch more
American films than German films, and indeed
more than those from any other European country?’
(2006, p. 240). He suggests that American films were
better made, and sets out to prove this hypothesis
though a comparative statistical style analysis. He
collects ASLs, shot scale, RAs, POVs, and also looks
at lighting and script construction. (There is very
little camera movement in films from this period.)
He concludes that ‘the move towards faster cutting
was led by the United States, and within the
American film industry it was undoubtedly led by
D.W Griffith from 1908 onwards. . . . Ernst Lubitsch
seems to have been the first to get a grip on
American methods, as is indicated by the ASL for
Wenn Vier dasselbe tun (1917) of 8.5 seconds, not to
mention the fact that he was already using a lot
of reverse-angle cuts by this date’ (2006, pp. 244–5).
In terms of shot scale, American films of this early
period moved in closer to the action, whereas many
German films remained at a distance, with the
notable exception of Franz Hofer’s Die schwarze
Kugel (1913). In terms of RAs and POV shots, Salt
notes that they began to appear in American films
around 1911–12, but did not appear in German
films until after World War I. Salt concludes that
‘there seems to have been very little progressive
stylistic development in German films during the
war years’ (2006, p. 247). The stylistic innovations
in American films during this period made them
more appealing to German audiences (and
European audiences in general).
‘The Stylistic Analysis of Television Drama
Programs’ (2006, pp. 259–76) is a long and detailed
chapter covering 1950s American television, British
and American cop shows from the 1980s, British
soap operas from the 1990s, and Finnish TV
programmes from the 1990s. (Salt also analyses a
few episodes of Star Trek and Friends.) Television
directing is generally regarded to be an anonymous
process. One problem Salt therefore addresses is to
determine if his statistical methods can discern
directorial style in television programmes.
In general terms, Salt discovers that live television
programmes from the 1950s contain long ASLs—
some over 20 seconds, which means that a 25 minute
programme may contain less than seventy-five shots.
Salt argues that this high ASL figure is due to
production practices—these programmes were
filmed continuously with multiple cameras and
were broadcast live. When a cut did take place, this
setup allowed for a large number of RAs but no POV
shots. All of these techniques save time and
production costs, key influences on television style.
Salt studies the programmes chronologically. He
discovers that cutting rate increases through the
decades in television drama, just as it does in
cinema. But television drama’s cutting rate does not
fall below 3 seconds (Salt identifies the fastest
cutting in Baywatch, at 3.4 seconds), whereas an
ASL below 3 seconds is quite common in con-
temporary cinema (which Salt demonstrates in a
later essay, ‘The Shape of 1999’).8 An ASL above 3
seconds does not, of course, apply to all television.
What has come to be known as the ‘MTV style’ in
pop music promos contains frenetic cutting, which
is considerably faster than 3 seconds (although a
statistical analysis of ‘MTV style’ in pop music
promos has yet to be carried out).
Although all television drama imposes consider-
able production constraints on directors, giving
them little room or time to experiment, the most
significant constraints apply in soap operas, which
have ‘a very simple and uniform dramatic structure’
(2006, p. 274). Not one to miss a challenge,
A Review of Moving into Pictures
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 227
Salt therefore looks for authorial style in contem-
porary British soaps, focusing on EastEnders and
Coronation Street (with a few comments on
Brookside as well).
Salt examines the work of three EastEnders
directors from 1994—Garth Tucker, Bill Hays, and
Brian Stirner. He argues that Tucker uses more RA
cuts and less camera movement than Hays and
Stirner. Hays, unlike Tucker and Stirner, uses little
shot scale in the middle range (medium close-ups
and medium shots). Nonetheless, Hays greatly
varies shot scale throughout his scenes, which
makes his EastEnders episodes look more filmic
than the limited variation in shot scale common in
most television. Hays also has a longer ASL, and he
is able to create more complex staging in his static
shots. Hays, therefore, has a nuanced and recogniz-
able style, whereas Tucker and especially Stirner’s
directing is more standard and uniform. In this
chapter, Salt has demonstrated the usefulness of
statistical analysis in identifying a distinctive
directorial style where few researchers have thought
to look before.
In ‘The Shape of 1999: The Stylistics of American
Movies at the End of the Century’ (pp. 330–43),9
Salt applies statistical style analysis to a selection of
twenty American films made in 1999. Salt collects
data on the following (by now familiar) parameters
of these films, including: ASL, shot scale, camera
movement, RAs, and POVs. He analyses the
resulting data and compares it to data he collected
on previous decades of American filmmaking. He
concludes that contemporary American films are
made according to an increasingly restricted stylistic
norm, characterized mainly by faster cutting,
increased use of RAs, and closer shooting:
[T]he mean ASL for each period . . . can be
seen to be decreasing continuously from the
high value of 10.47 seconds in 1946–51 to 4.92
seconds in 1994–99. (2006, p. 332)
[T]here are probably more films with RA
percentages above 40% than there would have
been forty years ago. (2006, p. 334)
[T]his very heavy emphasis on the use of close
ups [in the 1990s] is unparalleled in the past.
(2006, p. 336)
The final paper I wish to review is also the most
sophisticated, from a statistical point of view. In
‘The Numbers Speak’ (2006, pp. 389–96) Salt adds
lognormal distribution, theoretical probability
curves, and correlation coefficients to the analysis
and interpretation to some of his data—in this
instance, shot lengths.10 He uses lognormal dis-
tribution to measure the distribution of shot lengths
in a film. (This type of distribution best fits the data,
at least for films with an ASL below 20 seconds.) He
also adds theoretical probability curves to his shot
length data, which represent the expected value for
each shot length (how many shots are expected to
fall into a particular shot length in a given film).
Figure 1 (from 2006, p. 391) shows the shot length
bar chart for The Adventures of Robin Hood (1938)
complete with the theoretical probability curve.
‘The Numbers Speak’ contains numerous shot
length bar charts overlaid with theoretical prob-
ability curves.
Salt then uses the correlation coefficient to com-
pare the fit between the bar charts and the theor-
etical probability curve. The main problem that Salt
therefore addresses in this paper is to calculate the fit
between actual number of shots of a given length in a
particular film, and expected number of shots. If
the fit between actual and expected values is perfect
(if the values are identical), the correlation coeffi-
cient will be 1. In The Adventures of Robin Hood, the
correlation coefficient is 0.956, an almost perfect fit
(2006, p. 393). Salt identifies several anomalies,
where a film differs significantly from the expected
number of shots. For instance, the correlation coef-
ficient for some films containing a high ASL (over 20
seconds) can be quite low. Carmen Jones (1954) has
an ASL of 46 seconds and a correlation coefficient
of just 0.206 (2006, p. 393), suggesting that the
distribution of shot lengths is not lognormal.
One final measure Salt carries out is to identify
the correlation between successive shot lengths in
a film, using the autocorrelation coefficient. In
sequences of shots of identical length, the auto-
correlation coefficient will be 1. In sequences
containing a very long followed by a very short
shot, the autocorrelation coefficient will be 1. And
for completely random succession of shot lengths,
the value will be 0. The average value Salt computes
W. Buckland
228 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
for the twenty-four films he analyses in this paper is
0.2, suggesting a weak correlation between succes-
sive shot lengths (2006, p. 396).
3 Conclusion
From his initial, tentative suggestions made in ‘The
Statistical Style Analysis of Motion Pictures’ in
1974 to ‘The Numbers Speak’ (published for the
first time), Salt’s application of statistics has settled
down to a powerful system that includes ASL, shot
scale, camera movement, RAs, POVs, lognormal
distribution, theoretical probability curves, correla-
tion coefficient, and several other measures
(although not camera angle or strength of the cut,
as he initially proposed in 1974). While auteur
criticism is always present in his research, Salt has
broadened his scope to include stylistic trends in
national cinemas from the early years up to the
present. Since his 1974 essay, Salt has continued to
make significant advances through his growing
database containing several thousand films, and
through his increasingly sophisticated application of
statistics to those films.
References
Bohm, D. and Salt, B. (1967). Collective treatment of
liquid Helium. Review of Modern Physics, 39(4).
Botha, R. (1981). The Conduct of Linguistic Inquiry: A
Systematic Introduction to the Methodology of Generative
Grammar. The Hague: Mouton.
Buckland, W. (1999). Film Semiotics. In Miller, T. and
Stam, R. (eds), A Companion to Film Theory. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers, pp. 84–104.
Buckland, W. (2001). The last word on filmic enuncia-
tion? Semiotica, 135(3–4): 211–26.
Buckland, W. (2006a). A Rational Reconstruction of
the ‘‘Cinema of Attractions’’. In Strauven, W. (ed.),
The Cinema of Attractions Reloaded. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press, pp. 41–55.
The Adventures of Robin Hood (1938)
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324252627282930313233343536373839404142434445464747 4948 50
Actual Values
Theoretical Values
Fig. 1 Number of shots with lengths (in 35mm. feet) within the given length intervals
A Review of Moving into Pictures
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 229
Buckland, W. (2006b). The death of the camera: a review
and rational reconstruction of Edward Branigan’s.
Projecting a Camera: Language-Games in Film Theory,
New Review of Film and Television Studies, 4(3): 311–30.
Morelli, G. (1892). Italian Painters: Critical Studies of
Their Works. The Borghese and Doria-Pamfili Galleries
in Rome, trans. Constance Jocelyn Ffoulkes. London:
John Murray.
Salt, B. (1974). Statistical style analysis of motion
pictures. Film Quarterly, 28(1): 13–22.
Salt, B. (1992). Film Style and Technology: History and
Analysis, second edition. London: Starword.
Salt, B. (2006). Moving into Pictures: More on Film
History, Style, and Analysis. London: Starword.
Sarris, A. (1968). The American Cinema: Directors and
Directions 1929–1968. New York: Dutton.
Notes
1 Bohm and Salt (1967).
2 I have previously used Botha’s work to analyse the
formation of problems in film theory (Buckland, 1999,
2001, 2006a, 2006b).
3 The seven shot scales are defined in terms of their
representation of the body: big close-up (shows the
head only); close-up; medium close-up; medium shot;
medium long shot; long shot (full body in the frame);
and very long shot (human figure is small in the frame).
The camera movements are: pan; tilt; pan þ tilt; track;
track þ pan; and crane.
4 This is assuming that projection time is standardized.
With sound films, it is standardized to twenty-four
frames per second (sound distortion is clearly evident
in a film is projected fractionally faster or slower),
whereas silent films are sometimes projected at variable
speeds and, because they were hand cranked, they were
sometimes made at different speeds.
5 Except at the beginning and end, the class intervals are
the same—for 16mm film, each represent values with
a 2½ feet range (1–3½ feet, 4–6½ feet, etc.). The first
interval is 0–½ foot and the last one is 46þ. Salt,
therefore, uses unequal class interval distributions.
Because it is physically larger and therefore longer, Salt
divides 35mm films into longer (6 feet) intervals.
6 The number of shots in Salt’s tables are, in fact,
derived figures, not raw figures, as I explain in the
‘Constructing problems’ section.
7 Sarris identifies the following as pantheon directors:
Charlie Chaplin, Robert Flaherty, John Ford,
D.W. Griffith, Howard Hawks, Alfred Hitchcock,
Buster Keaton, Fritz Lang, Ernst Lubitsch, F. W.
Murnau, Max Ophuls, Jean Renoir, Josef von
Sternberg, and Orson Welles. He defines them as
‘directors who have transcended their technical
problems with a personal vision of the world. To
speak any of their names is to evoke a self-contained
world with its own laws and landscapes. They were
also fortunate enough to find the proper conditions
and collaborators for the full expression of their talent’
(1968).
8 ‘[I]n the 1994-99 period the number of films with
ASLs less than 3 seconds leapt to 72 films out of the
sample of 1035’ (2006, p. 332).
9 I need to acknowledge my link to this paper, since I
commissioned Salt to write it for the journal I edit, the
New Review of Film and Television Studies, 2(1) (May
2004): 61–85.
10 Salt returns to measuring shots in terms of feet, but
the data are not grouped into classes, as they were in
‘The Statistical Style Analysis of Motion Pictures’, but
remain individual values (this makes the calculation of
the probability density more accurate).
W. Buckland
230 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
