Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus:
a methodological study applied to medieval literature
F. Cafiero
Université Paris – Sorbonne
cafiero@phare.normalesup.org
J.–B. Camps
Université Paris 1 Panthéon – Sorbonne
jean-baptiste.camps@univ-paris1.fr
Abstract - In the humanities, and particularly in history and philology, databases are often
constituted of few individuals described by many variables. In that case, the most commonly
used statistical methods often fail to prove efficient. This is particularly true in the field of
lexicometry and we encountered it in the study of our corpus of medieval occitan texts, the
vidas, in search for their possible origin and authorship. We propose therefore an agenda
to avoid this curse of dimensionality, and show how calibration and rarely used methods in
these fields such as hierarchical clustering can help divide that kind of data into coherent and
relevant subgroups.
Keywords - factor analysis, data clustering, author identification, philology.
1 A peculiar corpus: the vidas
1.1 Elements of context
Amongst the relatively small corpus of Occitan prose literature from the XIIIth century that
has survived, the vidas, alongside with the razos, constitute a corpus of roughly 225 texts,
known as the “biographies” of the troubadours, since Raynouard’s edition in 1820. Several
debates surround the question of the origin of these texts: were they performed at first or
were they created specifically to be integrated in manuscripts? Did they appear in Northern
Italy or do they come from an older Languedocian tradition? Despite the lack of medieval
unambiguous vocabulary, there is an apparent distinction between commentaries, explanation
of a specific poem (what is called a razo) and more general biographical narratives detached
from a specific work.
Written in Northern Italy during the XIIIth century, vidas seem to answer a specific need
for contextualisation, consistent with the needs of a public separated from the authors of the
poems both by time (up to more than one and a half century), space and native language.
These vidas also participate in a larger movement, linked with the transformation from an
oral tradition based on performance to a written one: organisation of the poems, classification
MASHS 2011, Marseille
in various genres, attribution to the proper authors, sometimes even philological care for the
text and its establishment. In this context, the vidas are used both to determinate once
and for all a proper and unique explanation, an exegesis of the troubadour’s poems based
on the life of the author, and also to organise the troubadours in a hierarchical fashion,
each author receiving its proper place, the esteem and rank he is entitled to by his talent
or his birth. In this transformation, the oral living tradition of troubadour’s lyric becomes
a honourable literature, and the troubadours themselves are dignified and looked upon as
respectable authors1.
The sample on which this paper focuses is composed of 52 vidas, taken from the same venetian
manuscript of the last quarter of the XIIIth century (Bibl. ap. vat., Reg. lat. 5232, known
to philologists as the chansonnier A)2. Along with other luxurious venetian manuscripts of
the same period (particularly I and K ), A uses the vida, along with a miniature — often
described as a “portrait” — to mark the beginning of the authors’ sections and to introduce
the poems3. The last datable vida in our corpus is from ca. 1274, while the date of the
earliest is uncertain. Their authorship, exact location and composition date are in question.
Only a few vidas are signed, and none are in A. Still, one of the vidas of A is attributed
by others manuscripts to a known author, Uc de Saint–Circ (†1253), one of the troubadours
having lived in Italy. He is also considered as a plausible author for several other vidas, while
to a much debated extent4.
The main purpose of this paper will be to address questions of date, authorship and manuscript
tradition, without having to develop an automated syntactic analysis, but rather by working
from a graphical and lexicometrical point of view.
1.2 Lexicometric characteristics of our corpus
The vidas are brief narratives, telling us, in a very standardised style, the life and deeds
of a troubadour, as an introduction to his poems. They are globally composed according
to the same patterns. The genre in itself is clearly recognisable, and they constitute, as
Jean Boutière stated, “un véritable genre littéraire, dont le moule, le squelette, la langue
et la phraséologie ont été si bien respectés au cours du temps qu’il serait aisé d’en faire
aujourd’hui des pastiches” [BS64, p. viii]. In fact, they are build around the same structure,
use a limited amount of words and formulae to describe the troubadours. Most of them
start with the phrase “[Troubadour’s name] si fo de [place] e fo [first designation of the
troubadour]”, and the rest of the text is, for an important part, constructed on this relatively
1For more information about vidas, see, among numerous studies [WP84] and [Men92].
2We used the edition provided by Françoise Vielliard in [LV08].
3Both the vida and the miniature are part of a metatextual apparatus, what Meneghetti calls a “un doppio
filtro metatestuale” [Men92, p. 348]
4Panvini thinks that Uc can be considered author of 36 vidas [Pan52], while Favati attributes him a majority
of the vidas and nearly all razos [Fav61]. Meneghetti considers as certain the paternity of Uc on the vidas of
Raimbaut d’Aurenga, Guillaume IX, Sordello (in the IK version) and Guilhem Figueira, and has even stated
that it was “ragionevole, quantomeno a livello di ipotesi di lavoro, considerare come composte, o almeno
rivedute, da Uc tutte le biografie contenenti allusioni ad avvenimenti anteriori al 1257” [Men92, p. 243-245],
while she recognised that historiography might have fallen, at some point, to a “furor attribuizionistico a
senso unico”, and has also proven the existence of others biographers [Men02, p. 148], contesting the stylistic
comparative approach of Guida [Gui96], potentially biased by the very standard and formulaic style of the
vidas.
Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus: a comparison of various clustering methods
standard and very scarcely missing social designation5.
The fifty–two vidas of A are usually short (a few lines), but there are some variations in
sizes (fig. 1): the shortest one (the vida of Richartz de Tarascon) has only 22 words, and the
longest one (Raimon Jordan, the viscount of Saint Antonin) has 676 words, the mean being
of 164 words (and the median of 147). Only two especially long vidas have more than 400
words and they correspond to very specific stories — Guillem de Cabestaing and the story of
the eaten heart, Raimon Jordan and his impossible love. While the unusual length of these
last vidas might be an indication as to their somewhat later composition, the length of the
vidas in itself is not necessarily always a clue as to his possible author or date. In many cases,
the length of the text is determined by the available sources (mostly the poems attributed
to the troubadour in question), and also to the fame of the troubadour, the esteem he was
given, and his rank in troubadour lyric.
Figure 1: Number of words and number of different word–forms
In order to analyse those 52 texts, we had to choose between standardising and/or lemmatis-
ing, or working directly from the word–forms. Classifying texts depending on the vocabulary
they use, and thus, working on lemmatised word forms, is a common approach, useful for
content or theme–based clustering, but is not always the more relevant [EBTMB05], and es-
pecially not here, given the lexical characteristics of the vidas. On the contrary, our goal was
to identify all the elements constituting of clusters in the corpus: groupings due to branches
of the tradition, to scribes, to diatopic or diachronic variations, to possible authors, and not
to a priori determine which variations were relevant or not. This led us to work on both
unlemmatised and unstandardised word forms, as any graphical variation could be an indica-
tion of the origin of a text and of its place in the manuscript tradition. For the same reasons,
we chose not to ex ante rule out the “stop words” or “function words”, as variations through
their usage could also be of interest regarding matters of style or morphosyntactic variations,
and be helpful for author identification [Sta09, AL05].
This is why the vidas have simply been transformed in a raw word frequency table6. Conse-
5In A, there is only one vida with no such designation, the vida of Marcabru, and it is justified by the fact
that he was, as a child, “gitaz a la porta d’un ric home, ni anc non saup hom qui.l fo ni don” (was thrown at
the door of a powerful man, and nobody ever knew who he was nor whence he came). In the other texts, this
designation can be present either in its more simple form “he was a. . . ” or under the filiation form, “he was
the son of. . . ” for instance. For a more detailed analyse of the structure, see [Cam12]
6Informations relative to sentences’ length and use of punctuation were not relevant, since both of these
MASHS 2011, Marseille
quently, we had a total for all 52 texts of 1480 different word–forms. In each text, we count
between 14 and 296 of them, with a mean of 92 (fig. 1). The number of different word–forms
is obviously affected by the total number of words, and we can observe that they are linked
by a non–linear relationship . This relationship seems to fit the intuition that, as though the
number of words a text may contain is virtually infinite, the vocabulary a language possesses
is finite. Consequently, the curviness of this relationship testifies of the amount of vocabulary
that an author had at his disposal.This is particularly true in the case of the vidas and re-
veals the standardisation of their vocabulary. The abnormal individual (the same abnormal
individual as in the boxplot, the vida of the viscount of Saint Antonin) possesses properties
that substantially differ from the other texts7. Had we done the nonlinear regression again
while ignoring it, we would have had a more efficient model even (dashed line on fig. 2).
Figure 2: Linear and nonlinear regression of the number of different word–forms by the total
number of words
1.3 Term weighting and calibration
Two important characteristics of our corpus are the limited amount of vocabulary, direct
function of the total number of words, and the relatively important variation in sizes between
texts, a known difficulty in term of text classification and authorship attribution methods
[SG06]. Thus, we had to seek a way to avoid the risk of seeing our clusters only determined
by the size of the texts. To solve this problem, we considered using some form of differential
term weighting [Dum91], but the most popular one (including Dumais’) are built to be useful
in a theme–based approach that was not ours. To compensate specifically for the different
lengths of the texts, we adopted a very basic weighting (let Fij be the frequency of term
are conditioned by the choices of the modern editor, not the author of the text.
7The wider vocabulary used by this text seems to sustain its classification in a somewhat different group
than the other vidas, being less of a short biographical narrative and more of developed narrative, announcing
italian XIVth century novellas (such as those contained in Boccaccio’s Decameron).
Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus: a comparison of various clustering methods
i in document j and Tj the total of terms in document j,
Fij
Tj ). This was allowed by the
relationship between the number of word–forms and total number of words: length of the
texts would still be rendered by their lexical richness, while not being the most important
element of all subsequent analysis.
Another problem came from the difficulty to judge, ex ante as well as ex post, which method
would be the most helpful to divide our corpus into relevant subgroups. This is why we
constituted a control sample (see table 1 in appendix), composed of twelve poems all extracted
from manuscript A as well8. For this control sample to be efficient we chose texts from
four different troubadours. We picked them in order to have two strongly different groups
(an earlier Northern Occitan group and a later Northern Italian group), and so that the
two troubadours in each group, while close to the other, would still be separated from him
in terms of chronology and geography. The first group is composed of the auvergnat Peire
d’Alvernha (fl. ca. 1150–1170) and the limousin Guiraut de Bornelh (†1215); the second group
is composed of Uc de Saint Circ (†1253), troubadour born in Quercy but having composed
most of his work in Northern Italy, and the Venetian Bertolome Zorzi (†ca. 1273).
2 A first approach: Factor Analysis
2.1 Homogeneity or dimensionality?
Our first approach was to use factor analysis. In addition to the more usual Principal compo-
nents analysis, we computed a Correspondence analysis. While partly similar in its principles
to Pearson’s PCA, it applies the same ponderation to lines and columns (the χ2) and is par-
ticularly relevant for the study of sets of homogeneous data, contingency tables in general,
and frequency tables in particular.
It seems likely that we could experience here what has been known since Bellman, and proved
frequent in search for nearest neighbours [MS79], as the “curse of multi-dimensionality”. In-
deed, our corpus is composed of quite few individuals, of which we study many characteristics,
each word of the frequency table being a characteristic of the text. This geometrically trans-
lates into drawing very scarce points in a high-dimensional space, ending up very often with
unsuccessful results in terms of relevance as well as of contrast generated [ECM01]. Yet,
there are possibilities that a technique such as factor analysis would work. It has been shown
that increasing dimensionality can even help — as long as the added dimensions are relevant
[HKK+10]. Are the number of occurrences of each word relevant dimensions? The only way
to know it was to try to compute with them and see the results.
But, both PCA and CA gave out unusable results. Calibration of the CA (fig. 3) has not
been efficient at all to exhibit which were the relevant groups in our control sample. In
PCA, calibration was not efficient either, and the graph associated to our corpus displayed
an indistinct mass of individuals centred on the first plane, with two abnormal individuals,
corresponding to the two longer texts (already the abnormal individuals on fig. 1 left), with
an eigenvalues barplot showing mostly one meaningful axis.
8One must notice that, while these texts are found in the same manuscript, in the same language, they are
still different from the vidas: they are in verse, not in prosa, and have somewhat different lexical properties
as to their lexical richness. But without a corpus of clearly attributed vidas, they were our least biased
alternative.
MASHS 2011, Marseille
Figure 3: CA and PCA on weighted word frequencies of the control sample
In order to refine this analysis, different forms of Differential term weighting have been
applied on the frequency table [Dum91]. Yet, this method failed to allow more contrast and
readability9.
2.2 Reducing dimensionality
How to explain this failure? First, this could come from our data: the individuals could
simply be “too close to call” if they form distinct and coherent subgroups. This would be
in favour of the hypothesis of one single author for most of the vidas. But, it could also
come from the dimensionality problem that we previously evoked. In order to avoid it, we
implemented two methods.
First, we tried to recompute our two factor analysis, taking into account only the first hundred
more frequent words. Yet, this method failed to correctly sort our control sample. To
avoid dimensionality problems, we then implemented a non–metric Multidimensional Scaling
(MDS). By focusing thus only on relative positions of the points, and no more on absolute
position, we reduce the dimensionality problem. If some groups are isolated this way, this
would mean that our problem was a dimensionality problem, and not the mere expression of
an almost perfect homogeneity of our corpus.
This procedure behaves quite well on our test corpus, and actually separates some groups
from a core of texts in the vidas, which seems to show that there are indeed distinct parts in
our corpus. Yet, the visualisation hardly helps us to determine what are the more relevant
groupings of these texts.
3 Hierarchical clustering
3.1 Determining an agenda
In order to obtain results on questions relative to authorship, scribes, and manuscript tradi-
tion, we needed to operate a clear–cut classification of the individuals, to establish proximities
9A common solution, rather bypassing the difficulty than confronting it, would be to redo the analysis
ignoring these individuals. But, such a method would inevitably result in a loss of information and would
deprive us from a complete apprehension of the corpus.
Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus: a comparison of various clustering methods
Figure 4: Non-Metric multidimensional scaling with word weighting on our control sample
and on the vidas
and distances between texts. This is why we sought a method that could allow us to represent
these proximities and distances in an eye–readable fashion, while still being able to render the
hierarchy of the distances, and the abnormal individuals. We a priori ruled out methods such
as K–means or subspace clustering, as our data set was small enough (only 52 individuals) for
more complex methods, allowing us not to determine ex ante how many subsets we wanted
to draw in our corpus. The same goes for neural networks such as Kohonen self–organising
map [Koh82], which implies the same constraint — having to choose the number of desired
clusters — with no obvious advantages. We focused however on non–supervised learning,
allowing us to gather the more similar individuals in relevant subsets or “clusters”, without
having to be given any characteristics of what these clusters should be. The method we have
chosen to use is a classic type of non–supervised learning called hierarchical clustering.
In the agglomerative version of this method, each individual is aggregated to another single
individual considered the “closest”, according to a criterion the user has to choose. Then, the
clusters formed at this first step are once again aggregated to the closest cluster, the operation
being repeated till the clusters are gathered in a unique group containing all the individuals.
As we do not define a priori constraints on what the common features of individuals belonging
to a cluster should be, similarity is here understood as a mere matter of distance between
individuals: the closer you are on a geometrical viewpoint, the more similar you are.
We then used our test corpus to understand which precise technique of hierarchical clus-
tering to use. Several decisions had to be taken: which distance measure? which linkage
criterion? do we use our term weighting or not? do we use all the word–forms, or should
we restrain to a hundred of them, as has often proved efficient in authorship attribution
methods [AL05, Sta09]? We ran many possible combinations10 of these decisions to see
10We tested combinations of: single-likage, complete-linkage, weighted-average linkage, UPGMA, McQuitty
and Ward’s method as linkage criterion; euclidean, maximum and Manhattan as distance; with all the words,
MASHS 2011, Marseille
Figure 5: HC of control corpus, computed for the 100 most frequent words, with Manhattan
distances, Ward’s method and weighted terms
which would divide best our test corpus — the better division being to gather texts this way:
{{1, 2, 3}, {4, 5, 6}}, {{7, 8, 9}, {10, 11, 12}}. Our better fit was obtained when using only the
100 most common forms, with Manhattan distance11 , Ward’s method12 and weighted terms.
This is why we applied this method to our vidas corpus (fig. 6).
3.2 Results
The principal division of the corpus, in two subgroups, unites apart for the majority of the
texts a subgroup composed of very short texts (median of 39 words, mean of 36.9 against
respectively 179.0 and 194.1 for the main group), that are only attested in the Venetian
manuscript group (ABIK, H )13. The more characteristic words for this subgroup are the
three words present most of the time in the first sentence of the vidas, si fo de (prob. close to
0 for de and si, p = 1e−04 for fo), and the word sirventes (p = 3e−04) which can be explained
by the fact that these very short vidas are more frequent for authors of the sirventes’ section.
As for repulsions, we find per (p = 0.0071), que (p = 7e− 04), el (p = 1e− 04), three terms
characteristic of a more developed syntax and longer texts.
The subdivision in two of the main group does not seem to relate to branches of the manuscript
tradition. It seems to oppose, on one hand less detailed vidas, some of them concerning the
the hundred most common and the two hundred most common; with and without our weighting.
11Manhattan distance is a concept coming from “taxicab geometry”, where the distance between two points
is the sum of the absolute differences of their coordinates:
∑n
i=1 |xi − yi|
12In Ward’s method, an individual is not necessarily linked with the closest neighbour; pairs are formed so
that they make the least increase to the error sum of squares at each step [War63].
13One should also add N2, an Italian XVIth century copy, probably by the humanist Giulio Camillo, of,
according to [Poe05], several medieval sources, likely including Venetian chansonniers.
Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus: a comparison of various clustering methods
Figure 6: HC of the vidas’ corpus, computed for the 100 most frequent words, with Manhattan
distances, Ward’s method and weighted terms
older troubadours whose personal life was less known (Peire d’Alvernha †1170, Marcabrus
†1150) but whose literary importance was great, and on the other hand vidas partially con-
cerning later troubadours, or more “romanced” vidas (Guillem de Cabestanh, the viscount
of Saint Antonin, Jaufre Rudel), revolving more around love stories. This is rendered by the
opposition between the more distinctive use of the terms saup (p = 0.0031), ben (p = 0.004)
and trobar (p = 0.0485) for the first group, and ella (p = 0.0015) and amor (p = 0.0353) for
the second. This opposition in how the vidas summarise the lives of the troubadours, may
also be the result of a chronological evolution, from texts centred around the literary value
of the authors to more narrative texts, with a greater interest for more personal aspects or
romance.
Tough detailing the content of every subgroup would require an article in itself, we will now
focus on one of the smaller very homogeneous clusters, build around the vidas of Folquet De
Marseilla, Uc de Saint Circ, Cadenetz, Raimbaut de Vacqueyras, Bernart de Ventadorn and
Aimerics de Peguilhan14. This cluster contains a vida (the vida of Bernart de Ventadorn)
which is signed, in the manuscripts IKERSg by Uc de Saint Circ, as well as the vida of
Uc de Saint Circ himself, which might be an autobiography. Close to this group are the
vidas of the italians Bertolome Zorzi and Sordel, two troubadours close geographically and
chronologically to Uc, as well as some of the perhaps later vidas that are, as we said, getting
closer to novellas (Guilhem de Cabestanh, the viscount of Saint Antonin). Moreover, the
vidas of this cluster are characterised by precise and detailed informations (vida of Folquet
de Marseilla for instance), and frequent use of the first person (which is elsewhere seldom
14Other analyses have demonstrated that the presence of Peire Rogier in this cluster is more subject to
variations, while the rest of the group is robust.
MASHS 2011, Marseille
present) and of direct testimony15. A closer look a the presence and absence of mentions of
death allows us to propose a dating contained between 1238 and 125316. It is then possible,
tough of course not absolutely certain, that the vidas of this subgroup are the ones originally
written by Uc de Saint Circ himself.
Though cutting the dendrogram at an uniform arbitrary height is customary, the tests on the
control corpus tend to demonstrate that it is not always the preferable choice — especially
when precise distinctions between clusters are needed — and that the observation of the
shape of the dendrogram itself, whenever allowed by a limited amount of individuals, may
be a more relevant solution. In any case, one should not be satisfied by the analysis of the
clusters generated by a single cut of the dendrogram. As different divisions may contain
different informations (perhaps even translate different dimensions), one should probably
try to analyse both the main divisions of the population up above and the more consistent
subgroups in the bottom. For instance, in our control sample, the main division is relative to
a chronological and geographical repartition, while finer divisions are linked to the authorship
of the texts.
As such, in the case of homogeneous corpus with few individuals and possibly a lot of variables,
the heuristic value of Hierarchical Clustering can be put forward in comparison to other,
more widespread, methods. In particular, in the study of the “genetic” of texts, the way the
divisions inside the corpus are showed seems easier to read and better adapted to the nature
of the data than most other clustering or neural networks methods.
References
[AL05] S. Argamon and S. Levitan. Measuring the usefulness of function words for
authorship attribution. In In Proceedings of the 2005 ACH/ALLC Conference,
2005.
[BS64] J. Boutière and A.–H. Schutz. Biographies des Troubadours. Textes provençaux
des XIIIe et XIVe siècles. Paris, 1964. 2e édition.
[Cam12] J.-B. Camps. Peirols si fo uns paubres cavalliers : lire les troubadours dans les
chansonniers A, I et K. Medioevo romanzo, [à parâıtre], 2012.
[Dum91] S. T. Dumais. Improving the retrieval of information from external sources.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 23(2):229–236, 1991.
[EBTMB05] M. El-Bèze, J.-M. Torres-Moreno, and F. Béchet. Peut-on rendre automa-
tiquement à César ce qui lui appartient ? Application au jeu du Chirand-
Mitterrac. In Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN 2005) –
Atelier DEFT’05, volume 2, pages 125–134, 2005.
[ECM01] R. Baeza-Yates E. Chavez, B. Navarro and J. Marroqúın. Searching in metric
spaces. ACM Computing Surveys, 33:273–321, 2001.
15Vidas of Folquet(“q’ieu vos ditz”), Cadenetz (“E tot lo sieu faich eu saubi per vertat per auzir et per
vezer”), Bernart de Ventadorn (“E tot so qu’ieu vos ai dich de lui si me comtet e.m dis lo vescoms n’Ebles de
Ventedorn, que fo fills de la vescomtessa q’en Bernartz amet tant”).
161238 corresponds to the terminus ante quem for Cadenetz entrance in the order of the Hospital, which is
mentioned; 1253 is the death of Uc de Saint Circ, not mentioned in this manuscript (tough mentioned in IK ).
Setting bounds in an homogeneous corpus: a comparison of various clustering methods
[Fav61] G. Favati. Le Biografie trovadoriche : testi provenziali dei secc. XIII et XIV.
Bologne, 1961.
[Gui96] S. Guida. Ricerche sull’attività biografica di Uc de Saint Circ. In Primi approcci
a Uc de Saint Circ, pages 75–144. Soveria Mannelli, Rubbetino, 1996.
[HKK+10] M.E. Houle, H.-P. Kriegel, P. Kröger, E. Schubert, and A. Zimek. Can shared-
neighbor distances defeat the curse of dimensionality? In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management,
page 482–500, Heidelberg, Germany, 2010. Springer.
[Koh82] T. Kohonen. Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature maps.
Biological cybernetics, 43(1):59–69, 1982.
[LV08] J.–L. Lemâıtre and F. Vielliard. Portraits de troubadours : initiales du chan-
sonnier provençal A (Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vat. Lat. 5232). Città del
Vaticano, 2008.
[Men92] M.–L. Meneghetti. Il Pubblico dei Trovatori, ricezione e riuso dei testi lirici
cortesi fino al XIV secolo. Turin, 1992.
[Men02] M.–L. Meneghetti. Uc e gli altri : sulla paternità delle biografie trobadoriche.
In Il Racconto nel Medioevo romanzo, pages 147–162, Bologna, 2002. Pàtron.
[MS79] R.B. Marimont and M.B. Shapiro. Nearest neighbour searches and the curse
of dimensionality. Journal of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications,
24:59–70, 1979.
[Pan52] Bruno Panvini. Le Biografie provenzali. Valore e attendibilità. Firenze, 1952.
[Poe05] Elizabeth W. Poe. A Re-Evaluation of troubadour manuscript N2. Revue belge
de philologie et d’histoire, 83(3):819–828, 2005.
[SG06] C. Sanderson and S. Guenter. Short text authorship attribution via sequence
kernels, markov chains and author unmasking: an investigation. In Proceedings
of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP’06, page 482–491, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2006. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
[Sta09] E. Stamatatos. A Survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of
the American Society for information Science and Technology, 60(3):538–556,
2009.
[War63] J. H Ward, Jr. Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. Journal
of the American statistical association, 58(301):236–244, 1963.
[WP84] E. Wilson Poe. From Poetry to Prose in Old Provençal: The Emergence of the
Vidas, the Razos and the Razos de Trobar. Birmingham, 1984.
MASHS 2011, Marseille
A The control sample
Number Incipit BdT Attribution in ms.
1 Bella mes la flors daiguilen 323.5 Peire d’Alvernha
2 En estiu qan cridal iais 323.17 Peire d’Alvernha
3 Abans qeil blanc puoi sion uert. 323.1 Peire d’Alvernha
4 Er auziretz encabalitz chantars 242.17 Guiraut de Bornelh
5 Ben mera bels chantars 242.20 Guiraut de Bornelh
6 A ben chantar couen amars 242.1 Guiraut de Bornelh
7 Nuills hom no sap damic tro la perdut. 457.26 Uc de Saint-Circ
8 Anc enemics qieu agues. 457.3 Uc de Saint-Circ
9 Seruit aurai longamen. 457.34 Uc de Saint-Circ
10 Pron si deu mais penssar almieu semblan. 74.14 Bertolome Zorzi
11 Entre totz mos cossiriers. 74.5 Bertolome Zorzi
12 Mout fai sobreira foillia. 74.9 Bertolome Zorzi
Table 1: The control sample
