M. Chau et al. (Eds.): PAISI 2012, LNCS 7299, pp. 36–44, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 
CybercrimeIR – A Technological Perspective  
to Fight Cybercrime 
Weiping Chang1, Yungchang Ku2,4,*, Sinru Wu3, and Chaochang Chiu4 
1 Department of Criminal Investigation, Central Police University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 33304 
una024@mail.cpu.edu.tw 
2 Computer Center, Central Police University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 33304 
ycku1230@gmail.com 
3 Department of Information Management, Central Police University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 33304 
kicelove@gmail.com 
4 Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 32003 
imchiu@saturn.yzu.edu.tw 
Abstract. The problem of cybercrime is so serious and costs our society increa-
singly and significantly. Integrating the cybercrime materials of law enforce-
ment is urgent need for fighting cybercrime internationally. This study proposes 
a feasible architecture of CybercrimeIR to collect and classify the useful cyber-
crime materials in investigator’s perspective. In the experiments, this study 
firstly adopts text representation approaches and machine learning techniques 
(e.g. support vector machine, Naïve Bayesian, and C4.5) to classify useful cy-
bercrime materials in investigators’ perspective. The performance measure in 
accuracy can at least achieve to 90% while conducting feature selection with in-
formation gain. We believe the proposed architecture of CybercrimeIR is very 
useful for integrating cybercrime materials of law enforcement globally. 
Keywords: cybercrime, fighting cybercrime, information retrieval, textual 
analysis, text mining. 
1   Introduction 
As the Internet becomes a part of our daily lives, cybercrime is increasingly con-
ducted and deemed as any illegal activity. Cybercrimes are activities in which com-
puters, telephones, cellular equipment, and other technological devices are used for 
illicit purposes that often take place in the global electronic networks, such as com-
puter hacking or network intrusion, Internet fraud, spreading of malicious code, iden-
tity theft, electronic property theft, money laundering, and cyber-pornography [1-2]. 
According to the Norton Cybercrime Survey, the total annual cost of global cyber-
crime across 24 countries in 2010, inclusive of direct financial losses and time costs, 
amounts to US$388 billion1. Cybercrime costs the world significantly more than the 
                                                          
* Corresponding author. 
1 http://www.nortonopscenter.com, title: Norton Study Calculates Cost of Global 
Cybercrime 
 CybercrimeIR – A Technological Perspective to Fight Cybercrime 37 
global black market in marijuana, cocaine and heroin combined (US$288 billion). The 
problem of cybercrime is so serious across countries that fighting cybercrime should 
be an international engagement [2-4]. 
Many platforms accumulate cybercrime materials of law enforcement, such as 
websites of cybercrime cases, cybercrime databases, technical investigation tools, 
tactical reports, and so on. These materials are valuable for understanding cybercrime. 
For example, Computer Crime Research Center2 collects cybercrime news, confe-
rences on computer crime and cyber terrorism, and computer crime research articles. 
The Computer Crime & Intellectual Property Section of the United States Department 
of Justice has a website3 to provide many cybercrime cases. US Department of De-
fense also prepared cybercrime database for sharing information across DOD, the 
intelligence agencies and the FBI [5]. To fight cybercrime, the qualified investigators 
with exchanging knowledge and experience are important to the success of perform-
ing the cybercrime investigations. Currently, most training plans on cybercrime inves-
tigations are academic curriculums, localized case studies, and verbal and mental 
instructions by senior investigators. Few studies focused on providing a global com-
monly platform for collaborative knowledge sharing of cybercrime investigations and 
countermeasures between investigators.  
Cybercrime materials of law enforcement can imply the knowledge, tactic skills 
and practical experience to improve personnel capabilities on cybercrime investiga-
tion. Most of them are domain-specific knowledge in criminal justice. Chou and 
Chang (2008) suggested a system prototype of CyberIR is required to integrate cyber-
crime materials of law enforcement into legal, organizational, and technological pers-
pectives. However, the volume of cybercrime materials of law enforcement is very 
large. There is a question on how to automatic collect and integrate useful information 
from cybercrime materials of law enforcement into a commonly platform for global 
collaborative knowledge sharing. Since cybercrime materials of law enforcement are 
accessible text-based pages (e.g. HTML pages) from the Internet, this study aims to 
refine the CyberIR model with a classification component for providing useful infor-
mation to cybercrime investigators.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviewed the need of 
integrating cybercrime materials of law enforcement globally and introduced the in-
formation retrieval techniques for the proposed architecture. In Section 3, we describe 
our research questions; where Section 4 outlines the proposed framework. We present 
our experiment and the results in Section 5. Finally, we describe our contributions and 
future directions in Section 6. 
2   Literature Review 
2.1 The Need of Integrating Cybercrime Materials of Law Enforcement 
Globally 
Due to the rapid development of information technology (IT), the criminal apply these 
novel ITs to commit the cybercrime, and law enforcement agencies are facing the 
                                                          
2 http://www.crime-research.org/ 
3 http://www.cybercrime.gov/cc.html 
38 W. Chang et al. 
most difficult challenges to fight against cybercrime in many countries. The Europol 
threat assessment on computer crime described that both legislation and procedures 
may differ across jurisdictions where intelligence is admissible as evidence in one 
country and not be evidence in another [6]. The Law may different from state to state 
and nation to nation. An Act that is illegal in one locale may not be against the Law in 
another [7]. Hunton believed that the ability to obtain valid criminal evidence and 
supporting intelligence from these numerous networked resources, distributed global-
ly, dynamically produced and highly volatile can only further complicate and even 
hinder the investigation and analysis of cybercrime [8]. Williams argues that law en-
forcement does not posses the skills or resources at this time to tackle cybercrime in 
parallel with traditional crime [9]. Furthermore, since different countries have differ-
ent types of cybercrime, the knowledge of computer technologies and investigation 
techniques are usually developed locally. 
Generally, the countermeasures of fighting against the cybercrime can be catego-
ries into three perspectives: legal, organizational, and technological [2]. The legal 
approach aims to restrict cybercrime activities through legislation. The organizational 
approach intends to enforce laws, to promote cooperation, and to educate the public 
through the establishment of dedicated organizations. The technological approach 
endeavors to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of cybercrime analysis and 
investigation with the help of new technologies. A vast amount of cybercrime materi-
al is in need of being processed from these three approaches. Therefore, the vast 
knowledge is needed in fighting against cybercrime [10-11]. Since there are no stan-
dards or unification over these human affairs, the accessing and sharing of the cyber-
crime material is difficult. Therefore, how to integrate this material to world wide 
agencies responsible for cybercrime fighting becomes a big challenge. Our proposi-
tion for tackling this cybercrime material of law enforcement integrating and sharing 
problem is the application of classification and information retrieval (IR) techniques. 
In our previous study, we developed the CyberIR system to retrieve cybercrime ma-
terial [3]. In this research, CybercrimeIR applies classification techniques to classify 
cybercrime material into legal, organizational and technological aspect collections. 
After classifying, CybercrimeIR provides integrated and classified cybercrime materi-
al to law enforcement agencies in different countries, and CyberIR system with classi-
fied cybercrime material would have better performance than unclassified one.  
2.2 Information Retrieval Techniques 
Cybercrime materials of law enforcement contain a great deal of text-based content. 
Therefore, the task of collecting and figuring out useful information from cybercrime 
materials of law enforcement can be formulated as a text classification problem. In this 
study, we adopted information retrieval techniques to identify useful information from 
cybercrime materials of law enforcement in cybercrime investigators’ perspective. 
Vector Space Model: Currently, information retrieval techniques provide great sup-
port to the using of the information since it has strong capability in the dealing of up-
to-date information which is separately stored in free text format. The purpose of 
information retrieval is to store documents electronically and the relevant textual doc-
uments can be separated from non-relevant ones. A powerful approach in IR research 
 CybercrimeIR – A Technological Perspective to Fight Cybercrime 39 
is Vector Space Model (VSM), which documents are represented as weighted vectors 
of indexed terms where the size of the vectors matches the vocabulary space [12-13]. 
The weight of each index term within each document indicates its significance in 
terms of its representation and discriminative power. 
 
jijij idftfw ∗=  (1) 
For term frequency (
ijtf ), a term that occurs more often in a document is more likely 
to be important to the classification of that document; therefore, the term frequency is 
higher. For inverse document frequency (
jidf ), a term that occurs in too many docu-
ments will not help in the classification of the document; therefore, the inverse docu-
ment documents is lower. A high weight in tf-idf is reached by a high term frequency 
and a low document frequency of the term in the whole collection of document; thus, 
the weights tend to filter out common terms. A typical real world textual dataset 
usually has a large number of features through the weighted process. However, not all 
the features are necessary to learning the concept of interest. Many of them may be 
noisy or redundant and feeding all these features into a model often results in over 
fitting and poor predictions [14]. Therefore feature selection can be applied to extract 
suitable size subset of features relevant to the target concept in the text [15]. 
Textual Representation: Features are very important for textual document analysis. 
Conducting good feature sets can improve the performance of the classifier. In terms 
of the features types for examining law enforcement documents of cybercrime, sever-
al different textual representations can be used: bag of words, word/ part of speech, 
and noun phrases [16-19]. In the Bag of Words representation, the semantically empty 
stop-words need to be removed and the remaining terms are used as the textual repre-
sentation. The bag of words representation has been widely used because of its simple 
nature and its ability to produce a suitable representation of the text. Word/Part of 
Speech is a useful approach to capture how the sentence is organized in the document. 
The feature is a tag of morpho-syntactic information based on contextual information 
[18]. Word/Part of Speech features include adjective, noun, adverb, and verb. Noun 
Phrases retains only the nouns and noun phrases within a document and has been 
found to adequately represent the important article concepts [20].  
To perform text classification, a real-world textual data set is usually represented 
by a set of features. When the number of features is large, not all the features are ne-
cessary to learning the concept of interest; instead, many of them may be noisy or 
redundant and feeding all these features into a model often results in over fitting and 
poor predictions [14]. In such cases, feature selection techniques have been shown to 
be effective in improving classification performance by removing irrelevant or redun-
dant features in a large feature set [21]. A feature selection method generates different 
candidates from the feature space and assesses them based on some evaluation crite-
rion to find the optimal subset of features, such as document frequencies (DF), infor-
mation gain (IG), mutual information (MI), X2-test (CHI), and term strength (TS) 
[22]. The Information gain heuristic is one of more effective feature selection ap-
proaches used in many text categorization studies [15, 23-24]. 
40 W. Chang et al. 
Classification Techniques: For text classification, the category information of the 
documents will be assigned and the documents are represented as numerical vectors 
by a set of statistics potentially relevant features. The dominant approach in text clas-
sification is based on  machine learning techniques that are used to build classifiers 
by learning the characteristics of the categories from a set of pre-classified documents 
[13]. Well known machine learning techniques with good performance reported in the 
literature include: support vector machine (SVM), C4.5, and Naïve Bayesian (NB) 
[25-26]. The SVM is a powerful statistical machine learning technique first intro-
duced by [27]. Due to its ability to handle millions of inputs and its good perfor-
mance, the SVM often reported to have the best performance in text classification 
[15].  
3   System Design 
Fig.1 illustrates our proposed system architecture of CybercrimeIR. The design con-
sists of three major parts: cybercrime materials collection, textual analysis and classi-
fication, and user-oriented search support. 
 
 
Fig. 1. System Architecture of CybercrimeIR 
 CybercrimeIR – A Technological Perspective to Fight Cybercrime 41 
3.1 Part I: Cybercrime Materials Collection 
Part I is designed to collect cybercrime materials of law enforcement (e.g. cybercrime 
news, juridical cases, tactical/ technical reports, and so on) from Internet and from 
law enforcement agency of other countries. There are two ways to input the cyber-
crime materials into the unified database: Collection and Acquisition. The former is to 
setup the crawler programs to monitor and automatic collect the cybercrime materials 
from selected publicly websites and online databases. The later is to provide a unified 
interface to allow the nations to upload their cybercrime materials to meet the need of 
international engagement for fighting cybercrime across countries. All the cybercrime 
materials are stored and integrated into the unified database. 
3.2 Part II: Textual Analysis and Classification 
Part II aims to perform a feasible classification model to classify useful cybercrimes 
materials to meet user interest. Textual Analysis is to generate text features from the 
unified database to represent the cybercrime materials. Three widely used types of 
text features: bag of words, word/ part of speech, and noun phrases are adopted in our 
system. These features have been considered in various text classification researches 
[15-17], and can also be applied to this study. Since feature selection has been shown 
to be effective in improving classification performances by removing irrelevant or 
redundant features in a large feature set, the information gain (IG) heuristic is adopted 
to perform feature selection because of its efficient in text categorization studies [23, 
28]. Classification Model is to build feasible classifier based on cross validation strat-
egy. Support Vector Machine, Naïve Bayesian and C4.5 algorithms are adopted for 
training the classifier to identify the useful cybercrime cases from the collected data-
base. A 10-fold cross validation strategy is implemented using the WEKA data min-
ing tool with default parameter settings for all experiments. For each feature  
set with the Support Vector Machine, Naïve Bayesian and C4.5 classifiers, we  
adopt the performance measure in accuracy to evaluate the overall correctness of  
classification.  
 
cases  collected  of  number  total
cases  classified correctly   all of  number
ccuracyA =  (2) 
3.3 Part III: User-Oriented Search Support 
In Part III, the classified useful cybercrime materials will store into the collections. 
When the user conduct the search from the collections, the learning agent will coordi-
nate the search algorithm based on user profile and interest to present the results into 
three perspectives of cybercrime materials: legal, Organizational, and technological. 
The learning agent will also keep the user’s feedback to refine the next search.  
42 W. Chang et al. 
4   Experiments and Discussions 
4.1 Testbed  
This study collected 70 cybercrime cases from the website of the Computer Crime & 
Intellectual Property Section of the United States Department of Justice to demon-
strate how the proposed architecture works. Three cybercrime investigators of the 
same team from Criminal Investigation Bureau in Taiwan were invited to perform the 
pre-classified task on deciding the category of each case. The case is denoted as “yes” 
if all the coders agree the case is useful for their cybercrime investigation work, oth-
erwise “no”. Totally, 25 cybercrime cases are denoted as “yes” and 45 cybercrime 
cases are denoted as “no”.  
4.2 Feature Generation and Performance Measure  
Following the information retrieval techniques, several feature sets were generated 
from the collected data by different text representation approaches. We denoted as 
Ori_BOW, Ori_WPOS, and Ori_NP. After conducting feature selection with informa-
tion gain, another selected feature sets were also generated. We denoted as FS_BOW, 
FS_WPOS, and FS_NP. In building feasible classification model, Support Vector 
Machine, Naïve Bayesian and C4.5 algorithms are adopted for training the classifier 
based on these feature sets. Therefore, the performance measure in accuracy of origi-
nal feature sets and selected feature sets can be illusteated in Table 1 and Table 2, 
where the values in bold fonts denote the best performance.  
Table 1. The features and performance measure in accuracy of the original feature sets  
Feature Subset Features SVM Naïve Bayesian C4.5 
Ori_BOW 3,637 70.00% 68.57% 77.14% 
Ori_WPOS 2,373 77.14% 71.43% 67.14% 
Ori_NP 1,006 61.43% 62.86% 51.43% 
Table 2. The features and performance measure in accuracy of the selected feature sets 
Selected Features Features SVM Naïve Bayesian C4.5 
FS_BOW 474 90.00% 91.43% 80.00% 
FS_WPOS 440 90.00% 97.14% 65.71% 
FS_NP 158 82.86% 90.00% 60.00% 
4.3 Discussions  
From our experiment results, we can see that text representation and machine learning 
techniques can yield the classification results to classify the useful cybercrime mate-
rials to users. The result also indicates that text analysis can be applied and feasible to 
this domain. In the performance measures in accuracy, the features conducted by 
information gain can yield better classification performance than the original features. 
 CybercrimeIR – A Technological Perspective to Fight Cybercrime 43 
This result also indicates that feature selection can improve the classification perfor-
mance in this study. In addition, Naïve Bayesian achieves overall better performance 
than the other two commonly used classification algorithms.  
5 Conclusions and Future Directions 
Cybercrime becomes a major crime type nowadays. Due to its trans-border characte-
ristics, fighting cybercrime requires international cooperation. The problem of cyber-
crime is so serious and costs our society increasingly and significantly. To fight 
against cybercrime, all countries need to cooperate and to share related materials and 
resources. Integrating the cybercrime materials of law enforcement is urgent need for 
fighting cybercrime internationally.  
However, there are no standards or unification over these cybercrime materials 
across countries or on the Internet. This study proposes a feasible architecture of Cy-
bercrimeIR to collect and classify the useful cybercrime materials in investigator’s 
perspective. The experiments also present the exciting evidence to show how the pro-
posed architecture works and evaluates. The major contribution of this research is the 
initiation and demonstration of a method and IR system in the solving of the problem. 
This beginning step could engender the serious consideration about international co-
operation on cybercrime fighting. In the long term, the computer-related crime can be 
solved only by computer-related technologies.  
This study has some limitations that can also be explored further. For the architec-
ture of CybercrimeIR, we would like to further consider both text and non-text cyber-
crime materials of law enforcement into the unified databases. We also intend to  
explore the functions of learning agent for user interest. Moreover, we also plan to 
investigate other classification techniques and feature selection methods which also 
may be appropriate for the classification tasks of cybercrime materials. 
 
Acknowledgements. This work was fully supported by the National Science Council, 
Taiwan, under the Grant No. 100-2410-H-015-008. The authors appreciate the ano-
nymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. 
References 
1. Speer, D.L.: Redefining borders: The challenges of cybercrime. Crime, Law and Social 
Change 34, 259–273 (2000) 
2. Chung, W., Chen, H., Chang, W., Chou, S.: Fighting cybercrime: a review and the Taiwan 
experience. Decision Support Systems 41, 669–682 (2006) 
3. Chou, S., Chang, W.: CyberIR – A Technological Approach to Fight Cybercrime. In: 
Yang, C.C., Chen, H., Chau, M., Chang, K., Lang, S.-D., Chen, P.S., Hsieh, R., Zeng, D., 
Wang, F.-Y., Carley, K.M., Mao, W., Zhan, J. (eds.) ISI Workshops 2008. LNCS, 
vol. 5075, pp. 32–43. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
4. Moraski, L.: Cybercrime Knows No Borders. Infosecurity 8, 20–23 (2011) 
5. Hancock, B.: US Department of Defense Prepares Cybercrime Database. Computers & Se-
curity 19, 674 (2000) 
6. EUROPOL: High Tech Crimes with the EU: Threat Assessment 2007 (2007) 
44 W. Chang et al. 
7. Shinder, D.: What makes cybercrime laws so difficult to enforce. IT Security (2011) 
8. Hunton, P.: The growing phenomenon of crime and the internet: A cybercrime execution 
and analysis model. Computer Law & Security Review 25, 528–535 (2009) 
9. Williams, L.Y.: Catch Me if You Can: A Taxonomically Structured Approach to Cyber-
crime. The Forum on Public Policy (2008) 
10. Chang, W.: Fighting Cybercrime: A KM Perspective. In: Chen, H., Chau, M., Li, S.-H., 
Urs, S., Srinivasa, S., Wang, G.A. (eds.) PAISI 2010. LNCS, vol. 6122, pp. 28–30. Sprin-
ger, Heidelberg (2010) 
11. Park, H., Cho, S., Kwon, H.-C.: Cyber Forensics Ontology for Cyber Criminal Investiga-
tion. In: Sorell, M. (ed.) e-Forensics 2009. LNICST, vol. 8, pp. 160–165. Springer, Hei-
delberg (2009) 
12. Salton, G.: Automatic information organization and retrieval. McGraw-Hill, New York 
(1968) 
13. Sebastiani, F.: Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Sur-
veys 34, 1–47 (2002) 
14. Meiri, R., Zahavi, J.: Using simulated annealing to optimize the feature selection problem 
in marketing applications. European Journal of Operational Research 171, 842–858 (2006) 
15. Abbasi, A., Chen, H., Salem, A.: Sentiment analysis in multiple languages: Feature selec-
tion for opinion classification in Web forums. ACM Transactions on Information Sys-
tems 26 (2008) 
16. Schumaker, R.P., Chen, H.: Textual analysis of stock market prediction using breaking fi-
nancial news: The AZFin text system. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 27, 1–19 (2009) 
17. Zhang, Y., Dang, Y., Chen, H., Thurmond, M., Larson, C.: Automatic online news moni-
toring and classification for syndromic surveillance. Decision Support Systems 47, 508–
517 (2009) 
18. Stamatatos, E.: A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology 60, 538–556 (2009) 
19. Zhang, C.L., Zeng, D., Li, J.X., Wang, F.Y., Zuo, W.L.: Sentiment Analysis of Chinese 
Documents: From Sentence to Document Level. Journal of the American Society for In-
formation Science and Technology 60, 2474–2487 (2009) 
20. Tolle, K.M., Chen, H.C.: Comparing noun phrasing techniques for use with medical digital 
library tools. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 51, 352–370 (2000) 
21. Dash, M., Liu, H.: Feature selection for classification. Intelligent Data Analysis 1, 131–
156 (1997) 
22. Aghdam, M.H., Ghasem-Aghaee, N., Basiri, M.E.: Text feature selection using ant colony 
optimization. Expert Systems with Applications 36, 6843–6853 (2009) 
23. Yang, Y., Pedersen, J.O.: A Comparative Study on Feature Selection in Text Categoriza-
tion. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 
412–420. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. (1997) 
24. Forman, G.: An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics for text classifica-
tion. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, 1289–1305 (2003) 
25. Das, S.R., Chen, M.Y.: Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment extraction from small talk on the 
web. Management Science 53, 1375–1388 (2007) 
26. Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H., Huang, Z.: A framework for authorship identification of online 
messages: Writing-style features and classification techniques. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology 57, 378–393 (2006) 
27. Vapnik, V.: Statistical learning theory. Wiley (1998) 
28. Abbasi, A., Chen, H.: Applying authorship analysis to extremist-group Web forum mes-
sages. IEEE Intelligent Systems 20, 67–75 (2005) 
