 
Linguistic Profiling and Behavioral Drift in Chat Bots 
 
Nawaf Ali 
Computer Engineering and Computer 
Science Department 
J. B. Speed School of Engineering  
University of Louisville 
Louisville, KY. USA 
ntali001@louisville.edu 
 
Derek Schaeffer 
Computer Engineering and Computer 
Science Department 
J. B. Speed School of Engineering 
University of Louisville 
Louisville, KY. USA 
dwscha02@louisville.edu 
 
Roman V. Yampolskiy 
Computer Engineering and Computer 
Science Department 
J. B. Speed School of Engineering 
University of Louisville  
Louisville, KY. USA 
roman.yampolskiy@louisville.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
When trying to identify the author of a book, a paper, or a 
letter, the object is to detect a style that distinguishes one 
author from another.  With recent developments in 
artificial intelligence, chat bots sometimes play the role of 
the text authors.  The focus of this study is to investigate 
the change in chat bot linguistic style over time and its 
effect on authorship attribution.  The study shows that chat 
bots did show a behavioral drift in their style.  Results 
from this study imply that any non-zero change in lingual 
style results in difficulty for our chat bot identification 
process. 
I.  Introduction 
Biometric identification is a way to discover or verify the 
identity of who we claim to be by using physiological and 
behavioral traits (Jain, 2000).  To serve as an identifier, a 
biometric should have the following properties: (a) 
Universality, which means that a characteristic should 
apply to everybody, (b) uniqueness, the characteristics will 
be unique to each individual being studied, (c) 
permanence, the characteristics should not change over 
time in a way that will obscure the identity of a person, and 
(d) collectability, the ability to measure such 
characteristics (Jain, Ross & Nandakumar, 2011).   
Biometric identification technologies are not limited 
to fingerprints.   Behavioral traits associated with each 
human provide a way to identify the person by a biometric 
profile. Behavioral biometrics provides an advantage over 
traditional biometrics in that they can be collected 
unbeknownst to the user under investigation (Yampolskiy 
& Govindaraju, 2008).  Characteristics pertaining to 
language, composition, and writing style, such as 
particular syntactic and structural layout traits, vocabulary 
usage and richness, unusual language usage, and stylistic 
traits remain relatively constant.  Identifying and learning 
these characteristics is the primary focus of authorship 
authentication (Orebaugh, 2006). 
Authorship identification is a research field interested 
in finding traits, which can identify the original author of 
the document.  Two main subfields of authorship 
identification are: (a) Authorship recognition, when there 
is more than one author claiming a document, and the task 
is to identify the correct author based on the study of style 
and other author-specific features.  (b) Authorship 
verification, where the task is to verify that an author of a 
document is the correct author based on that author’s 
profile and the study of the document (Ali, Hindi & 
Yampolskiy, 2011).  The twelve Federalist papers claimed 
by both Alexander Hamilton and James Madison are an 
example for authorship recognition (Holmes & Forsyth, 
1995).  Detecting plagiarism is a good example of the 
second type.  Authorship verification is mostly used in 
forensic investigation. 
When examining people, a major challenge is that the 
writing style of the writer might evolve and develop with 
time, a concept known as behavioral drift (Malyutov, 
2005).  Chat bots, which are built algorithmically, have 
never been analyzed from this perspective.  A study on 
identifying chat bots using Java Graphical Authorship 
Attribution Program (JGAAP) has shown that it is possible 
to identify chat bots by analyzing their chat logs for 
linguistics features (Ali, Hindi & Yampolskiy, 2011).  
A. Chat bots 
Chat bots are computer programs mainly used in 
applications such as online help, e-commerce, customer 
services, call centers, and internet gaming (Webopedia, 
2011). 
Chat bots are typically perceived as engaging software 
entities, which humans may communicate with, attempting 
to fool the human into thinking that he or she is talking to 
another human.  Some chat bots use Natural Language 
Processing Systems (NLPS) when replying to a statement, 
while majority of other bots are scanning for keywords 
within the input and pull a reply with the most matching 
keywords (Wikipedia, 2011).  
B. Motivations 
The ongoing threats by criminal individuals have migrated 
from actual physical threats and violence to another 
dimension, the Cyber World.  Criminals try to steal others 
information and identity by any means.    Researchers are 
following up and doing more work trying to prevent any 
criminal activities, whether it is identity theft or even 
terrorist threats.  
II. Application and Data Collection 
Data was downloaded from the Loebner prize website 
(Loebner, 2012), in which a group of human judges from 
different disciplines and ages are set to talk with the chat 
bots, and the chat bots get points depending on the quality 
of the conversation that the chat bot produces.   A study 
was made on chat bot authorship with data collected in 
2011 (Ali, Hindi & Yampolskiy, 2011); the study 
demonstrated the feasibility of using authorship 
identification techniques on chat bots.  The data in the 
current study was collected over a period of years.   Our 
data only pertained to chat bots that were under study in 
(Ali, Hindi & Yampolskiy, 2011), which is why this study 
does not cover every year of the Loebner contest, which 
started in 1996.  Only the years, that contain the chat bots 
under study, were used in this research. 
 
III. Data Preparation 
The collected data had to be preprocessed by deleting 
unnecessary labels like the chat bot name, and time-date of 
conversation (Fig. 1).  A Perl script was used to clean the 
files and split each chat into two text files, one for the chat 
bot under study, the other for the human judge.  The judge 
part was ignored, and only the chat bot text was analyzed. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Sample conversation between a chat bot and a judge. 
IV. Chat Bots used. 
Eleven chat bots were used in the initial experiments: 
Alice (ALICE, 2011), CleverBot (CleverBot, 2011), Hal 
(HAL, 2011), Jeeney (Jeeney, 2011), SkyNet (SkyNet, 
2011), TalkBot (TalkBot, 2011), Alan (Alan, 2011), 
MyBot (MyBot, 2011), Jabberwock (Jabberwock, 2011), 
Jabberwacky (Jabberwacky, 2011), and Suzette (Suzette, 
2011).  These were our main baseline that we intend to 
compare to the chat bots under study, which were: Alice, 
Jabberwacky, and Jabberwock 
V. Experiments 
The experiments were conducted using RapidMiner 
(RapidMiner, 2011).   A model was built for authorship 
identification that will accept the training text and create a 
word list and a model using the Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) (Fig 2), and then this word list and model will be 
implemented on the test text, which is, in our case, data 
from the Loebner prize site (Loebner, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Training model using Rapid Miner. 
 
In Fig. 3 we use the saved word list and model as 
input for the testing stage, and the output will give us the 
percentage prediction of the tested files. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Testing stage using Rapid Miner. 
 
The data was tested using two different saved models, 
one with a complete set of chat bots (eleven bots) in the 
training stage, and the second model was built with 
training using only the three chat bots under study. 
 
When performing the experiments, the model output 
is confidence values, in which, values reflecting how 
confident we are that this chat bot is identified correctly.  
Chat bot with highest confidence value (printed in 
boldface in all tables) is the predicted bot according to the 
model.  Table 1 shows how much confidence we have in 
our tested data for Alice’s text files in different years, 
when using eleven chat bots for training.  
Table 1. Confidence level  of Alice’s files when tested with all eleven 
chat bots used in training 
Process 
Document 
Normalize Validation 
Store 
Word list 
Store 
Model 
Get Word 
list 
Process 
Document 
Normalize 
Get 
Model 
Apply 
Model 
Table 2 shows the confidence level of Alice’s files 
when using only the three chat bots under study. 
 
Table 2. Confidence  level  of Alice’s files when tested with only three 
chat bots used in training. 
 
Fig. 4 shows the results of testing the three chat bots 
over different years when training our model using all 
eleven chat bots. 
The results in Fig. 5 comes from the experiments that 
uses a training set based on the three chat bots under 
study, Alice, Jabberwacky, and Jabberwock.  Jabberwock 
did not take part  in the 2005 contest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Identification percentage over different years using all eleven chat 
bots for training. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 5. Identification percentage over different years using only the three 
chat bots under study for training. 
 
 
Table 3 shows the confidence level of Jabberwacky’s 
files values when tested with the complete set of eleven 
chat bots. 
 
 Table 3. Confidence  level  of Jabberwacky’s files when tested with all 
11 chat bots used in training. 
 
 
Table 4 shows the confidence level of Jabberwock’s 
files when all the chat bots are used for training. 
 
Table 4. Confidence  level  of Jabberwock’s files when tested with all 
eleven chat bots used in training. 
 
VI. Conclusions and Future Work 
 
The initial experiments conducted on the collected data 
did show a variation between chat bots, which is expected.  
It is not expected that all chat bots will act the same way, 
since they have different creators and different algorithms.  
 
Some chat bots are more intelligent than others; the 
Loebner contest aims to contrast such differences.  Alice 
bot showed some consistency over the years under study, 
but in 2005 Alice’s style was not as recognizable as in 
other years.  While Jabberwacky performed well for all 
years when training with just three bots and was not 
identified in 2001 when the training set contained all 
eleven chat bots for training, Jabberwacky gave us a 40% 
correct prediction in 2005.  Jabberwock, the third chat bot 
under study here, was the least consistent compared to all 
other bots, and gave 0% correct prediction in 2001 and 
2004, and 91% for 2011, which may indicate that 
Jabberwock’s vocabulary did improve in a way that gave 
him his own style.  
 
With three chat bot training models, Jabberwacky 
was identified 100% correctly over all years.  Alice did 
well for all years except for 2005, and Jabberwock was 
not identified at all in 2001 and 2004. 
 
With these initial experiments, we can state that some 
chat bots do change their style, most probably depending 
on the intelligent algorithms used in initializing 
conversations.  Other chat bots do have a steady style and 
do not change over time. 
 
More data is required to get reliable results; we only 
managed to obtain data from the Loebner prize 
competition, which in some cases was just one 4KB text 
file.  With sufficient data, results should be more 
representative and accurate. 
 
Additional research on these chat bots will be 
conducted, and more work on trying to find specific 
features to identify the chat bots will be continued.  This 
is a burgeoning research area and still much work need to 
be done. 
References 
 
Alan. (2011). AI Research. Retrieved June 10, 2011, from 
http://www.a-
i.com/show_tree.asp?id=59&level=2&root=115 
Ali, N.,    Hindi, M.,  & Yampolskiy, R. V. (2011). 
Evaluation of authorship attribution software on 
a Chat bot corpus. XXIII International 
Symposium on Information, Communication and 
Automation Technologies (ICAT), Sarajevo, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 1-6. 
ALICE. (2011). ALICE.  Retrieved June 12, 2011, from 
http://alicebot.blogspot.com/ 
CleverBot. (2011). CleverBot Retrieved July 5, 2011, 
from http://cleverbot.com/ 
HAL. (2011). AI Research. Retrieved June 16, 2011, from 
http://www.a-
i.com/show_tree.asp?id=97&level=2&root=115 
Holmes, D. I.,  & Forsyth, R. S. (1995). The Federalist 
Revisited: New Directions in Authorship 
Attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
10(2), 111-127.  
Jabberwacky. (2011). Jabberwacky-live chat bot-AI 
Artificial Intelligence chatbot. Retrieved June 10, 
2011, from http://www.jabberwacky.com/ 
Jabberwock. (2011). Jabberwock Chat. Retrieved June 12, 
2011, from 
http://www.abenteuermedien.de/jabberwock/ 
Jain, A. (2000). Biometric Identification. Communications 
of the ACM, 43(2), 91-98.  
Jain, A.,    Ross, A. A.,  & Nandakumar, K. (2011). 
Introduction to Biometrics: Springer-Verlag New 
York, LLC. 
Jeeney. (2011). Artificial Intelligence Online. Retrieved 
March 11, 2011, from http://www.jeeney.com/ 
Loebner, H. G. (2012). Home Page of The Loebner Prize. 
Retrieved Jan 3, 2012, from 
http://loebner.net/Prizef/loebner-prize.html 
Malyutov, M. B. (2005). Authorship attribution of texts: a 
review. Electronic Notes in Discrete 
Mathematics, 21, 353-357.  
MyBot. (2011). Chatbot Mybot, Artificial Intelligence. 
Retrieved Jan 8, 2011, from 
http://www.chatbots.org/chatbot/mybot/ 
Orebaugh, A. (2006). An Instant Messaging Intrusion 
Detection System Framework: Using character 
frequency analysis for authorship identification 
and validation. 40th Annual IEEE International 
Carnahan Conference Security Technology, 
Lexington, KY. 
RapidMiner. (2011). Rapid- I. Retrieved Dec  20, 2011, 
from http://rapid-i.com/ 
SkyNet. (2011). SkyNet - AI. Retrieved April  20, 2011, 
from 
http://home.comcast.net/~chatterbot/bots/AI/Sky
net/ 
Suzette. (2011). SourceForge ChatScript Project. 
Retrieved Feb 7, 2011, from 
http://chatscript.sourceforge.net/ 
TalkBot. (2011). TalkBot- A simple talk bot. Retrieved 
April 14, 2011, from 
http://code.google.com/p/talkbot/ 
Webopedia. (2011). What is chat bot? A Word Definition 
from the Webpedia Computer Dictionary. 
Retrieved June 20, from 
www.webopedia.com/TERM/C/chat_bot.html 
Wikipedia. (2011). Chatterbot- Wikipedia, the free 
encyclopedia. Retrieved June 22, 2011, from 
www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chatterbot 
Yampolskiy, R. V.,  & Govindaraju, V. (2008). 
Behavioral Biometrics: a Survey and 
Classification. International Journal of 
Biometrics (IJBM). 1(1), 81-113.  
 
 
