Reclaiming Individuality of Mysterious 
Passage 
M. Chaurasia 
Member, ACM 
Dr. Sushil Kumar 
Bhilai Institute of Technology, Durg, INDIA 
 
Abstract— Authorship attribution, the science of inferring characteristics of author from characteristics 
of documents written by that author become an urgent need to find the original author of anonymous 
text. In this paper, a novel approach is proposed that attempts to measure the style variation of author 
using character n-gram profiles. This proposed method is a different approach to identify the author 
using initial character n-gram whereas prior research has shown the identification on total character n-
gram. This approach will prove to be quite stable. With the help of small experiment, we attempt to prove 
it. The results acquired from the mention technique are quite accurate and it hikes to 100% in identifying 
the author from an anonymous text. Using N-gram frequency profiles, it provides a simple and reliable 
way to categorize documents in a wide range of classification tasks. 
 
Keywords- Author identification, Character n-gram, Dis-similarity measure, Natural Language 
Processing. 
I.  LITERATURE RIVIEW   Organizations (business, academia, government, etc.) are facing risks resulting from their ever-
increasing reliance on the information infrastructure.  Decision and policy makers managing these risks are 
challenged by a lack of information intelligence concerning the risks and consequences of cyber events .They 
need to understand the implications of cyber security risks and solutions related to their information 
infrastructure and business. The combination of increased vulnerability, increased stakes and increased threats 
make cyber security and information intelligence (CSII) one of the most important emerging challenges in the 
evolution of modern cyberspace mechanism. 
 
  In some criminal, civil, and security matters, language can be evidence. A suicide note, a threatening 
letter, anonymous communications, business, emails, blog posts, trademarks—all of  these can help 
investigators, attorneys, human resource executives and private individuals understand the heart of an incident. 
When you are faced with a suspicious document, whether you need to know who wrote it, or if it is a real threat 
or a real suicide note, or if it  is too close for comfort to some other document, you need reliable, validated 
methods  [8]. 
 
Author attribution is a well-studied area of artificial intelligence. Formalized methods for determining 
authorship have even older roots. The field of  Stylometry began even before the turn of the twentieth century 
with several documented methods of analyzing documents to settle disputed authorship. Linguistic 
idiosyncrasies that have been identified and are currently being exploited include methods ranging from 
counting keywords to analyzing punctuation [1]. Reference [2] introduced a new recognition technology to 
identify authors with their synonyms choice. Author’s choice of synonyms is peculiar and can be used in 
determining the identity of an author. In the same year, R.Williams [3] explores a biometric tool based on 
frequency analysis which is used for identifying the author or can say digital signature for authorship attribution.    
  Stylometry attempts to capture an author’s style using quantitative measurements of 
various features in the text such as word length or vocabulary distributions. Many stylometric studies have 
measured word dependencies as a feature of an author’s style using language models that restrict what words a 
given word can depend upon. Furthermore, another approach [4] was based on building a character-level n-gram 
model of an author’s writing, in which one Greek dataset performs 18% accuracy improvement over deeper 
NLP techniques. They [4] measures the classifier performance by using precision, recall, and macro-average F-
measure scores whereas,  
 
Precision = number of correctly classified texts in, divided by the number of all texts classified to be in,  
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1118
Recall = number of correctly classified texts in, divided by the number of all texts that truly belong to, 
 
     F-measure = (2*precision*recall) / (precision + recall) 
 
The character n-gram approach has been proven to be quite useful to computing the writing style [5]. In 1994 
[6], Kjell first used character bigrams and trigrams to distinguish the Federalist Papers. Keselj [10] and 
Stamatatos [7] described character n-gram information with very fine results. Moreover, one of the best 
performing algorithms in an authorship attribution competition organized in 2004 was also based on a character 
n-gram representation [11]. An N-gram is a fill in succession of k-items in any given string of length m, where 
grams can be anything, from characters to words. In computational linguistics n-gram models are used most 
commonly in predicting words (in word level n-gram) or predicting characters (in character level n-gram) for 
the purpose of various applications [12]. 
II. OUR METHODOLOGY AND ALGORITHM 
An N-gram is an N-character slit of a longer string. Although in the literature, the terms have an impression of 
any co-occurring set of characters in a string. The key feature of this paper is we do not use the term for 
conterminous slits. Typically, our paper strategy based on one start slit of every term (initial slot). Thus, for e.g. 
sentence “Play makes child healthy and fit.” would be composed of following initial n-gram. 
 
TABLE I.  POSSIBLE INITIAL CHARACTER N-GRAM 
 
Bi-
gram pl ma  ch he an fi 
Tri-
gram pla mak chi hea and fit 
Quad-
gram play make chil heal -- -- 
 
In general, a string of length m, will have m bi-grams, m tri-grams, m quad grams and so on. A possible 
strategy for character n-gram is to use all positional n-grams including initial n-gram. However, such a strategy 
often leads to less feature space i.e. easy identification from an existing machine learning methods. 
A. Representation of Profiles of N-gram Frequency  
As in [9], working atmosphere of our approach is shown in bubbles Fig. 1. Pre-processed data generate the n-
gram profiles of author which then fed to evaluate the value of dis-similaity measure which must be unique for 
identifying an author. However, pre-processing required steps are as follows: 
 Remove numerals from the text. 
 Take away all punctuations marks from text. 
 Complete course of action is case-insensitive. 
 
Creating the character n-gram profile includes the following steps: 
 Divide the text into separate tokens based on preprocessing steps. 
 Compute all possible character n-gram for N = 2, 3and so on. 
 Form it into table to ascertain that each output N-gram has its own frequency. 
 Sort the N-grams order by their frequencies from most frequent to least frequent. 
 Assemble the profile size of each author like 100, 200 and so on for bi-grams, tri-grams, quad-grams 
and so on. 
 
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1119
 
Figure 1.  Rendering N-Grams Profiles 
 
Each document to be classified went through the text preprocessing phase, and then the N-gram profile was 
generated as described above. The N-gram profile of each text document (document profile) was compared 
against the profiles of all documents in the training classes (class profile) in terms of dis-similarity algorithm [10] 
used in this paper. 
B. Algorithm and Equations 
This algorithm used for computing dissimilarity is the one presented in [10] .We generates the bi- & tri-grams 
from author’s original sample text called Author’s Profile. A similar profile is generated for the test data. Now, 
let f1 (n) be the frequency of the nth bi- or tri-gram in the Author’s Profile. Let f2 (n) be the frequency of the nth 
bi- or tri-gram in the test data. We calculate the dissimilarity between the two using the following formula: 
 
∑    (f1 (n) –f2 (n)) 2 
      n€ profiles 
 
In order to normalize these differences, we divide them by the average frequency for a given n-gram. 
 
Sum       =         ∑   
 
Sum        =  ∑  
 
Given two profiles the algorithm returns a positive number, which is a measure of dissimilarity. For identical 
texts, and more generally, for texts that has identical L most frequent n-grams, the dissimilarity are 0. Using this 
measure and a set of author profiles, we can easily assign a text to an author by generating a text profiles and 
n profile
2 
n profile 
2
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1120
assigning the text to the category with which the calculated dissimilarity is minimal. Moreover, in order to get 
better result text size data should be separated and of same size approximately whereas train size can varies and 
use to train the system. 
 
In experimental analysis, take profiles of different length as reference to compare with the complete profile of 
the unknown text for the same author & also for the unknown text for the different author .Then the profile of 
each author is being compared with the profiles of all authors exist in the same data set. If the value of dis-
similarity measure of an anonymous text is close to the value of dis-similarity of author specified in data set, 
then author could be identified. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section, we discuss a small corpus which includes train size text and test size text for our problem 
province. In continuation, we compute the results of accuracy to identify an unknown text which varies with 
type of n-gram. 
 In experimental analysis, capture the profiles of authors of variable size for training and capture the 
profiles of different authors along with the same author profiles for testing. For our experimental purpose, we 
used data-set of four authors mention in TABLE II.  
 
TABLE II.  AUTHORS IN OUR DATA-SET 
 
DATA 
SET 
 
  AUTHOR NAME 
TRAIN 
SIZE 
(Words) 
TEST 
SIZE 
(Words) 
P0 EVA -GALE 22068 22068 
P1 PAYTON LEE 278303 275585 
P2 RUTH ANN NORDIN 235807 109254 
P3 ROSS BECKMANN 124047 124047 
 
In TABLE II, it is mention that the total number of words for train size and total number of words for test size of 
respective authors. It includes three novels for P0, six novels for P1, five novels for P2 and two novels for P3. A 
profile is generated from each novel. Furthermore, minimally all the authors has two novels. So, the training set 
profiles is generated from the combination of two novels from each author and the accuracy is measured on 
attribution of rest of novels. We experimented our approach with the small data-set and compared the accuracy 
of verifying the author from different authors’ profiles. In the following tables, we demonstrated medial n-gram, 
final n-gram, total n-gram and the initial n-gram. 
 
 
TABLE III.  INITIAL BI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 50 100 200 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 68.75 87.5 100 
 
 
TABLE IV.  INITIAL TRI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 100 200 500 700 
Accuracy 
Measure in 
percentage 
81.25 87.5 100 100 
 
 
 
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1121
TABLE V.  TOTAL BI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 100 200 430 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 56.25 75 81.25 
 
 
TABLE VI.  TOTAL TRI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 100 200 400 700 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 75 75 81.25 87.5 
 
 
TABLE VII.  MEDIAL BI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 50 100 200 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 62.5 81.25 81.25 
 
 
TABLE VIII.  MEDIAL TRI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 500 700 1000 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 81.25 87.5 93.75 
 
 
TABLE IX.  FINAL BI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 50 100 200 
Accuracy 
Measure in 
percentage 
56.25 62.5 62.5 
 
 
TABLE X.  FINAL TRI-GRAM 
 
Profile Length 100 200 500 700 
Accuracy Measure 
in percentage 75 56.25 75 62.5 
 
From all above experimental results, it shows an unambiguous picture that in assessment  with other types of 
positional n-grams, initial n-gram approach declares good result to identify the identity of an anonymous  text.   
Results of initial n-gram show the utmost correctness of 100%; on the other hand supplementary n-grams 
achieve lower accuracy level. The method is very successful on this data-set. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper, a small experiment demonstrates the effectiveness of initial n-grams in reclaiming the mortal is 
more accurate than other positional n-grams extracted from words. This experiment utters first-class eminence 
result than medial n-gram, final n-gram and total n-gram. Since, we established our approach in small data-set & 
obtained a good piece of state so, our future potential will be to enlarge our corpus with a high anticipate to get 
valuable and accurate results. This can be enhanced to higher scale and also it varies with different sizes of n-
gram. 
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1122
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Baayen, H. V. Halteren, A. Neijt, and F. Tweedie, "An experiment in authorship attribution", 6es Journees internationales 
d’Analyse statistique des Donnees Textuelles, St Malo, France, March 2002. 
[2] J. H. Clark, C. J. Hannon, 2007, “An Algorithm for Identifying Authors Using Synonyms”, Proceeding ENC’07 Proceedings of the 
Eighth Mexican International Conference on Current Trends in Computer Science IEEE Computer Society Washington, DC, USA. 
[3] R. Williams, S. Gunasekaran, W. Patterson, “On the Development of Digital Signatures for Author Identification “,First IEEE 
International Conference on Biometrics: Theory, Applications, and Systems,  BTAS 2007, pp 1-5.   
[4] F. Peng, F. Shuurmans, V. Keselj, S. Wang,” Language Independent Authorship Attribution Using Character Level Language 
Models”,  In Proc. of the 10th European Association for Computational Linguistics (2003). 
[5] J. Grieve, "Quantitative authorship attribution: An evaluation of techniques," Literary and Linguistic Computing, 22(3),  pp 251-270, 
2007. 
[6] Kjell, B., "Discrimination of authorship using visualization," Information Processing and Management, 30(1), 141-150, 1994. 
[7] Stamatatos, E., "Ensemble-based author identification using character n-grams," In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on 
Text-based Information Retrieval, pp. 41-46, 2006. 
[8] Institute for Linguistic Evidence, I. 2008. Institute for linguistic evidence - mission & philosophy. 
http://www.fermentas.com/techinfo/nucleicacids/maplambda.htm 
[9] M. A. Chaurasia, Dr. S. Kumar, “An Empirical Study on Author Affirmation” in International Journal of Electrical & Computer 
Science (IJECS/IJENS), Vol. 11, Issue 1,UK, in press. 
[10] V. Keˇselj,  F. Peng, N. Cercone, and C. Thomas. “N-Gram-Based Author Profiles For Authorship Attribution”. In PACLING’03, 
August 2003, pages 255–264. 
[11] P. Juola, "Ad-hoc authorship attribution competition," In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the Association for Computers and 
the Humanities and the Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing, pp. 175-176, 2004. 
[12] M. Mansur, N.  UzZaman, M. Khan, “Analysis of N-Gram Based Text Categorization for Bangla in a Newspaper Corpus “Center for 
Research on Bangla Language Processing, BRAC University, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2005 
M. Chaurasia et al. / International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0975-3397 Vol. 3 No. 3 Mar 2011 1123
