Email Hoax Detection System Using 
Levenshtein Distance Method 
Yoke Yie Chen , Suet-Peng Yong and Adzlan Ishak 
Computer & Information Sciences Department 
Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS 
Bandar Seri Iskandar, 31750 Tronoh, Perak, Malaysia 
chenyokeyie@petronas.com.my, yongsuetpeng@petronas.com.my, adzlan89@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—Hoaxes are non-malicious viruses. They live on 
deceiving human’s perception by conveying false claims as 
truth. Throughout history, hoaxes have actually able to 
influence a lot of people to the extent of tarnishing the 
victim’s image and credibility. Moreover, wrong and 
misleading information has always been a distortion to a 
human’s growth. Some hoaxes were created in a way that 
they can even obtain personal data by convincing the 
victims that those data were required for official purposes. 
Hoaxes are different from spams in a way that they 
masquerade themselves through the address of those related 
either directly or indirectly to us. Most of the time, they 
appear as a forwarded message and sometimes from legit 
companies. This paper addresses this issue by developing a 
hoax detection system by incorporating text matching 
method using Levenshtein Distance measure. The proposed 
model is used to identify text-based hoax emails. Sensitivity 
and specificity are used to evaluate the accuracy of the 
system in identifying hoax emails. 
 
Index Terms—hoax detection system, Levenshtein distance, 
text analysis 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
E-mail hoaxes are known not to be malicious towards 
any created systems. Hoax is considered to be a junk 
which can give misleading information to the users or 
readers of the email. According to Blanzieri and Bryl [1], 
spam is a junk mail which is mostly unwanted or 
unsolicited which sent either directly or indirectly by 
personnel who has no current relationship to the email 
user. Hoaxes are unsolicited and unwanted emails which 
directly or indirectly sent by personnel who has current 
relationship with user of the email [2]. In short, hoaxes 
are the ‘smarter’ version of spams which masquerade 
themselves well via the personnel that are present as 
ones’ contacts. Usually hoaxes come in a form of 
forwarding messages from various sources. Misleading 
information from hoaxes may cause financial damage and 
irritating individual users. Worse of it, hoax has the 
ability to gather information and could possibly convince 
e-mail receivers act on non-exist events.  
Some email hoaxes had caused a lot of false alarms 
which lead to negative impact on certain parties.  For 
example, PayPal had to undermine and took 
responsibility after a Nigerian scam which was 
considered as a type of hoax was forwarded to most of its 
recipients by an unknown source that masquerade itself 
by using the email address similar to PayPal in year 2003. 
Another false alarm on the existence of acid rain due to 
the explosion of nuclear reactor in Japan had also caused 
chaos to the South East Asians in which this hoax was 
forwarded to many after a week from the earthquake 
incident in Japan. Although these hoaxes had yet to be 
proven as frauds, their contents were misleading [2-4]. 
Even though some e-mail hoaxes are not malicious, it 
is often a disturbance to the society. Furthermore, based 
on Meme’s theory [5], when a person’s mind is being 
infected by the wrong information, it will be hard for that 
infected person to be convinced otherwise of the real 
truth. The problem can only be solved once the users 
were exposed to the real fact of these hoaxes. 
Nevertheless, it will not be easy to convince a person on 
the real truth unless the source of the truth presented is 
valid to that person’s view [5]. Therefore, it is crucial that 
hoaxes should be identified primarily to avoid further 
misunderstandings which can bring significant losses as 
well as negative impact to a party’s growth. In view of 
this, the development of automatic hoax detection system 
will serve the purpose to protect e-mail receivers from 
mislead by false information. In the literature, there are 
not many hoax detection system created thus far. The 
work related to email hoax detection systems are stated in 
[2-4]. Most of its detection patterns are the same but 
different by definition [1].  
Previous works in this area suffer from the ability to 
update their hoax database in order to automatically 
identify the latest hoaxes existence.  In this paper, we 
present our proposed hoax detection system by using text 
matching approach to determine the hoax suspicious level 
of an incoming e-mail. The main objective of this project 
is to develop a Hoax Detection System which is able to 
 
Manuscript received January 2014 
Yoke Yie Chen is with Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Bandar Seri Iskandar, Perak,
Malaysia (email: chenyokeyie@petronas.com.my) 
Suet-Peng Yong is with Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Bandar Seri Iskandar, Perak,
Malaysia (email: yongsuetpeng@petronas.com.my) 
Adzlan Ishak was with Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Bandar Seri Iskandar, Perak,
Malaysia (email: adzlan89@petronas.com.my) 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014 441
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
doi:10.4304/jcp.9.2.441-446
detect new and old email hoaxes presented in today’s 
world. The main concern is to create higher awareness on 
the existence of email hoax and enlighten the users on the 
validity of every email’s content that has been forwarded. 
In the proposed system, a new incoming e-mail will go 
through a statistical based filtering algorithm. Based on 
the statistical outcomes, an email which identified as a 
hoax that was not found in the hoax database will be 
stored as new hoax in the database. In other words, our 
proposed system is able to perform automatic update 
while detecting hoaxes. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
A. Hoax Detection System vs. Spam Filters 
Hoax detection system is not commercialized as good 
as spam detectors [1, 2]. Spam detectors and spam filters 
are similar to one another [6]. However, the concept of 
spam is pretty much simple and easy to understand. If the 
spam is not traceable, the spam is an effective spam while 
if the spam is recognizable, the spam filter is definitely an 
effective spam filter [6]. Spam filter has a lot of 
resemblance to a hoax detection system. In example, both 
hoax and spam email content contains clues such as 
capital letter words and exclamations marks. Perhaps, the 
only differences in these two subjects are the signatures 
of the targeted filter subjects, the definition of their own 
and also the method of extraction. Therefore, this 
suggests that the approach used in spam filtering system 
can also be applied to hoax detection system. 
The process of approving whether an email is a spam 
or not are as follows [1, 2]: 
• Compare email to spam database. 
• If spam database contains the spam which was 
detected in the email, flag it as spam and remove 
them to the junk folder automatically (used by 
all email service provider today). 
• Un-flagged spams can either be flag as neutral 
(safe) or suspicious depending on the 
probabilities of the spam and presented to the 
user to decide on which email should they 
remove as spam manually later on. 
The most common approach in spam filtering systems 
is Naive Bayes algorithm, cluster-based approach, cross-
regulation method, and text mining techniques. Naive 
Bayes classifier is the most common methods used in 
today’s spam filtering system. According to Paliouras et 
al. [7], spam filtering is suitable with a machine learning 
classification such as Naive Bayes (NB) as it has been 
proven to cope well with this task despite of its simplicity.  
On the other hand, cluster-based classification 
approach is another interesting approach for spam 
filtering. Often spams are being distributed more than the 
ordinary legitimate mails in which it tackles the skewed 
class distribution concept while concept drift is based on 
the user’s preferences which may change over time or 
spam topic may vary according to fashionable trends [8]. 
A cluster-based classification approach is able to handle 
concept drift and skewed class distribution fairly well. 
Cross-regulation method is a newly found method for 
spam filtering [9]. It was introduced with the aim to 
further detect spams based on an immune system concept. 
Thus far, the research has proven positive result but have 
very little similarities to hoax detection system based on 
its architecture. Text mining techniques has the ability to 
tackle key phrases as part of its mined texts [8]. 
Researches on text mining [10-12] show promising effort 
in comparing between texts. Text mining concept is a 
data mining tool that is able to extract text based contents 
based on the desired outcome. However, there are several 
limitations to this concept and the processing method 
might be a little slower.  
B. Comparison of Previous Works on Hoax Detection   
Systems 
Research has shown that it is possible to automate a 
hoax detection system. Hoaxes have certain 
characteristics in which most of its content can be found 
bolded, underlined, a lot of exclamation marks and often 
use words which require instant decisions to be made. 
Therefore, it is possible for hoaxes to be identified 
automatically [13]. 
Hoax detection research began actively in the year 
2002. This model began its research after noticing that 
hoaxes are indeed a disturbing matter in the society. 
According to Hernandez et al. [3], knowledge is essential 
to human’s growth and that misleading information can 
be costly. Having said so, they began by using the rule-
based method as a start for this particular research. In 
2002, rule-based method is one of the leading text 
extraction method used for anti-spams. Rule-based 
methods are methods in which extraction are made based 
on certain rules and conditions. This traditional filter 
method uses simple and straightforward methods which 
classify spams by matching email fields with key words. 
The failure to this method is due to the fact that the 
complexity of spams today has overridden the benefits 
that this method has yet to offer. 
In 2004, Croatian CERT took a step further by 
developing another version of a hoax detection system [4]. 
This system has proven to be successful due to low 
Internet traffic over in the nation. However, this system 
has shown some drawbacks in certain area mostly on the 
idea of using fuzzy logic and Levenshtein method. These 
two methods have shown promising results in detecting 
hoaxes but the speed of processing the hoaxes is deemed 
to be slow added with heavy traffic of Internet and large 
volumes of data. Furthermore, the hoax database is not 
able to update on its own. 
In 2009, the study for an automatic hoax detection 
system became much more feasible than before [2]. 
Instead of using rule-based as well as fuzzy logics, this 
research uses n-grams as text extraction method. N-grams 
is one of the data mining tool which predict words within 
the email. N-grams allow the system to predict the 
subsequent words in the analyzed email in which it can 
process the words faster (assumed and deemed to be by 
the inventors) However, given the study for n-grams in 
442 JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
spams [14, 15], the complexity of the probability in 
executing this concept is pretty complicated for hoax 
detection system. According to Vukovic et al. [2], n-
grams approach is able to speed up the process of hoax 
detection. However, the drawback of using n-grams 
approach is that it is unable to train the hoax identifier on 
the latest hoaxes found based on the characteristics of a 
hoax. Table I shows the similarities and differences in 
existing works that we have composed from the literature. 
 
TABLE I. 
COMPARISON OF WORKS 
 
Previous 
Works 
2002 Hoax 
Detector [3] 
Croatian 
CERT (2004) 
[4] 
2009 
Automatic 
Hoax 
Detection 
System [2] 
Hoax 
Detection 
Yes. Automated 
but not really 
intelligent. 
Expand to anti-
virus software 
Yes. 
Automated 
and rather 
intelligent 
(embed with a 
database) 
Yes. Both 
automated and 
intelligent 
system 
integrated 
together 
Target 
More to 
Organizational 
level 
Personal 
Based Personal Based
Detection Server based Server Based Server based 
Form Text Text Text 
Approaches 
/ Data 
mining 
Concepts 
highlighted 
Not available 
Levensthein + 
Fuzzy Logic + 
modified 
nearest 
neighbour 
algorithm 
n-grams 
Result 
Able to detect 
but at minimal 
effect 
Able to detect 
with 
probabilities 
analyzed 
Able to detect 
with 
probabilities 
analyzed 
Time 
Require to 
process 
Not Available 
Slower with 
tons of data to 
process 
Light and 
faster (based 
on few 
samplings) 
Claims 
Time Require to Process made claim and have no 
specific results to prove on its similarity of 
comparison thus far 
Gap 
It requires an 
intelligent 
mechanism to 
read and compare 
hoaxes at 
personal level 
Gap 
It requires an 
intelligent 
mechanism to 
read and 
compare 
hoaxes at 
personal level 
 
Based on the analysis as shown in Table I, there are 
still rooms for improvement on the current approaches in 
developing hoax detection system. Other sort of close-
related subjects as part of the investigation related to hoax 
detection are spams and text mining tools. The 
architecture of spams filters are similar to the hoaxes 
detection systems created over the years with different 
definitions. Spams can be traced based on the sender’s 
address of a particular email  [1, 6] while hoaxes need to 
be addressed by its content [2-4]. The methods used in 
hoaxes detection [2-4] have also been used by spam 
filters before in the literature [7, 8, 14, 16].  
 
To the best of our knowledge, there are no hoax 
detection systems that are able to self update its database 
on the existence of new hoaxes. This means that the 
system is unable to recognize newly created hoaxes. This 
is the biggest challenge faced in this research. Therefore, 
our proposed system is to close the gap in hoax detection 
by identifying the characteristics of hoaxes based on an 
online hoax data.  
The ultimate aim of this project is to increase the 
awareness of the existence of hoaxes and to avoid 
unnecessary misleading information that may cause 
misunderstanding among the society. Having said that, in 
order to close the gap with the previous researches, our 
proposed system includes features of identifying the 
characteristics of a hoax in helping to classify an 
incoming e-mail into different hoax suspicious levels.  
III. METHODOLOGY 
A. System Architecture 
The proposed hoax detection system comprises of 
three main components: text pre-processing, hoax 
detection and new hoax detection. Text pre-processing 
gathers the email to be tested for its validity of being a 
genuine email or a hoax. Email header and signature will 
be removed from the original email. The system uses 
Levenshtein Distance to identify potential hoax from the 
email content by comparing it with the hoax database. 
Hoax database consists of email hoaxes that collected 
from the Hoax-Slayers.com, which was recognized by the 
National Library of Australia (PANDORA) as a good 
source of hoaxes. The proposed system design flow is 
shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Proposed System Design Flow 
B. Levenshtein Distance 
Levenshtein Distance (LD) is a metric for measuring 
the number of differences between two strings. The 
following is the notation for Levenshtein Distance: 
 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014 443
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
LD(s,t) 
 
Where  s = source string 
            t = target string 
The distance between strings is measured by the 
number of insertion, deletion or substitution required to 
transform string s to string t. For example: 
• If the source string (s) is "bold" and target string 
(t) is also "bold", then LD(s,t) = 0, because no 
transformations are needed. The strings are 
identical to each other. 
• If original source string (s) is "bold" and target 
string (t) is "bonk", then LD(s,t) = 2, because 
two substitution (changes of "l" to "n" and “d to 
“k”) is necessary to transform the original string 
to the compared string. 
Hence, the higher the Levenshtein distance, the more 
different the strings are and the less likely that the email 
is a hoax.  The email content input by the user will treat 
as the source string and target string are the hoax email 
stored in the hoax database. The final distance count will 
be converted into percentage using the following formula: 
 Distance = (100 – total distance count) * 100 
As mentioned in the previous section, most of the hoax 
detection systems mentioned in the literature is not able 
to detect new hoaxes. To address this issue, the proposed 
system added another component to identify potential 
new hoaxes. Therefore, the following rules are applied in 
the system.  
1. Distance is greater than 60%, the e-mail is a 
hoax 
2. Distance is less than 60%, the e-mail is 
suspected being a hoax. The email content 
will be sent for final filtering. 
C. Final Filtering 
Based on our observations, hoaxes have certain similar 
patterns that can be easily detected such as: 
• They often use uppercase letters 
• Title comprises of words such as URGENT! 
Please FORWARD this message and etc. 
• Includes extreme words such as WORST, 
VERY SERIOUS and etc 
 
We maintain a bag of words that consists of common 
words that are frequently found in hoax emails. Table II 
is the sample collected bag of words found from hoaxes. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II. 
 COLLECTION OF HOAX KEYWORDS 
 
Num Words Num Words 
1 URGENT 11 VIRUS 
2 ATTENTION 12 FOLLOW 
3 PLEASE 13 INSTRUCTION
S 
4 FORWARD 14 IMMEDIATEL
Y 
5 SEND 15 MESSAGE 
6 INFECTED 16 NOT 
7 WORST 17 ADD 
8 CLOSED 18 TELL 
9 EVERYONE 19 EVERYBODY 
10 LOVED 20 SPREAD 
 
Hence, we calculate the percentage of words that are 
written in uppercase over the total number of characters 
found in the e-mail. 
 
Uppercase Percentage = (Total number of Uppercase 
Character / Total number of Characters in e-mail) * 100 
 
Keywords Percentage = (Total number of Keywords 
found / Total number of words in e-mail) * 100 
 
We apply the 60% rule mentioned above on the 
formulas to determine whether or not the email is a new 
email hoax. New email hoaxes identified will be added 
into the hoax database. 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A. System Prototype 
As shown in Fig. 2, users who want to test whether an 
email content is a hoax will need to copy the email 
content to the system. Once user has click on ‘Calculate 
Hoax Percentage’ button, the hoax suspicious level will 
be calculated. If the suspicious level is less than 60%, the 
system will suggest user to determine if there is new hoax 
detected.  
 
 
Figure 2. System Prototype 
In the case when the system suggests to determine 
whether a new hoax detected, users are required to click 
444 JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
on ‘Determine New Hoax via New Hoax Calculation’ 
button. Once clicked, a new hoax suspicious level will be 
calculated. As shown in Fig. 3, the hoax suspicious level 
is 74%. Hence, a new hoax has been detected and the 
email content will be added into hoax database. 
 
 
Figure 3. Detect New Hoax 
B. System Evaluation 
The accuracy of the system in identifying hoax emails 
need to be assessed in order to ensure the proposed 
system is effective in identifying hoax emails. The 
performance measure used to evaluate the accuracy of the 
system is positive predictive value, negative predictive 
value, sensitivity and specificity. A total number of 40 
sample emails were tested using the system. Table III 
summarizes the evaluation results. 
 
TABLE III. 
SUMMARY OF EVALUATION RESULTS 
 
Email 
Hoax  Genuine
System 
Results 
Hoax  TP = 25  FP = 1 
Genuine  FN = 10  TN = 4 
 
true positive (TP) = a true hoax email is identified by   
                                the system 
false positive (FP) = a real email is identified as a hoax  
                                  email 
true negative  (TN) = a real email is identified 
false negative  (FN) = a hoax email is identified as a  
                                    real email 
 
Based on Table 3, the system performance evaluation 
is as follows: 
 
Positive Predictive Value (PPV) = TP / (TP + FP) 
    = 0.96 
 
Negative Predictive Value(NPV) = TN / (FN + TN) 
    = 0.29  
 
Sensitivity  = TP / (TP + FN) 
      = 0.71 
 
Specificity  = TN / (FP + TN) 
      = 0.80 
 
The high positive predictive value (PPV = 0.96) 
indicates that many true hoax emails has been identified 
by the system. The low negative predictive value (NPV = 
0.29) indicates that the system is weak in identifying 
genuine emails. Hence, there is a high likelihood that the 
system will treat hoax email as genuine emails. This 
conforms to the high value of sensitivity (0.71) which 
indicates that the probability of the system identifying 
hoax email as genuine email is high. The system has a 
high specificity value (0.80); this suggests that the 
probability of the system identify genuine email as hoax 
is high. Although the system is able to produce good 
results in identifying hoax emails, it lacks the ability to 
identify a hoax email written with the format of a genuine 
email. During system testing, we can observe that most of 
the hoax emails that have been written professionally 
have not been identified as hoax by the system. This is 
because emails that have been written professionally help 
to increase reader’s confidence and make them believe 
that the story that they tell is true. Hence, by using the 
format of the email (uppercase letters) as one of the 
factors to identify hoax email may not be an absolute 
effective method.  
V. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Being aware of the existence of hoaxes create greater 
awareness for finding the right knowledge which can be 
used to further develop a human’s perception as they 
grow. Misleading information can only cost losses to 
certain groups of people including tarnishing their image 
in the eye of the public. In this paper, we have developed 
a hoax detection system using Levenshtein Distance. The 
extracted e-mail is compared with the hoax database to 
support the decision on hoax identification. On the other 
hand, a value added feature is suggested in the proposed 
system by presenting the likeliness of hoaxes to the 
recipients. This makes a difference from the previous 
system. The system is able to provide high positive 
predictive value of 0.96 but it lacks the ability to identify 
genuine emails. Hoax emails does not only sent in a text-
based format but also with images. The collection of hoax 
keywords is limited. Hence, these are the limitation of the 
system and there is still room for improvements.  
 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014 445
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
For future work, the system can be improved by 
integrating artificial intelligence techniques such as fuzzy 
logic. With this technique, the system should be able to 
better classify hoax emails and genuine emails. Previous 
works in hoax detection is not adopting text processing 
theory except n-grams. However, it is believed that other 
text mining tool using machine learning algorithm [10] 
can be used as text pre-processing to extract texts from e-
mail.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Blanzieri, E. and A. Bryl, "A Survey of Learning-based 
Techniques of Email Spam Filtering," Artif. Intell. Rev., 
vol. 29(1), p. 63-92, 2008. 
[2] Vukovi, M., K. Pripu, and H. Belani, "An Intelligent 
Automatic Hoax Detection System", in Proceedings of the 
13th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and 
Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems: Part I. 
2009, Springer-Verlag: Santiago, Chile. p. 318-325. 
[3] Hernandez, C.J., Sierra, J.M. and Ribagorda, A., "A First 
Step towards Automatic Hoax Detection", in Proceedings. 
36th Annual 2002 International Carnahan Conference on 
Security Technology, 2002. 
[4 ]Petković, T., Kostanjčar, Z., and Pale, P., "E-Mail System 
for Automatic Hoax-Recognition", in XXVII. International 
Convention MIPRO 2005. 2005: Croatia. p. 117-121. 
[5] Brodie, R., "Virus of the Mind: The New Science of the 
Meme", Integral Press 1995, USA.  
[6] Cormack, G.V., "Email Spam Filtering: A Systematic 
Review", Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 
vol.1 (4): p. 335-455, 2008. 
[7] Androutsopoulos, I., Paliouras, G., Karkaletsis, V., Sakkis, 
G., Spyropoulos, C. and Stamatopoulos, P., "Learning to 
Filter Spam E-Mail: A Comparison of a Naive Bayesian 
and a Memory-Based Approach", in Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Machine Learning and Textual 
Information Access, 4th European Conference on 
Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in 
Databases (PKDD 2000), Lyon, France, pp. 1-13, 2000.  
[8] Hsiao, W.-F. and T.-M. Chang, "An incremental cluster-
based approach to spam filtering", Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 
34(3), p. 1599-1608, 2008. 
[9] Abi-Haidar, A. and Rocha, L.M., "Adaptive Spam 
Detection Inspired by a Cross-Regulation Model of 
Immune Dynamics: A Study of Concept Drift", in 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Artificial Immune Systems, Springer-Verlag Berlin, 
Heidelberg 2008. 
[10] Isa, D., Lee, L.H., Kallimani, V.P. and Rajkumar, R., "Text 
Document Preprocessing with the Bayes Formula for 
Classification Using the Support Vector Machine", IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 
20(9), p. 1264-1272, 2008. 
[11] Viola, P. and Narasimhand, M., "Learning to Extract 
Information from Semi-Structured Text Using a 
Discriminative Context Free Grammar", in Proceedings of 
the 298h Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 
pp.330-337, Univerrsity of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 
[12] Rozilawati, D. and Aono, M., "Ontology Based Approach 
for Classifying Biomedical Text Abstracts", Internationa 
Journal of Data Engineering, vol.2(1), 2011. 
[13] M.Christensen, B., "Latest Email Hoaxes - Current Internet 
Scams - Hoax-Slayer", Available from http://www.hoax-
slayer.com 
[14] Kanaris, I., Kanaris, K., Houvardas, I and Stamatatos, E., 
"Word versus Character N-Grams for Anti-Spam Filtering". 
International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, vol. 
16(6), p. 1047-1067, 2007. 
[15] Ifrim, G., Bakir, G. and Weikum, G., "Fast Logistics 
Regression for Text Categorization with Variable-Length 
N-Grams. Saarbrucken", in Proceedings of the 14th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowldege 
Discovery and Data Miing, pp.354-362, 2008. 
[16] Buckingham, J.T., Geoffrey, J.H., Goodman, J.T. and 
Rounthwaite, R.L., U.S. Patent No. 7899866. Washington 
D.C: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 
 
 
446 JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014
© 2014 ACADEMY PUBLISHER
