A Text Mining Approach to Assist the General Public in
the Retrieval of Legal Documents
Yen-Liang Chen and Yi-Hung Liu
Department of Information Management, National Central University, Chung-Li, No. 300, Jhongda Road,
Jhongli City, Taoyuan County 32001, Taiwan (R.O.C.). E-mail: ylchen@mgt.ncu.edu.tw; lyh0315@gmail.com
Wu-Liang Ho
Department of Legal Service, Straits Exchange Foundation, No. 536, Beian Road, Zhongshan District,
Taipei City, 10465, Taiwan (R.O.C.). E-mail: alainsouchan2005@yahoo.com.tw
Applying text mining techniques to legal issues has
been an emerging research topic in recent years.
Although some previous studies focused on assisting
professionals in the retrieval of related legal documents,
they did not take into account the general public and
their difficulty in describing legal problems in profes-
sional legal terms. Because this problem has not been
addressed by previous research, this study aims to
design a text-mining-based method that allows the
general public to use everyday vocabulary to search for
and retrieve criminal judgments. The experimental
results indicate that our method can help the general
public, who are not familiar with professional legal
terms, to acquire relevant criminal judgments more
accurately and effectively.
Introduction
The 21st century is a century of laws, and so, to protect
one’s rights, one should be acquainted with the law. The law
and our lives are intimately connected; numerous daily
events involve legal issues and have become a necessity to
modern life. The individual relationships within a society
may be full of conflict and friction, which can endanger
people’s lives and property. Therefore, to maintain social
harmony, a country must develop laws and require its citi-
zens to comply. Laws determine people’s standards of
behavior, stipulating what we can and cannot do. Unfortu-
nately, because of a lack of legal knowledge, the general
public can often inadvertently violate the law, causing unex-
pected legal disputes.
In Taiwan, the legal system is composed of the written
law, enacted by the legislature, and the executive authorities,
who develop a variety of administrative regulations. In court
cases, the judge reaches his or her decisions in accordance
with the stipulations and statutes of the law. Moreover, the
judge must interpret the statutes and the actual case situation
to make a clear judgment. A judgment consists of the file
number, the accused, the counsel, the cause of action, the
main body of a court verdict, the facts and reasons, the cited
statutes, the date of judgment, and the judge. Precedent is an
important concept that is used to justify subsequent cases
with similar issues or facts. The statutes and judgments (or
precedents) play an important role in the judge’s verdict in
governing the Taiwanese society.
Nowadays, various automatic systems based on computer
and Internet technologies have been developed to fulfill the
demands of the general public. In legal consultation, these
automatic systems can be categorized into: (1) searching
legal databases, such as LexisNexis (2012) and Westlaw
(2012), or (2) using search engines to obtain related legal
materials via the Internet.
Although these two methods can find relevant informa-
tion, they may have the following weaknesses:
(1) In both methods, documents are retrieved only if they
contain certain user-specified keywords. In other words,
to accurately and efficiently retrieve documents, users
must be acquainted with professional legal terms. Unfor-
tunately, general users usually do not have enough exper-
tise to express their query using precise and accurate legal
keywords. Therefore, this automatic approach is not
appropriate for the general public because they use
popular terms or slang to describe their legal issues, rather
than the professional terminology used in laws or statutes.
(2) In the database method, users must also be familiar with
query interfaces in order to search the database. For most
of the general public, this is a difficult requirement.
(3) In the search engine method, a user must convey his
problem with a list of keywords. He or she cannot
express him- or herself in a more natural manner, such as
in a paragraph using everyday vocabulary.
Received February 29, 2012; revised May 25, 2012 and June 23, 2012;
accepted June 25, 2012
© 2013 ASIS&T • Published online 3 January 2013 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.22767
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 64(2):280–290, 2013
In light of the problems mentioned previously, this work
proposes an automatic search method that is appropriate for
the general public. System users are not required to know
formal legal terms and can communicate their cases in a
more natural format.
Recently, text mining has become an important research
area. Text mining is the process of discovering pivotal infor-
mation and features from textual data. It is an interdiscipli-
nary field of several technologies, including databases, data
mining, information retrieval, linguistics, statistics, and so
on. Because most of human knowledge and history are
stored in documents containing text, texts are a rich reservoir
of valuable information. Depending on the type of docu-
ment, different pieces of valuable information are hidden.
Accordingly, numerous applications and methods have been
developed. Examples of these text mining applications
include news categorization (Calvo, 2001; Zheng, Milios, &
Watters, 2002), patent retrieval (Chen & Chiu, 2011; Kang,
Na, Kim & Lee, 2007), e-mail security (Bergholz, De Beer,
Glahn, Moens, Paaß, & Strobel, 2010; Cortez, Correia,
Sousa, Rocha, & Rio, 2010), scientific document retrieval
(Kaur, Yusof, Boursier, & Ogier, 2010), theme detection
(Velardi, Navigli, Cucchiarelli, & D’Antonio, 2008), docu-
ment sentiment analysis (He & Zhou, 2011; Li & Wu, 2010;
Zhang, Zeng, Li, Wang, & Zuo, 2009), authorship identifi-
cation (Stamatatos, 2009; Zheng et al., 2006), document
summarization (Aliguliyev, 2010; Pons-Porrata, Berlanga-
Llavori, & Ruiz-Shulcloper, 2007), online advertisement
recommendations (Thomaidou & Vazirgiannis, 2011; Wang
et al., 2011), search engines (Kawai, Jatowt, Tanaka,
Kunieda, & Yamada, 2011; Yin, 2007), and so on. Although
text mining has been utilized in many applications, it has
rarely been used in the legal domain’s published literature,
even though it could be a useful automatic tool for analyzing
legal documents.
Although there are a few studies regarding text mining in
the legal field (Chen & Chi, 2010; Chou & Hsing, 2010;
Moens, 2001; Moens, 2001), they were designed for profes-
sional users familiar with the law. They did not consider the
needs of the general public, who also require legal counsel-
ing and support, even though they have little formal legal
knowledge. Although they can describe the problem, their
terms mostly come from ordinary, daily vocabulary. Addi-
tionally, they do not have experience with query interfaces,
preventing them from navigating legal databases.
Therefore, this research aims to develop a legal document
retrieval system with the following two properties:
(1) The user can express his/her search as a short paragraph,
rather than as a query or with keywords.
(2) The user does not need precise legal terms in his/her
search. The user has the freedom to use any words he/she
chooses.
Figure 1 shows the system framework. The system’s
utilities include a collection of final criminal judgments used
as a database and a Google website.
The database is provided by the Judicial Yuan in Taiwan.
It stores more than 1.9 million historical district court judg-
ments of criminal cases in Taiwan from 2000 to 2010 (Judi-
cial Yuan, 2011). All cases include legal keywords, court
name, judgment number, specific time, judgment cause, and
a case description. Google’s search capabilities navigate the
gap between legal terms and general terms by finding the
corresponding legal terms to the user-provided general
terms.
The retrieval procedure for relevant cases can be divided
into four steps.
Step 1. Input user statement: The user inputs a short para-
graph stating his/her legal problem using general terms,
which includes ordinary, daily vocabulary.
Step 2. Transformation: The general terms in the user query
are mapped to related legal terms using Google.
Step 3. Identification: A document matching method is used
to determine the degree of relevance between the con-
verted user query and the collected final criminal judg-
ments.
Step 4. Return most relevant cases: After identification, the
most similar criminal case judgments are retrieved.
Our research focuses on assisting the general public in
retrieving legal documents through more natural queries. To
FIG. 1. Framework of the retrieval system. (Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.)
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013 281
DOI: 10.1002/asi
our knowledge, this query approach in the legal domain has
not been attempted in any previous research. In this study,
we acquire relevant written judgments of criminal cases by
applying text mining techniques and the Google Similarity
Distance Method (Cilibrasi & Vitanyi, 2007), which is well
suited to mitigate the differences between general and legal
terms. The method is divided into two phases: the training
phase and the query phase. In the training phase, we use text
mining techniques and expert review to determine a set of k
legal terms to use as the vector base for all legal documents.
Then, all legal documents can be represented as vectors with
k legal terms. Next, in the query phase, we employ the
Google Similarity Distance method (Cilibrasi & Vitanyi,
2007) and the cosine similarity measure to retrieve relevant
case judgments. The Google Similarity Distance method
transforms users’ query keywords into related legal terms. In
order to find similar judgments from past criminal cases, we
adopted the cosine similarity method, a measure of similar-
ity between two document vectors determined by measuring
the cosine of the angle between them (Baeza-Yates &
Ribeiro-Neto, 1999).
The rest of this article is organized as follows. The rel-
evant literature is first reviewed and described in Literature
Review. The research design is then introduced in Research
Design. In Experiments and Evaluation we discuss the
experiment results and evaluations. We then discuss findings
and limitations of this study in the Discussion section.
Finally, conclusions and future research suggestions are pre-
sented in Conclusion and Future Work.
Literature Review
An Overview of Text Mining
The high volume of information stored in unstructured
texts is not easily analyzed and requires specific processing
methods to extract useful patterns. Text mining is an analysis
process that discovers hidden features and extracts pivotal
information for further processing. It uses techniques from
information retrieval, information extraction, as well as
natural language processing (NLP) and combines them with
data mining, machine learning, and statistics.
When mining enormous document collections, it is nec-
essary to preprocess the text documents and store the infor-
mation in a more appropriate data structure for further
processing. Even though several methods exist that try to
exploit the syntactic structure and semantics of text, most
text mining approaches are based on the Vector Space Model
(VSM), which is the idea that text documents can be repre-
sented as vectors in multidimensional space. VSM was
originally introduced by Salton et al. in 1975 for indexing
and retrieving information, and is now widely used in text
mining approaches and document retrieval systems.
The simplest type of VSM uses a binary format, and
more advanced types use term weighting schemes (such as
the TF-IDF formula presented by Salton et al., 1994) to
improve performance. VSM’s accuracy and performance is
influenced by the selected vector base. To build a more
accurate and efficient vector base, a dimensionality reduc-
tion process must be conducted. According to Trappey and
Trappey (2008), several weighting schemes have been pro-
posed, such as TF (Baeza-Yates & Ribeiro-Neto, 1999;
Trappey & Trappey, 2008), TF-IDF (Salton, Allan, &
Buckley, 1994; Salton & McGill, 1983), variants of TF-IDF
(Salton & Buckley, 1988), entropy (Hotho, Nürnberger, &
Paaß, 2005; Lochbaum & Streeter, 1989), and chi-squares
(c2) (Feldman & Sanger, 2007; Li, Luo, & Chung, 2008).
For unlabeled documents, features can be selected according
to their weights. For labeled documents, feature selection
can be accomplished using methods based on the chi-square
(c2) value.
After transforming the documents into vectors, the simi-
larity between two documents can be computed using the
distance or correlation between the corresponding vectors
(Baeza-Yates & Ribeiro-Neto, 1999; Herlocker, Konstan,
Borchers, & Riedll, 1999; Hotho et al., 2005; Salton et al.,
1975). Some examples of these methods include Euclidean
distance, cosine measure, and Pearson coefficient.
Applications of Text Mining
Because text appears almost everywhere, so do text
mining applications. When text appears in new documents,
it usually leads to novel text mining applications. For
example, text mining methods can be used in news texts to
determine the news category (Calvo, 2001; Zheng et al.,
2002). In patent documents, patent retrieval methods can be
developed using text similarities (Chen & Chiu, 2011; Kang
et al., 2007). When receiving e-mail, we can determine
whether it is spam by analyzing its text (Bergholz et al.,
2010; Cortez et al., 2010). For scientific documents, intelli-
gent search methods can be designed by comparing text
similarities and other attributes (Kaur et al., 2010). In a
commentary, text mining methods can help discover the
main themes and the authors’ attitudes (He & Zhou, 2011; Li
& Wu, 2010; Velardi et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009). Addi-
tionally, text mining methods can be used to guess the iden-
tities of anonymous authors (Stamatatos, 2009; Zheng et al.,
2006). Text mining techniques can also be used to automati-
cally generate an abstract or summary of long documents
(Aliguliyev, 2010; Pons-Porrata et al., 2007). Furthermore,
commercial websites can use text mining methods to display
appropriate advertisements (Thomaidou & Vazirgiannis,
2011; Wang et al., 2011). As one of the most important
contributions, the modern search engine was developed by
using text mining techniques (Kawai et al., 2011;Yin, 2007).
It is impossible to list all text mining applications, but the
above discussion should illustrate the impact text mining has
had in countless situations.
A Literature Review of Text Mining in the Legal Domain
Text mining in the legal domain has been an emerging
research topic in recent years, and so far, only a few studies
282 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi
have been done. Moens (2001) regarded legal documents as
a type of text. Accordingly, he gave an overview of text
mining methods and discussed their potential to help
improve legal document retrieval. In Chen and Chi (2010),
the aim was to retrieve the most similar historical judgments
for the prosecution using the police’s criminal investigation
documents. Chou and Hsing (2010) developed a legal docu-
ment classification, clustering, and search methodology
based on neural network technology, helping law enforce-
ment to manage criminal written judgments.
All of the above systems were designed to support pro-
fessionals in retrieving or managing related legal docu-
ments, and do not take into account the fact that the general
public might find it difficult to describe their legal problems
in professional legal terms. This research gap motivated us
to propose a legal document retrieval system that is custom-
designed for the general public.
Research Design
The design architecture contains two main phases, the
training set generation phase and the query phase. In the
training set generation phase, the training data consist of
numerous criminal judgments. These cases are processed to
obtain a useful training set and an index base containing the
top k legal terms to be used in the query phase. The training
phase details are discussed in Phase 1: Training Set Genera-
tion. In the query phase, the retrieval method is based on the
NGD (Normalized Google Distance) method and finds
relevant criminal cases with respect to the user query.
The query phase is described in Phase 2: Query.
Definitions
Before we introduce the proposed approach, we define
two terms used in our research.
Definition 1. Legal Term Legal terms are “terms of art,”
words with specific meanings in a specific context and
highly unlikely to be used in everyday, informal conversa-
tion. A legal term l is a word or phrase with a specific
meaning in a legal context. We refer to terms used by legal
professionals or in formal legal documents as legal terms.
Two examples are “sexual harassment” and “secondary
boycott.”
Definition 2. Popular Term A popular term p refers to the
everyday, informal words used by the general public in
stating their legal problems or cases. A popular term may
itself be a legal term. Examples of popular terms are “get rid
of,” “poison,” and “steal.”
Phase 1: Training Set Generation
In Chinese, a word is the smallest independent, meaning-
ful element. There are no obvious boundaries between
words. Therefore, Chinese lexical analysis, such as Chinese
word segmentation, is a prerequisite for terms retrieval.
First, text preprocessing is conducted. The main purpose
is to clean and preprocess the criminal documents. In the
preprocessing steps of the training phase, we conduct
segmentation, stop word elimination, and Part-of-Speech
(POS) filtering operations.
We used the CKIP (2011) system, an online remote
Chinese word segmentation service, as the word segmenta-
tion tool. Every word token generated is followed by a
POS tag, produced by CKIP. Stop word elimination is con-
ducted next. Because there is no generally acknowledged
list of Chinese stop words in use, this research used a
self-defined list of Chinese stop words. To reduce the noise
from word segmentation and to obtain a better term list,
we used POS tagging to select meaningful candidate
terms. Traditionally, most studies have selected nouns to
represent documents. In criminal case documents, however,
other POS tags are also meaningful, such as adjectives
(共同, “together”), nouns (罪犯, “criminal”), and verbs (破
壞, “damage”). Therefore, we revised the traditional POS fi
ltering rule to keep adjectives, nouns, and verbs as
candidate terms.
After preprocessing, a number of terms will have been
extracted from these criminal judgments. These terms,
however, still need to be processed further to obtain repre-
sentative terms for each document. Therefore, three steps,
document expansion, feature selection, and expert verifica-
tion, are performed.
Although several terms have been extracted, these terms
may not be able to fully represent these criminal judg-
ments. We found that each criminal case has at least one
cited statute, and the terms in these statutes are usually
closely related to the case. This leads us to document
expansion, where we use legal terms extracted from these
statutes to expand the term list. By adding these extracted
legal terms to each term list, accurate retrieval of relevant
criminal cases in the query phase is improved. Figure 2
shows how the term list is expanded by adding terms from
the cited statutes.
This research attempts to generate representative vectors
for each criminal case in the gathered document set. Feature
selection is necessary to reduce the document dimensions
and is divided into two steps: (1) feature weight computation
and (2) top k legal term list generation.
In the feature term weight computation step, term fre-
quency (TF) and inverse document frequency (IDF) are two
common methods used to find the weight of each term.
Throughout this article, each document is represented by a
legal term set {l1 ,l2 , . . . , ln}, where n is the number of legal
terms that occur in the document. The relevance of each li
in the vector is calculated using the TF-IDF formula
(wij = tfij ¥ log(m/mi)). In this formula, wij is the weight of
term li in document dj, tfij is the occurrence of term li in
document dj, m is the total number of documents in the
document set, and mi is the number of documents containing
li. Moreover, if term li is extracted from cited statutes, the
TF-IDF formula changes to (wij = tfij ¥ log(m/mi) + 0.5).
After calculating the weights for each term, we obtain a
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013 283
DOI: 10.1002/asi
training set, which is represented by term-document matrix
W, where wi,j is the weight of legal term li in document dj .
To obtain the top k legal term list, we employ the TDV
(Term Discrimination Value) method proposed in Can and
Ozkarahan (1987). An optimal index term is one that can
distinguish between two different documents and relate two
similar documents. The discrimination value is the differ-
ence between the term-document matrix’s density and the
density of that same matrix without that index term. TDV
computation is divided into four steps and is described as
follows.
Step 1: Find the global document centroid G. The i-th entry >gi
(i = 1, . . . , n) of G is defined as the average weight of li in all m
documents:
g
m
wi ijj
m
=
=∑
1
1
Step 2: Find the average Euclidean distance s from every docu-
ment vector dj to G.
σ σ= ( ) ≥
=
∑1 0
1m
d d Gj
j
m
, Where
Step 3: Find the average Euclidean distance si from every docu-
ment vector dj to G, ignoring li.
σ i j i
j
m
j j j i j i j n
m
d d G
d w w w w w
= ′( )
′ =
=
− +
∑1
1
1 2 1 1
,
, , , , , ,, , , ,Where … … ,
, , , , , ,
j
i i i n
i
G g g g g g
( )
= ( )
≥
− +1 2 1 1
0
… …
σ
Step 4: Compute the Term Discrimination Value. TDVi is defined
as the discrimination value of legal term li .
TDVi i= −σ σ
Following these steps, we can compute the discrimina-
tion value for each legal term in the term-document matrix.
A legal term with a higher TDV has a greater capability of
distinguishing between documents. Therefore, we obtain the
top k legal term list by sorting the discrimination values of
each legal term.
Finally, we asked legal experts to check the appropriate-
ness of these selected top k terms. Based on their opinions,
we adjusted the list accordingly.
Phase 2: Query
In the query phase, a user query is segmented into mul-
tiple terms using the preprocessing steps described in the
training phase. The main goal is to transform the popular
terms in the original query into the k legal terms obtained in
the training phase. Transforming these popular terms into
legal terms, however, raises the following difficulties: (1) A
popular term may have multiple corresponding legal terms,
each of which is associated with a different degree of inten-
sity. (2) It is very difficult, if not impossible, to build an
ontology or dictionary to store all these mapping relations.
(3) Because popular terms are words used by the general
public in daily life, they may change over time.
The rise of the Internet has enticed numerous users to
create a large number of websites. Users, just by typing
keywords into a search engine, can access the largest global
data warehouse in human history. Search engines, such as
Google Search, can also return aggregate page-count esti-
mates for a query. Google distance, for a given set of key-
words, is a measure of semantic interrelatedness based on
the number of hits returned by the Google search engine.
Keywords with the same or similar meanings in natural
language tend to be “close” in units of Google distance,
while words with dissimilar meanings tend to be farther
apart (Wikipedia, 2012). In our study, we adopted the
Google distance method for the query terms transformation.
Figure 3 illustrates the query terms transformation
process. The preprocessing steps illustrated in the training
phase are used to segment a query into multiple popular
terms. To match the popular terms to the k legal terms
set derived from the training phase, we employ the NGD
(Normalized Google Distance) method (Cilibrasi & Vitanyi,
2007; Evangelista & Kjos-Hanssen, 2006). NGD is a seman-
tic relatedness method, in which the Google search engine is
FIG. 2. Process of document expansion. (Color figure can be viewed in
the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.)
284 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi
used to determine how closely related two terms are on the
basis of the frequency of their simultaneous occurrence in
web documents. NGD seeks to understand the relationship
between any two terms according to the number of search
results, that is, the number of returned pages. Cilibrasi and
Vitanyi (2007) provided a statistical index based on Google
page counts, showing the logical distance between a pair of
terms. The NGD formula is defined as follows:
NGD p l
f p f l f p l
M f p
i j
i j i j,
max log , log log ,
log min log
( ) = ( ) ( ){ } − ( )
− i jf l( ) ( ){ }, log
(1)
M denotes the total number of web pages indexed by
Google Search, f(pi) represents the number of web pages
containing popular term pi, f(li) signifies the number of web
pages containing legal term lj, and f(pi,lj) is the number of
web pages containing both popular term pi and legal term lj,
as reported by Google Search. The NGD function measures
how close popular term pi is to legal term lj on a scale from
zero to one. A distance of zero indicates that the two terms
are practically identical and two independent terms have a
distance of one.
We can relate a popular term pi to k legal terms l1, l2, . . .,
lk in varying degrees. The vector vi = (vi,1, . . ., vi,k) is a
k-dimensional vector, where vi,j represents the similarity
between popular term pi and legal term lj. The definition of
vi,j is as follows:
v NGD p li j i j, ,= − ( )1 (2)
The higher the value of vi,j, the higher the similarity between
popular term pi and legal term lj. After the similarity values
between the popular and legal terms were computed, we
proposed the following method to transform a popular term
into one or multiple legal terms.
Step 1: Calculate the similarity value vi,j between popular terms
piand each of the k legal terms ljprovided by the training phase.
Step 2: Let sim-perci,j be the percentage of vi,j and the sum of vi,j
over all legal terms. Intuitively, sim-perci,j is the similarity between
popular term pi and legal term ljdivided by the total similarity of
popular term pi. It can determine how much percentage of the
weight of popular term pi is to be distributed to legal term lj . Also,
let pwi,q be the weight of popular term pi in query q. The formulas
of sim-perci,j and pwi,,j are defined as follows:
sim perc
v
v
i j
i j
i j
− =
∑,
,
,
pw
freq
freq
i q
i q
l l q
,
,
,max
=
maxl freql,q is computed over all terms that occur within the
query q.
Step 3: Distribute the weight of pwi,q to k legal terms lj according to
sim-perci,j , which is defined as aweighti,j. The aweighti,j indicates
how much weight of popular term pi is to be distributed to legal
term lj.
aweight pw sim perci j i q i j, , ,= × −
Step 4: Sum up the weight aweighti,j of each legal term.
In Figures 4 and 5, we have two popular terms, P1 and
P2, with weights of 0.5 and 0.8, respectively. Assume that
the similarity values of popular term P1 to legal terms L1,
L2, and L3 are 0.8, 0.6, and 0.5, respectively, whereas those
of P2 to legal terms L1, L3, L4, and L5 are 0.9, 0.6, 0.4, and
0.1, respectively. In step 2, we found that the percentages of
L1, L2, and L3 with respect to P1 are 0.42, 0.32, and 0.26,
respectively, whereas those of L1, L3, L4, and L5 to P2 are
0.45, 0.3, 0.2, and 0.05, respectively. Therefore, the weights
of popular term P1 distributed to legal terms L1, L2, and L3
are 0.21, 0.16, and 0.13, respectively, whereas the weights of
popular term P2 distributed to legal terms L1, L3, L4, and L5
are 0.36, 0.24, 0.16, and 0.043, respectively. Finally, the
weights of legal terms L1, L2, L3, L4, and L5 are 0.57, 0.16,
0.24, 0.29, and 0.04, respectively.
Using the above method, we can transform a query state-
ment into a vector of k legal terms and retrieve the most
similar criminal cases from the training set. To achieve this,
we use cosine similarity to compute the similarity values
between a query and training set. Cosine similarity function
measures how close query q is to document dj on a scale
FIG. 3. Process of query term transformation. (Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.)
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013 285
DOI: 10.1002/asi
from zero to one. A value of zero indicates complete irrel-
evance. A higher similarity value implies greater similarity
between the query and the criminal case. Thus, we can
obtain the top r ranking criminal cases. The cosine similarity
function formula is defined below.
sim d q
d q
d q
w w
w w
j
j
j
i j i qi
n
i ji
n
i qi
n
,
, ,
, .
( ) = ⋅
×
=
×
×
=
= =
∑
∑ ∑
 
 
1
2
1
2
1
Where 0  sim(d ,q)  1.
Experiments and Evaluation
The main purpose of the following experiment is to
evaluate whether our proposed method’s accuracy is better
than the traditional TF-IDF weighting method for retrieving
legal document sets using queries containing everyday
terms. The experiment compares the performances of these
two methods through a survey. The evaluation details are
explained in the following subsections.
Data Collection
Our experiment contained two phases. In the training set
generation phase, the experimental data were built from
Chinese criminal judgments stored in the Law and Regula-
tions Retrieving System (Judicial Yuan, 2011). The text data
were extracted from the fact field, which describes the crimi-
nal facts and processes of the defendants. The experiment
data came from the 10 most common types of crime in 2010,
as reported by the Judicial Yuan. We randomly drew
approximately 100 judgments from each type of crime. As a
result, the data set contains 1,031 criminal judgments.
Table 1 shows the allocation of criminal judgments across
the 10 types. In the query phase, we selected 10 query
examples from metropolitan civil news stories (Udn News
Net, 2011). Udn News Net is a well-known news website in
Taiwan, containing various types of news stories related to
people’s everyday lives and social events. The length of
these 10 query examples varied from 37 to 91 words. The
following is an example of a query:
Query: 台中市刑警大隊於9月19日晚在沙鹿鎮民宅查
到大型簽賭站，阮姓嫌犯涉嫌全家一起經營，人贓俱
獲。(Taichung City police found a large gambling ring in a
home on the evening of September 19, in Shalu township. R
uan and his family are suspected of being involved with the
operation and were caught in the act.) From this query, we
obtain the following useful terms:
Terms:民宅 (“home”)
查到 (“find”)
簽賭站 (“gambling ring”)
涉嫌 (“suspected of being involved”)
經營 (“operation”)
人贓俱獲 (“caught in the act”)
All 10 queries are listed in the Appendix. After all the
target data were collected, text preprocessing tasks were
executed, including word segmentation, stop word elimina-
tion, and POS tagging. These outcomes were then used as
the input data for the next step.
FIG. 4. Relationship between popular terms and legal terms. (Color
figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.)
FIG. 5. Comparison of the weight of legal terms. (Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.)
TABLE 1. Information about training data collection.
Type # Training docs
Offenses Against Public Safety 123
Offenses of Larceny 85
Offenses of Fraud 101
Offenses of Causing Bodily Harm 101
Offenses of Forging Instruments or Seals 111
Offenses Against Sexual Autonomy 101
Offenses of Gambling 102
Offenses of Homicide 103
Offenses of Misappropriation 102
Offenses Against Personal Liberty 102
Total 1,031
286 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Details of Implementation
We conducted an empirical study to examine if the pro-
posed method could achieve satisfactory results. First, pre-
processing was conducted on the document set. A stop word
list containing 8,722 words was developed to remove useless
words.After preprocessing, a number of terms were extracted
from the document set, and we then conducted document
expansion. A total of 260 legal terms were extracted from the
cited regulations and were added to the term list, such as意圖
(intent), 不動產(real estate), and 過失(negligence). In the
end, we obtained a term list with 9,219 terms. The TF-IDF
weighting schemes were then used to determine the feature
weights. Each term’s weight was computed and a training
set was obtained. In the next step, in order to determine the
top k legal terms, all legal terms in the term list were ana-
lyzed using the TDV formula. Each legal term’s discrimi-
nation value was acquired and sorted, resulting in the top k
legal term list. We asked the final author of this article, who
is an attorney and legal expert, to verify whether these
selected top k terms were appropriate. Additionally, we
applied another measure, cosine measure, in steps 2 and 3 of
TDV computation instead of Euclidean distance. Our legal
expert checked the two legal term lists (each with 865 legal
terms), and chose 540 appropriate legal terms from each list.
An interesting observation here is that only 1% of terms
differed between the two verified term lists derived from
these two different measures. According to our expert’s
opinion, the term list derived from Euclidean distance was
more appropriate. Based on his suggestions, we adopted
Euclidean distance and set k = 540.
To assess the accuracy of the proposed method, the com-
parison method used a traditional TF-IDF scheme to build
vectors for both the cases in the training set and for the 10
queries. In other words, the comparison method did not
build a top k list and transform the query terms using this
list. It converted every query into a corresponding vector
using the formula below:
W
freq
freq
m
m
i q
i q
l l q i
,
,
,
.
max
log= ×
0 5
The weight Wi,q is the weight of term i in query q. The query
vector is formed with these query terms’ weights. Then,
cosine similarity measure is used to retrieve the relevant
criminal cases in the training set.
Experimental Results and Evaluation
A survey questionnaire was used to compare these two
methods. We developed a paper-based survey in which we
showed the three most similar cases retrieved using these
two methods, and asked respondents to score their degree of
satisfaction for each question. For the respondents’ conve-
nience, we put the similar cases drawn with our method for
each query question on one page, and the results of the
comparison method on another page.
In our main survey, 150 respondents were chosen from
two groups: Academic and Practitioner. Students and pro-
fessors in law departments were in the Academic group,
whereas lawyers and those in other legal professions
belonged to the Practitioner group. A total of 36 responses
were received, resulting in a response rate of 24%. Table 2
lists the backgrounds of these respondents. The question-
naire contained 10 questions, each of which was a news
event concerning a certain type of crime. For each question,
we retrieved the top three ranked criminal judgments using
our proposed method and the comparison method. The
respondents were asked to score the retrieved results of each
method and query question. Scores ranged from 1 to 5
points, and each respondent should have provided a total of
20 scores. Respondents were instructed to give higher scores
for higher satisfaction regarding the similarities between the
top three relevant criminal judgments and the query.
To compare users’ degrees of satisfaction between the
two methods, an independent T-test was conducted in the
evaluation. Table 3 lists the T-test results for all queries. As
shown in Table 3, the mean values of our proposed method
were higher than those of the comparison method for all 10
questions. The overall average satisfaction degree of our
proposed method and the comparison method were 3.245
and 2.328, respectively. Among them, nine results were sig-
nificant and only one was not. The only insignificant result
was Question 6’s query, which deals with offenses against
public safety. It was not significant because there are many
crime subtypes in this category, such as poisoning, arson,
drunk driving, hijacking, and so on. Therefore, there were
only a very limited number of criminal cases related to
poisoning, which was the issue in Question 6. Under such
conditions, we did not have enough data to train the system,
causing a mediocre performance for our proposed method in
Question 6.
Discussion
Findings
The goal of our study was to build a framework for legal
document retrieval by proposing a new query method suit-
able for the general public. To resolve the lack of mapping
lexicon between lay terms and legal terms, a semantic relat-
edness approach, NGD, was adopted to facilitate the trans-
formation. The core of our method involved TDV, NGD, and
cosine similarity measure. In order to confirm the reliability
TABLE 2. Backgrounds of the respondents.
Group Type # Questionnaires
Academic Student in department of law 15
Teacher in department of law 2
Practitioner Legal profession 16
Lawyer 3
Total 36
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013 287
DOI: 10.1002/asi
of our experiment results, the respondents in the satisfaction
survey were required to have a legal background and pro-
fessional knowledge that made them capable of answering
the questionnaire. The experiment results demonstrate that
the proposed method performs better than the baseline
TF-IDF method, and confirms that the transformation of
popular terms to legal terms is essential in retrieving legal
documents. Of the 10 query questions, the P values of the
proposed method were statistically significantly better than
the comparison method in nine questions, as shown in
Table 2. The only reason the one query question was not
significantly better was because there was an insufficient
number of cases for training the classifier to classify a crime
type. This result indicates that sufficient legal documents are
critical to building an effective legal retrieval system.
There is an increasing need for more effective and
smarter legal systems or databases that can help the general
public acquire related information in solving legal issues.
This study successfully provides a mediator to bridge the
gap between popular terms used in informal, everyday lan-
guage and legal terms used in professional systems or by
experts. The mediator was designed by adopting semantic
relatedness, term discrimination, and cosine similarity
measure. With our proposed method, general users are freed
from using unfamiliar professional terms or vocabularies to
search or query legal systems.
Limitations of the Study
The limitations of this study should be acknowledged.
First, our research is restricted to criminal codes. Due
to different properties within different laws, the external
validity of our proposed method is somewhat restricted.
Second, we spent 2 to 3 months collecting and analyzing the
data, that is, criminal judgments, because there were no
available public criminal judgment data sets that could be
used for this experiment. The experiment’s validity could be
improved if public data sets were used as benchmarks.
Third, with regard to the cases drawn for the experiment, the
cases were restricted to the 10 most frequently occurring
types of crime in Taiwan in 2010. Fourth, we needed the
help of legal experts to select terms because text mining
techniques have not yet been commonly applied to the
legal domain in Chinese society. Due to the newness of this
area, there are no existing Chinese legal dictionaries that
can help us filter out nonrepresentative words or stop words.
However, in the long run, after more efforts have been
devoted to this area, such dictionaries may become avail-
able. At that time, our proposed method can be fully auto-
matic, without relying on the help of a legal expert. Finally,
the study’s evaluation was based on a sample of 36 respon-
dents. If a larger sample was used, the evidence may have
more statistical power.
Conclusion and Future Work
Because of a lack of knowledge and legal background,
the general public has found it difficult to navigate automatic
law consulting systems. To bridge this gap, this article pro-
posed an innovative method to assist the general public in
the automatic retrieval of criminal judgments from historical
legal documents. This study combined the semantic similar-
ity measure, the NGD method, and the cosine similarity
measure to locate more accurate criminal judgments. The
TABLE 3. T-test results for 10 queries.
Question Method
Average
mean
Standard
deviation T value P value
1 Our proposed method 3.5 0.655 10.485** 5.37E-16
Comparing method 1.722 0.779
2 Our proposed method 3.167 1.108 5.521** 5.36E-07
Comparing method 1.667 1.195
3 Our proposed method 3.417 1.025 5.839** 1.51E-07
Comparing method 2.167 0.775
4 Our proposed method 3.917 0.77 5.015** 3.84E-06
Comparing method 2.778 1.124
5 Our proposed method 2.528 0.91 3.624** 0.0005
Comparing method 1.694 1.037
6 Our proposed method 2.472 0.845 1.038 0.303
Comparing method 2.278 0.741
7 Our proposed method 3.306 1.167 4.022** 0.0001
Comparing method 2.333 0.862
8 Our proposed method 3.361 0.961 2.104* 0.039
Comparing method 2.833 1.159
9 Our proposed method 3.806 0.467 2.907** 0.005
Comparing method 3.306 0.92
10 Our proposed method 2.972 0.81 2.42* 0.018
Comparing method 2.5 0.845
Note: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.
288 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi
training data in the experiments were historical criminal
judgments taken from the laws and regulations retrieving
system of the Judicial Yuan in Taiwan. We selected 10 news
stories from metropolitan civil news to use as queries. The
retrieved results were evaluated through a survey given to
legal professionals. To analyze the survey results, 10 inde-
pendent T-tests were employed and showed that our pro-
posed method is superior to the traditional querying method.
In the future, the current work should be extended so that
it can recommend the most relevant and needed laws and
statutes for a query that uses everyday, informal vocabulary.
Furthermore, we plan to improve the system so that it will
also provide possible verdicts for the user’s legal problem
and provide possible judgment results using not only the
problem itself, but also the judge’s identity or characteris-
tics. Finally, similar factual scenarios might appear in many
different areas of law. For example, human injury arising
from an accident involving a golf cart might manifest itself
in torts (negligence), product liability, or criminal charges (if
alcohol was involved). A potential research issue is media-
tion between the factual specifics and the particular area
of law.
References
Aliguliyev, R.M. (2010). Clustering techniques and discrete particle swarm
optimization algorithm for multi-document summarization. Computa-
tional Intelligence, 26(4), 420–448.
Baeza-Yates, R., & Ribeiro-Neto, B. (1999). Modern information retrieval.
Wokingham, UK: Addison-Wesley.
Bergholz, A., De Beer, J., Glahn, S., Moens, M.-F., Paaß, G., & Strobel, S.
(2010). New filtering approaches for phishing email. Journal of Com-
puter Security, 18(1), 7–35.
Calvo, R.A. (2001). Classifying Financial News With Neural Networks,
Proc. of the 6th Australasian Document Computing Symposium.
Can, F., & Ozkarahan, E. A. (1987) Computation of term/document dis-
crimination values by use of the cover coefficient concept. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 38(3), 171–183.
Chen, C.-H., & Chi, J.Y.P. (2010). Use text mining to generate the draft of
indictment for prosecutor. PACIS 2010 proceedings. 706–712.
Chen, Y. L., & Chiu, Y. T. (2011). An IPC-based vector space model for
patent retrieval. Information Processing and Management, 47(3), 309–
322.
Chou, S.C., & Hsing, T. P. (2010). Text Mining Technique for Chinese
Written Judgment of Criminal Case. IEEE Intelligence and Security
Informatics Conference. 113–125.
Cilibrasi, R. L., & Vitanyi, P. M.B. (2007). The Google Similarity Distance.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 19(3), 370–
383.
CKIP. (2011). On-line Chinese words segmented service. Retrieved
October 1, 2011, from http://ckipsvr.iis.sinica.edu.tw/.
Cortez, P., Correia, A., Sousa, P., Rocha, M., & Rio, M. (2010). Spam email
filtering using network-level properties. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 6171 LNAI, 476–489.
Evangelista, A., & Kjos-Hanssen, B. (2006). Google distance between
words. Frontiers in Undergraduate Research, University of Connecticut.,
Feldman, R., & Sanger, J. (2007). The text mining handbook: advanced
approaches in analyzing unstructured data. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Herlocker, J.L., Konstan, J.A., Borchers, A., & Riedll, J. (1999). An algo-
rithmic framework for performing collaborative filtering. In Proceedings
of the 22nd Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR’99), (pp. 230–237). New York: ACM Press.
Hotho, A., Nürnberger, A., & Paaß, G. (2005). A brief survey of text
mining. LDV-Forum GLDV Journal for Computational Linguistics and
Language Technology, 20(1), 19–62.
He, Y., & Zhou, D. (2011). Self-training from labeled features for sentiment
analysis. Information Processing and Management, 47(4), 606–616.
Kang, I.S., Na, S.H., Kim, J., & Lee, J.H. (2007). Cluster-based patent
retrieval. Information Processing & Management, 43(5), 1173–1182.
Kaur, J., Yusof, M., Boursier, P., & Ogier, J.-M. (2010) Automated scien-
tific document retrieval. The 2nd International Conference on Computer
and Automation Engineering, ICCAE 20105, 732–736.
Kawai, H., Jatowt, A., Tanaka, K., Kunieda, K., & Yamada, K. (2011).
Query expansion and text mining for chronoseeker-search engine for
future/past events. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems,
E94-D (3), 552–563.
Lochbaum, K.E., & Streeter, L.A. (1989). Combining and comparing the
effectiveness of latent semantic indexing and the ordinary vector space
model for information retrieval. Information Processing & Management,
25(6), 665–676.
Li, Y.J., Luo, C., & Chung, S.M. (2008). Text clustering with feature
selection by using statistical data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge And
Data Engineering, 20(5), 641–652.
Li, N., & Wu, D.D. (2010). Using text mining and sentiment analysis for
online forums hotspot detection and forecast. Decision Support Systems,
48(2), 354–368.
Moens, M.F. (2001). Innovative techniques for legal text retrieval. Artificial
Intelligence and Law, 29–57.
Pons-Porrata, A., Berlanga-Llavori, R., & Ruiz-Shulcloper, J. (2007). Topic
discovery based on text mining techniques. Information Processing and
Management, 43(3), 752–768.
Salton, G., Wong, A., & Yang, C.S. (1975). A vector space model for
automatic indexing. Communications of the ACM, 18(11), 613–620.
Salton, G., & McGill, M. (1983). Introduction to modern information
retrieval. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Salton, G., & Buckley, C. (1988). Term-weighting approaches in automatic
text retrieval. Information Processing & Management, 24(5), 513–
523.
Salton, G., Allan, J., & Buckley, C. (1994). Automatic structuring and
retrieval of large text files. Communications of the ACM, 37(2), 97–108.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 60(3), 538–556.
Thomaidou, S., & Vazirgiannis, M. (2011). Multiword keyword recommen-
dation system for online advertising. Proceedings of 2011 International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, 423–
427.
Trappey, A.J.C., & Trappey, C.V. (2008). An R&D knowledge manage-
ment method for patent document. Industrial Management & Data
Systems, 108(1–2), 245–257.
Velardi, P., Navigli, R., Cucchiarelli, A., & D’Antonio, F. (2008). A new
content-based model for social network analysis. Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Semantic Computing 2008, 18–25.
Wang, J., Wang, B., Duan, L.-y., Tian, Q., & Lu, H. (2011). Interactive ads
recommendation with contextual search on product topic space. Multi-
media Tools and Applications, &–22.
Yin, H. (2007). Method and system of knowledge based search engine
using text mining. Google Patents, US Patent 7257530.
Zhang C. L., Zeng D., Li J.X., Wang F.Y., & Zuo W.L. (2009). Sentiment
analysis of Chinese documents: From sentence to document level.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 60(12), 2474–2487.
Zheng, W., Milios, E., & Watters, C. (2002) Filtering for medical news
items using a machine learning approach. AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings, 949–953.
Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H., & Huang, Z. (2006). A framework for author-
ship identification of online messages. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 57(3), 378–393.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013 289
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Judicial Yuan. (2011). Law and regulations retrieving system of the
Judicial Yuan of The Republic of China. Retrieved from http://
jirs.judicial.gov.tw/Index.htm
LexisNexis. (2012). A web-based legal database system. Retrieved from
http://www.lexisnexis.com/
Westlaw. (2012). A web-based legal information database system.
Retrieved from http://international.westlaw.com/
Wikipedia. (2012). The definition of Normailzed Google distance.
Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalized_Google_
distance
Udn News Net. (2011). Union daily news. Retrieved from http://udn.com/
NEWS/mainpage.shtml
Appendix
Ten query questions.
Question Content
1 新竹警方查獲KTV羅姓女店員暗中抄下多名客人信用卡號和卡片背面認證碼到網路盜刷. (HsinChu Police seized Luo, a female cl
erk at a KTV, who wrote down guests’ credit card numbers and authentication codes in order to commit online shopping fraud.)
2 男子王耀弘與同夥組成暴力討債集團，利用中部營造商與下游廠商彼此借貸關係介入替人討債，要到錢就拿走5成，要不到就勒
索數10萬元當走路工，部分營造商不甘「請鬼拿藥單」，報警把王嫌等人抓起來. (Suspect Yao-hong Wang formed a violent debt
collecting group with his partners. They collected debt using the credit relations between the builders of central Taiwan and their OEM.
They took away fifty percent of the debt. However, without collecting the debt successfully, they would blackmail companies for several
hundred thousand dollars and demand those companies to work for them. Some builders did not wish to seek their own destruction and
had police arrest them.)
3 林男去醫院探望時，見當時年僅15歲的鄧小妹頗具姿色且年幼可欺，佯裝要送她回家，鄧女父母不敢拒絕，林男把鄧女帶回家
後，即對當時尚在國中就讀的鄧女強姦得逞. (A man, Lin, visited his friends, the Dengs, in the hospital and saw their young and bea
utiful 15-year-old daughter who was a junior high school student at the time. With no objection from his friends, he offered to take her
home. Upon arrival, he successfully raped her.)
4 台中市刑警大隊於9月19日晚在沙鹿鎮民宅查到大型簽賭站，阮姓嫌犯涉嫌全家一起經營，人贓俱獲. (Taichung City police foun
d a large gambling ring in a home on the evening of September 19, in Shalu township. Ruan and his family are suspected of being invol
ved with the operation and were caught in the act.)
5 男子陳世緯在本月14日潛入中西區大同路1處民宅，企圖偷東西。他發現屋內有大量漫畫，竟1本接1本看了3個多小時，被返家
的屋主發現，報警逮捕. (A thief named Shi-wei Chen broke into a house on Datong Road, in the West district of Taichung, and attem
pted a burglary on the 14th of this month. He found a large number of comic books and actually read them for more than three hours. T
he owner found him upon his return and called the police to arrest him.)
6 台中陳姓老夫妻神祕中毒案，而下毒的嫌犯竟然就是自己的外籍媳婦。因為婆媳兩人長期關係不合，嫌犯在上班的工廠取得「
亞硝酸鈉」，放進婆婆冰在冰箱的筍湯，導致公婆吃了差點送命. (In Taichung, an elderly couple, the Chens, were mysteriously poi
soned. The suspect in this case is their foreign daughter-in-law, with whom they had a long-standing bad relationship. The suspect obtai
ned sodium nitrite from the factory she worked at and added it to her mother-in-law’s bamboo shoot soup in the refrigerator, which alm
ost caused her in-laws’ deaths.)
7 昨晚11時坦承酒駕開車的蔡耀庭，本想開車從大雅區到神岡區林森路的表哥家拜訪，不料開車自撞電線桿。警方表示，晚上夜
深人靜無人傷亡，蔡某酒測值高達1.28毫克升. (Drunk driver Tsai Yaoting attempted to drive from the Daya district to the Shengan d
istrict to visit his cousin via Linsen Road. At 11 o’clock last night, he hit a wire pole. The police said Tsai’s blood alcohol level was 1.2
8 mg per liter, but no one was injured in last night’s accident.)
8 疑似精神異常張姓男子昨持西瓜刀砍殺鄰居，林姓男子及兩名就讀國中小兒子受傷，送醫無大礙，他徒步逃逸後向警方投案，
鄰居嚇得直說恐怖. (Mr. Chang, a suspected psychotic, stabbed his neighbors with a melon knife yesterday. His neighbor, Lin, and his
two sons in junior high school were not seriously injured and were sent to a hospital. A neighbor who witnessed the event said they felt
scared. Mr. Chang surrendered to the police after escaping on foot.)
9 富邦人壽陳姓業務員日幫翁姓女子投保時，將翁女的首期保費13萬元占為己有，並將翁女的保費繳費方式從年繳改為月繳，使
保單變成無效保單. (When Fubon Life Insurance salesman, Mr. Chen, helped a woman, Ms. Weng, purchase insurance a few days ago,
he held the initial premium, 130,000 N.T. dollars, for himself and changed the premium payment method from paying annually to mont
hly. This invalidated the insurance policy.)
10 利姓男子於住處煮粥時，使用爐火不慎，導致瓦斯外洩，引發爆炸，導致利男胞兄與樓上住戶逃生不及，造成4人吸入過多一氧
化碳中毒死亡. (While cooking porridge at his home, Mr. Li used his stove carelessly, causing an explosion triggered by a gas leak. His
brother and tenants upstairs could not escape and were all killed by carbon monoxide poisoning.)
290 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi
