A Platform Framework for Cross-lingual Text Relatedness Evaluation and 
Plagiarism Detection 
Abstract 
Research work related to plagiarism detection 
methods in dealing with monolingual texts (e.g. 
English texts) have been well established in recent 
years. However, little attention has been paid to 
facilitate plagiarism detection in cross-lingual text 
collections (e.g. English and Chinese texts). In this 
paper we present a system platform to evaluating text 
similarity and relatedness in multilingual text 
collections for plagiarism detection. First, we utilized 
a number of selected texts in Chinese-English parallel 
corpora collected from internet to train text classifiers 
based on the Support Vector Machines (SVM) model. 
As such, the multilingual texts of unknown category 
can be classified by the trained classifiers. 
Subsequently, the resulting categorized texts were 
measured by means of a language-neutral clustering 
technique based on Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) 
method for evaluating semantic similarity among texts. 
The preliminary results show that our platform 
framework has the potential for cross-lingual text 
relatedness evaluation and plagiarism detection. 
1. Introduction 
Evaluation of relatedness and similarity of cross-
lingual texts and plagiarism detection have 
increasingly become important issues in the 
applications of academics, intellectual property 
protection, and knowledge based economies, etc. In 
essence, text relatedness/similarity evaluation and 
plagiarism detection are two sides of a coin. Both of 
them focus on finding similar texts or information for a 
specific topic. A general definition of plagiarism is 
“take (the work or idea of someone else) and pass it off 
as one’s own.”1 or practice of claiming, or implying, 
original authorship of (or incorporating material from) 
someone else's written or creative work, in whole or in 
part, into one's own without adequate 
                                                          
1 See http://www.askoxford.com,  January 2008
acknowledgement.”2. Plagiarist will never only change 
keywords or modify syntaxes but imitate original 
concepts. Maurer[6] listed four broader categories of 
plagiarism, including accidental, unintentional, 
intentional, and self-plagiarism. In terms of the above 
plagiarism types, most of the extended research work 
have been primarily concerned with three issues: 
plagiarism analysis[9], authorship identification[5], 
and near-duplicate detection [1]. Detecting plagiarism 
and copyright infringement in documents are crucial 
and challenging tasks especially in paper publication 
and academic evaluations. To deal with such issues, 
lots of automatic techniques to the evaluation of text 
similarity and relatedness have been developed, 
allowing people quickly find out where, why and how 
the documents are related to each other. Research work 
related to plagiarism detection methods in dealing with 
monolingual texts (e.g. English texts) have been well 
established in recent years. However, little attention 
has been paid to facilitate plagiarism detection in 
cross-lingual text collections (e.g. English and Chinese 
texts). Compared with traditional monolingual 
plagiarism identification, plagiarism analysis of cross-
lingual texts appears to be far more complicate and 
challenging. It may require a language model to map 
several documents in different languages into a 
universal space for vector computation, and then 
evaluate the relatedness or concept similarity of tested 
texts. In this work we attempt to tackle the challenges 
by establishing a two-pass process platform framework 
to facilitate cross-lingual text relatedness evaluation 
and plagiarism detection. 
2. Related Work 
As mentioned above, plagiarist will never only 
change keywords or modify syntaxes but imitate 
original concepts for plagiarism. To facilitate 
recognition of cross-lingual text relatedness and 
                                                          
2 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plagiarism, January 2008
Hsin-Chang Yang 
Dept of Information Management,  
National University of Kaohsiung, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
yanghc@nuk.edu.tw 
Chung-Hong Lee and Chih-Hong Wu 
 Dept of Electrical Engineering,
National Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
leechung@mail.ee.kaus.edu.tw,1095421105@cc.kuas.edu.tw 
The 3rd Intetnational Conference on Innovative Computing Information 
and Control (ICICIC'08) 
978-0-7695-3161-8/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
plagiarism, many approaches have used verbatim 
overlaps and machine translation to find similar 
content in multilingual documents. The utilization of 
machine translation for identification between different 
text pairs is a basic idea to recognize cross-lingual 
plagiarism[7]. CL-LSI(Cross-language Latent Semantic 
Index) is a well known technique and has good 
performance results than machine translation. 
Littman[10] proposed CL-LSI applying SVD process 
on English-French document, and Lee [2] categorized 
English-Chinese text by computing the centroid of 
training documents in LSI-space to represent the 
corresponding class. Moreover, linguistic information, 
i.e. syntactic structure, can help recognize text based 
on the way they are written. Uzuner[8] presented a set 
of low-level syntactic structures that capture creative 
aspects of writing and show that information about 
linguistic similarities of works improves recognition of 
plagiarism. 
The research work of finding text semantic 
correspondence between documents in different 
languages by text mining and machine learning 
techniques have been obtained a significant progress in 
recent years. Lee [3] presented a language-neutral 
method, based on Self-organization Maps (SOM) and 
provided a concept-based query, to discover implicit 
association in the Chinese-English document 
collections. Li and Shawe-Taylor [14] investigated an 
approach so-called kernel canonical correlation 
analysis(KCCA), with a pairs of semantic feature 
vector, for Japanese-English cross-language 
information retrieval. In this work, we perform a 
hybrid method combining both supervised and 
unsupervised machine learning approaches for text 
evaluation. First, we develop a unified vector space 
and SVM techniques model to classify domain specific 
multilingual texts, and then map them to document 
cluster map by means of self-organizing maps methods 
according to the closeness of the resulting vectors for 
obtaining the relatedness among texts. The preliminary 
results show that evaluation of text relatedness for 
bilingual documents makes cross-lingual plagiarism 
detection more feasible and can be extended to 
different domains. 
3. Fundamental concepts of techniques for 
multilingual text categorization and text 
relatedness evaluation 
In this work, we developed a two-pass process 
platform to evaluating text similarity and relatedness in 
multilingual text collections for plagiarism detection. 
First, we utilized a number of selected texts in 
Chinese-English parallel corpora collected from 
internet to train text classifiers based on the Support 
Vector Machines (SVM) model. The goal of SVM is to 
find a decision surface to separate the training samples 
into two classes and make decisions based on the 
support vectors that are selected as the only effective 
elements from the training set. For text classification, 
SVM makes decision based on the globally optimized 
separating hyper-lane. It simply finds out on which 
side of the hyper-plane the test pattern is located (see 
Figure 1). In particular, Joachims[11] has done much 
research on the applying SVM to text categorization.
On the other hand, if training samples can’t be 
separated into two classes, SVM maps the samples into 
a high dimension feature space and find a decision 
surface to separate the training samples into two 
classes (see Figure 2). Such mappings can be 
performed by several kernel functions, such as Radial 
Basic Function (RBF) and polynomial kernels, as 
shown in Equation (1) and Equation (2). 
Figure 1. Structure of SVM 
Figure 2. Kernal Mapping of SVM classifier
Equation (1) is Radial Basic Function (RBF) kernel, 
is one parameter of the kernel. Equation (2) is 
polynomial kernel function, d is degree of the kernel. 
Subsequently, we use self-organizing maps (SOM) 
[12]-[13]to evaluate the semantic relatedness between 
documents in a domain specific category, in which the 
resulting texts categorized by the SVM classifiers were 
collected together.  
The 3rd Intetnational Conference on Innovative Computing Information 
and Control (ICICIC'08) 
978-0-7695-3161-8/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
The SOM is one of the major unsupervised artificial 
neural network models. It basically provides a way for 
cluster analysis by producing a mapping of high 
dimensional input vectors onto a two-dimensional 
output space while preserving topological relations as 
faithfully as possible. After appropriate training 
iterations, the similar input items are grouped spatially 
close to one another. As such, the resulting map is 
capable of performing the clustering task in a 
completely unsupervised fashion. We employ the SOM 
method to produce two maps for cross-lingual text 
mining, namely the word cluster map and the 
document cluster map. The word cluster map that is 
employed for document encoding is produced 
according to word similarities, measured by the 
similarity of the co-occurrence of the words. Words 
that tend to be found in the same document will be 
mapped to close neurons in the map. Words that do not 
occur in the same document will map to distant 
neurons on the map. Accordingly we can define the 
relationship between two words according to their 
corresponding neurons in the word cluster map, and the 
mining task will be performed based on such 
relationships. The trained map also forms a Document 
Cluster Map by labeling each neuron with certain 
documents. Documents with similar keywords will 
map to the same or neighboring neurons. The 
similarity between two documents may be calculated 
by measuring the Euclidean distance between their 
mapped neurons in the map. Since the number of the 
neurons is much less than the number of the documents 
in the corpus, multiple documents may map to the 
same neuron. Thus a neuron forms a document cluster. 
Besides, neighboring neurons represent document 
clusters of similar meaning, i.e. high keyword co-
occurrence frequency. 
4. System Framework 
As shown in Figure 3, in this work we develop a 
two-stage text mining platform for cross-lingual text 
relatedness evaluation and plagiarism detection. It is 
believe that documents in different languages of the 
same topic category will have some co-occurrence of 
terms to represent their concepts. The framework we 
create is based on the fact that the collected domain 
specific documents in multiple languages, people tend 
to use limited sets of terms to represent their common 
concepts or ideas. Thus the highly similar multilingual 
documents having same concepts (i.e. with a high 
similarity/relatedness) may be possible (fully or 
partially) plagiarized documents. In addition, if the 
topic categories of multilingual documents can be 
firstly identified, and then the semantic relatedness of 
the texts in same category can be easily analyzed. After 
that, researchers can find documents with similar 
concepts or suspected plagiarized texts. First, we 
utilized a number of selected texts in Chinese-English 
parallel corpora collected from internet to train text 
classifiers based on the Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) model. As such, the multilingual texts of 
unknown category can be classified by the trained 
classifiers. In the second pass, the resulting categorized 
texts were measured by means of a language-neutral 
clustering technique based on Self-Organizing Maps 
(SOM) method for evaluating semantic similarity 
among texts. The clustered documents are conceptually 
similar, and the cross-lingual texts will be mapped onto 
same neuron and evaluate the text semantic similarity 
through the measures of neuron distance. 
Figure 3. System Framework
5. Evaluation 
Currently the implementation of intended system 
platform is still under development. In this section, the 
initial performance evaluation of the domain classifiers 
is addressed. We used 1,000 labeled documents (i.e., 
500 texts in Chinese and 500 ones in English) to train 
our classifier system, and 200 unlabeled documents 
(i.e., 100 texts in Chinese and 100 ones in English) to 
evaluate performance of system. We compare 
performance of the six classifier results by Accuracy, 
Recall, and Precision measures. As shown in Figure 4-
6, the measures of the developed SVM classifiers with 
Linear SVM, Gaussian Radial Basis Function (RBF) 
and Polynomial kernels are illustrated. In the final 
paper, we will further discuss the implications of the 
The 3rd Intetnational Conference on Innovative Computing Information 
and Control (ICICIC'08) 
978-0-7695-3161-8/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
experimental results mentioned above and compare the 
results with ones of other learning approaches to 
multilingual text categorization. Please refer to [4] for 
more detailed experimental discussion. 
Figure 4. Results of accuracy rate of developed SVM classifiers[4]
Figure 5. Results of Recall measures of developed SVM classifier[4]
Figure 6.Results of Precision measures of developed SVM 
classifiers[4]
6. Conclusion 
Cross-lingual plagiarism detection is a challenging 
task. Increased availability of online digital library and 
internet information sources makes it easier to get and 
plagiarize someone’s ideas from other source 
documents in different languages. To identify cross-
lingual text semantic similarity/relatedness and 
plagiarism, in this work we develop a system platform 
to evaluating text similarity and relatedness in 
multilingual text collections for plagiarism detection. 
First, we utilized a number of selected texts in 
Chinese-English parallel corpora collected from 
internet to train text classifiers based on the Support 
Vector Machines (SVM) model. As such, the 
multilingual texts of unknown category can be 
classified by the trained classifiers. Subsequently, the 
resulting categorized texts were measured by means of 
a language-neutral clustering technique based on Self-
Organizing Maps (SOM) method for evaluating 
semantic similarity among texts. The preliminary 
results show that our platform framework has the 
potential for cross-lingual text relatedness evaluation 
and plagiarism detection. 
7. Reference 
[1] A. Broder, "Identifying and filtering near-duplicate 
documents,” Springer, In R. Giancarlo and D. Sankoff, 
editors, Proceedings of the 11th Annual Symposium on 
Combinatorial Pattern Matching, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science(1848), Canada, p.p. 1-10,2000 
[2] C.H. Lee, H.C. Yang, and S.M. Ma, “A Novel 
Multilingual Text Categorization System using Latent 
Semantic Indexing.”, ICICIC (2) 2006: 503-506 
[3] C.H. Lee and H.C. Yang,  ”A Multilingual Text Mining
Approach Based on Self-Organizing Maps”, Applied 
Intelligence, Vol. 18(3): pp. 295-310, 2003. 
[4] C.H Lee, H.C Yang, T.C Chen, S.M Ma: “Development 
of a Multi-Classifier Approach for Multilingual Text 
Categorization.”, DMIN 2006:73-77 
[5] E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis and G. Kokkinakis, 
"Automatic text categorization in terms of genre and 
author,” Computational Linguistics, 2000, vol.26, no.4, 
p.p.471-495. 
[6] H. Maurer, F. Kappe and B. Zaka, "Plagiarism-A 
Survey,” Journal of Universal Computer Science. 2006, 
vol. 12, no.8, p.p.1050-1084. 
[7] H. Somers, F. Gaspari, and A. Niño, “Detecting 
Inappropriate Use of Free Online Machine Translation 
by Language Students – A Special Case of Plagiarism 
Detection.”, Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual 
Conference of the European Association for Machine 
Translation, Oslo, Norway, 41-48. 2006. 
[8] Ö. Uzuner, B. Katz, and T. Nahnsen, "Using Syntactic 
Information to Identify Plagiarism", Proceedings of the 
2nd Workshop on Building Educational Applications 
Using NLP, pages 37–44, Ann Arbor, June 2005. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
[9] S. Eissen and B. Stein, "Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection,” 
Springer. Proceedings of the 28th European Conference 
on IR Research, p.p. 565-569, 2006.
[10] S.T. Dumais, T.K. Landauer, and M.L. Littman, 
“Automatic cross-linguistic information retrieval using 
latent semantic indexing.”, In Proceedings of SIGIR'96 
Workshop on Cross-Linguistic Information Retrieval, 
16-24, 1996. 
[11] T. Joachims, "Text Categorization with Support Vector
Machines:Learning with Many Relevant Features", 
European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML),
1998. 
[12] T. Kohonen, “Self-organizing formation of topologically
correct feature maps,” Biological Cybernetics, vol. 43, 
pp. 59–69, 1982.
[13] T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps, Springer-Verlag: 
Berlin,1995.
[14] Y. Li and J. Shawe-Taylor,”Using KCCA for Japanese-
English cross-language information retrieval and 
document classification.” J. Intell. Inf. Syst. 27(2): 117-
133, 2006 
The 3rd Intetnational Conference on Innovative Computing Information 
and Control (ICICIC'08) 
978-0-7695-3161-8/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
