Can Document-genre Metadata Improve 
Information Access to Large Digital Collections? 
KEVINCROWSTONA N D  BARBARAH. KWASNIK 
ABSTRACT 
WE DISCUSS THE ISSUES OF RESOLVING the information-retrieval prob- 
lem in large digital collections through the identification and use of doc- 
ument genres. Explicit identification of genre seems particularly important 
for such collections because any search usually retrieves documents with a 
diversity of genres that are undifferentiated by obvious clues as to their iden- 
tity. Also, because most genres are characterized by both form and pur- 
pose, identifymg the genre of a document provides information as to the 
document’s purpose and its fit to the user’s situation, which can be other- 
wise difficult to assess. We begin by outlining the possible role of genre iden- 
tification in the information-retrieval process. Our assumption is that genre 
identification would enhance searching, first because we know that topic 
alone is not enough to define an information problem and, second, 
because search results containing genre information would be more easily 
understandable. Next, we discuss how information professionals have tra- 
ditionally tackled the issues of representing genre in settings where topical 
representation is the norm. Finally, we address the issues of studying the 
efficacy of identifylng genre in large digital collections. Because genre is 
often an implicit notion, studying it in a systematic way presents many prob- 
lems. We outline a research protocol that would provide guidance for iden- 
tifymg Web document genres, for observing how genre is used in searching 
and evaluating search results, and finally for representing and visualizing 
genres. 
Kevin Crowston and Barhara H. Kwasnik, Syracuse University School of Information Studie5, 
4-206 Centre for Science and Technology, Syracuse, NY 132444100 
LIBRARY TRENDS, Vol. 52, No. 2, Fall 2003, pp. 345-361 
02003 The Board of Trustees, University of Illinois 
346 LIBRARY TRENDS/FALL 2003 
INTRO nucT I oN 
Current computerized information-access systems face a fundamental 
limitation: they know what documents say but not what they mean or for 
what purposes they might be usefid. Extracting and representing the 
meaning of documents is difficult and time consuming, and automatic sys-
tems still have significant limitations. We note, though, that humans rarely 
have to read every word of a document to understand its purpose. Instead, 
people take a shortcut: they start by identifjing the kinds of documents 
they are faced with (i.e., the document’s genre), and then use different 
types of documents in appropriate ways. For example, a grant proposal is 
used differently from a syllabus, a product brochure, or a bank statement. 
Accordingly, differences in an information situation are often reflected in 
the k indo f  document that is considered helpful (e.g., a problem set, a les- 
son plan, and a tutorial about mathematics are all about math but useful 
in different situations). Information-access systems would be more useful 
for many tasks if they could similarly distinguish the purpose of documents 
and handle them in appropriate ways. 
In this paper we discuss the possibility of improving information access 
in large digital collections through the identification and use of document 
genre as a facet of document and query representation. First, we provide 
some historical background on the concept of genre and the approach it 
provides to the problem of incorporating context into information 
retrieval. We outline the framework of the information-retrieval problem 
with respect to genre and some traditional resolutions that have been 
attempted. Finally, we outline a research agenda that addresses some of the 
questions and issues that investigating genre entails. 
THEORY: GENREDOCUMENT 
Rhetoricians since Aristotle have attempted to classify communica- 
tions with similar form or purpose into types or “genres.” Numerous defi- 
nitions of genre, or discourse type, have been suggested (e.g., Longacre, 
1983;Miller, 1984;Swales, 1990).In our discussion, we draw on the defin- 
ition of genre proposed by Orlikowski and Yates (1994), who describe 
genre as “a distinctive type of communicative action, characterized by a 
socially recognized communicative purpose and common aspects of form” 
(p. 543). For instance, this document is an example of thejournal article 
genre. It has a form familiar to most researchers and practitioners and is 
monitored by thejournal’s editorial policies as well as the profession’s com- 
munication practices. There are many document genres: some common, 
such as a report or a newsletter, and others restricted to specific domains, 
such as the course syllabus or a problem set in higher education. Genre is 
applicable to electronic as well as physical documents. For example, in a 
study of Web documents, Crowston and Williams (2000) were able to iden- 
t i 9  documents of many familiar genres and of a few genres that seemed to 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 347 
be new to the Web, such as the home page (Dillon & Gushrowski, 2000) 
or the hotlist. 
Genre is useful because it makes documents more easily recognizable 
and understandable to recipients, thus reducing the cognitive load of pro- 
cessing them (Bartlett, 1932 [19671).Yates and Sumner (1997) argue that, 
on the Web genres help in both the production and consumption of doc- 
uments because genre adds “fixity” in a medium that does not otherwise 
distinguish very well between text types (say, a book and a Post-it). In our 
preliminary studies of people searching the Web (Roussinov, Crowston, 
Nilan, Kwasnik, Liu, & Cai, 2001), we observed that the genre of the doc- 
ument was one of the clues used in assessing document relevance, value, 
quality, and usefulness. 
TheProblems of Infomation Acces.s 
To explain how genre can be useful, we will first briefly review the 
problems faced by an information-access system. An information-access 
system has three components: 1. the users, who approach the system with 
contextually based information needs; 2. a store of information (e.g., the 
documents or databases) ;and 3.  an intermediating mechanism to connect 
needs and information. The intermediary may be a person, a search algo- 
rithm, a browsing environment, or a summarizer, among others. 
The basic process of matching users’ needs to potentially useful infor- 
mation in the system is complicated by many factors. First, problems may 
occur due to improper or incomplete representations of the information 
itself. When the information-access system is created, the documents or 
texts must be represented in such a way that they can be retrieved again as 
needed. Librarianship has occupied itself for over a centurywith systematic 
approaches to organizing and representing information in systems. In cre- 
ating bibliographic records, we call this process cataloging; in organizing 
actual documents or topics for meaningful retrieval, we call it classification; 
in providing access to bibliographic databases, we call the representation 
process indexing. 
There are similar processes of information representation on the Web 
and in many other applications in which large stores of information are 
prepared for eventual use in the future. Many of the schemes are adapta- 
tions of traditional schemes, such as that used on Yahoo.com, the Dublin 
Core Project, or the GEM Metadata Project for educational materials 
(http://www.thegateway.org/) . Others comprise grassroots, emergent 
sorts of organization and representations, such as the evolving classifica- 
tion on eBay.com or amazon.com (Kwasnik & Liu, 2000; Kwasnik, 2002). 
An increasingly popular approach relies solely on the full text of the 
documents. 
Another problem that may arise is that the process itself of matching 
users’ queries to the document representations may be inadequate or 
348 L I B R A R Y  TRENDS/FAI,I ,  Z O O 3  
faulty. Much effort on the part of information scientists has been spent in 
developing and perfecting search strategies, including various matching 
algorithms, probabilistic techniques, citation mapping, and natural lan- 
guage processing. These efforts struggle with many obstacles-among 
them the difficulties of evaluating search results in real environments, as 
well as problems of scaling, reliability, and the representation bottleneck. 
On the user side, we have people in need of information. Often, though, 
users are unable to precisely specify what it is they need and, even if they do, 
the ways in which humans articulate their needs produces a great variety of 
expression. The problem of appropriate representation of users’ queries is 
notjust a question of finding the correct representation according to some 
absolute criteria. Because information use is situated in specific contexts, 
there is also the need to be able to represent the information in such a way 
that a match can be made not only on the level of physical description and 
topic, for example, but also in terms of matching the information with a 
potential use. For example, consider a person approaching a system with the 
query, “I want to prepare a Passover dinner.” At a certain level we can see 
that there is a need for concrete information in the form of actual recipes. 
We might even interpret this as a “known item search.” However, recipes may 
satisfy the need only partially, since the person may want to know much more 
about the rituals and meanings of a Passover dinner and not just the food 
itself. The information need may be either broader than what is asked for or 
much narrower and more specific. Furthermore, we know that people ask 
for what they expect they can get that most closely matches what they rralh 
want, and thus their requests are often presented in a compromised form. 
Thus, we can see that topic alone is not enough to define an informa- 
tion problem because different users may require different solutions to 
seemingly similar information problems. Indeed, even the same user may 
require di€ferent information at different times. These different needs 
arise because the situation (or context) of a user determines not onlywhat 
topics are requested and what strategies are invoked in searching and eval- 
uating output but also what types of resources are considered relevant and 
useful. While we know that it is important to understand the situation of 
the user, the representation of the situation and then its implementation 
in a system is a difficult problem. Our efforts to create user profiles, uni- 
versal situation grammars, and so on suffer from limitations of scope to 
specific domains and lack of extensibility and flexibility. 
Why We Think Identzficution of Genre Would Be Useful 
We suggest that enhancing document representations by incorporating 
nontopical characteristics of the documents that signal their purpose-that 
is, their genre-will enrich document (and queiy) representations in such 
a way that they resonate more truly with the information need of a user as 
situated in a particular context. 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 349 
Because most genres are characterized by both form and purpose, 
identifying the genre of a document provides information as to the docu- 
ment’s purpose and its fit to the user’s situation, which can be otherwise 
difficult to assess. For instance, a university professor looking for infornia- 
tion about computer database systems for the class that she teaches would 
most likely be interested in documents of educational genres (e.g., syllabi, 
assignments, class notes). On the other hand, when working on a research 
paper in the database area, the same professor would more likely appreci- 
ate scholarlywork (e.g., papers, annotated bibliographies, calls for papers). 
The relevant documents for these two searches would be quite different, 
even though the topic and query keywords might be nearly the same. 
Explicit identification of genre seems particularly important for large 
digital collections because any search of these collections usually retrieves 
documents with a diversity of genres and, what is worse, these genres are 
undifferentiated by obvious clues to their identity. This is in contrast to 
nondigital information-seeking situations in which the searcher generally 
has an idea of what sorts of documents exist in the collection. Even if he 
or she does not, clues of physical form and location increase the chances 
that a document’s genre is recognized. For example, a user searching in a 
library can visually distinguish CDs from monographs, encyclopedias, or 
newspapers. Similarly, a user searching a database containing only journal 
articles has already implicitly restricted the search to that genre of docu- 
ments. On the Web, however, a search of a large and diverse document col- 
lection will usually retrieve some documents of relevant genres along with 
many documents of irrelevant genres-a low-precision result-even if all 
retrieved documents conform to search specifications regarding the topi- 
cal content of the document. 
Recognition of genre also has implications for automated methods of 
representing documents, such as automated summarization and indexing. 
A one-size-fits-all approach to summarizing or evaluating Web documents 
without regard for their form and function is likely to misrepresent many 
of them. For example, a newspaper article can be summarized by the first 
few sentences of the document, but such an approach will not work for a 
home page or a frequently-asked-questions document (FA&) (Marcu, 
1997).When medical information is sought, it makes a difference to the 
evaluation whether the document retrieved is a newsletter, a personal 
home page, or a hospital’s patient information site. 
How Librarians Have Addressed the Notion of Creme 
in Libray Infomation Systems 
We do not mean to imply that information science has never addressed 
the notion of genre, or that genre has not been incorporated into any 
information-representation schemes. Indeed, several classification systems 
allow some articulation of genre, and many metadata standards, including 
350 L I B R A R Y  TRENDS/FALL 2003 
the Dublin Core, include a field for genre. The treatment of genre is lim- 
ited or not very well defined, however. Our understanding of the nature 
and role of document genre is still nascent, and so the use of this kind of 
information is underdeveloped in information-retrieval systems. Further- 
more, it is not clear whether the extension of genre designations originally 
designed for physical collections will export well to digital ones. 
Historically, most library information systems took genre for granted 
since most collections contained only a limited array of document types. 
The exceptions are literary genres (such as poetry) and publication types 
(such as almanacs or newspapers), which have had a lively existence in 
explicit document representation for several centuries. Aside from these, 
the primary facets of- access to documents in traditional systems are 
descriptive components and subject, while genre is relatively rare. The 
descriptive access points derive from traditional ways of talking about 
books and book-like documents, and include: title, author, place and name 
of publisher, edition, date, series, physical description in terms of pages, 
size, volumes, and sometimes information about components, which are 
called analytics. The subject analysis of a document captures what a docu- 
ment is about-that is, its topic. 
Librarians and information scientists have recognized that the topical 
approach is extremely important but insufficient in some situations and com- 
pletely inappropriate in others. Not every document is necessarily about 
something. Sometimes the document’s nature as a document represents the 
most important or useful aspect of it. For instance, on the one hand we can 
say that a book may be about symphonies-their history or structure-but 
what is Beethoven’s Fifth about? It simply is. A symphony has a form and iden- 
tifiable characteristics but it does not have a readily identifiable topic, per se, 
except that which can be attributed to it through subtle and nonconsensual 
processes of interpretation. As the notion of document becomes broader and 
more diverse, as it does in the environment of the Web, we can see how the 
concept of subject does not stretch verywell to cover all types of information. 
In response to the need to identify a document’s form or genre in 
addition to its subject, librarians have created auxiliary tools in the form 
of tables and subdivisions to be used with existing topically based classifi- 
cation and subject-heading schedules. Here are a few examples: 
The Dauq Decimal Clussijcation (DDC) (Dewey, Mitchell, Beall, 
Matthews,& New, 1996)provides several ways to denote a document’s form 
or genre. The first is to incorporate a designation in the number itself. This 
is used in the 800s, which cover belles lettres. The first part of the number 
designates country/language, and the final digits represent the genre-1 
for poetry, 2 for drama, 3 for fiction, 5 for speeches . . . 7 for humor and 
satire, and so on (Table 1). 
These genre designations are limited to the genres generally accepted 
by Western literary scholars and do not necessarily do a good job of 
CROWSTON AND K\VASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 351 
Table 1, 
English poetry 821 
English drama 822 
English fiction 823 
English speeches 825 
English humor and satire 827 
Bulgarian poetry 891.81 
Bulgarian drama 891.82 
Bulgarian fiction 891.83 
Bulgarian speeches 891.85 
Bulgarian humor and satire 891.87 
describing emerging, culturally diverse, or hybrid genres. Still, it is a way 
of privileging genre in the organization of literary works. It is interesting 
to note, however, that most public libraries do not make use of this formal 
system for fiction and arrange such works by author, with the ad hoc tra- 
dition of separating out popular genres into separate sections for easy 
access and browsability: Mysteries, Romances, Science Fiction, and so on. 
Another technique in the DDC is to use suffixes from the Tables. The 
number for the topic is established, and then suffixes from some Table are 
added to denote the form or genre. For example: 
Table 2. 
Middle Eastern Cooking 641.5956 
Middle Eastern Cooking Encyclopedia 641.5956+03 
(dictionaries & encyclopedias) 
Middle Eastcrn Cooking Magazine 641.5956t05 
(serial publication) 
In physical collections, the suffixes serve to distinguish materials on 
the same topic but in different publication formats. This notion of 
form/genre evolved from the physical distinctions of publication and doc- 
ument types and thus is grounded in publishing practices and realities. 
The further interpretation of how such documents will be used remains 
implicit in the nature of the forms themselves but has practical implica- 
tions for collections. For instance, many dictionaries and encyclopedias 
comprise the noncirculating reference collection, magazines are indexed 
and stored differently than are books, and so on. In terms of digital col- 
lections, however, where the physical clues of publication format are 
largely absent, these suffixes might provide useful indicators for sorting 
and filtering search results. 
Another way in which subject is indicated on the bibliographic record 
is through the use of subject terms from a thesaurus or list, such as the 
352 LIBRARY TRENDS/FALL Z O O 3  
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH). The LCSH comprises an evolv- 
ing list of terms used by catalogers to assign subject designations to a work. 
Terms can denote topics, such as “sonnets,” in which case this would be a 
work ahout sonnets, not the sonnets themselves. Proper names may also be 
subjects. For example, a document about William Shakespeare will be 
assigned Shakespeare’s name as a subject, while a work by William Shake- 
speare would not. Modern cataloging practices abound in confusions 
about topic, creative responsibility, and genre/form, since in many docu- 
ments these three are inextricably fused. This confusion extends to 
searchers as well, who do not realize that searching for a genre using LCSH 
is problematic at best. 
This distinction of reserving subject headings for topics/subjects only 
is somewhat moderated by the addition of a subdivision. There are several 
kinds of subdivisions that can be used to “subdivide” a subject by time, geo- 
graphical location, and further topical aspects. For example: 
Witchcraft-Sweden 
Witchcraft-1 5th Century 
Witchcraft-Biblical teaching 
The subdivisions of interest here, though, are the ones from the Form 
Subdivisions list. This type of subdivision allows the cataloger to further 
describe a work by its form or literary genre. This list is limited to several 
hundred well-established types. The genres included have literary warrant, 
sirice every subject heading and division in the LCSHwas developed for an 
existing, rather than a hypothetical, work. 
Wi tchcraft-Bibliography 
Witchcraft-Case studies 
Witchcraft-Dictionaries 
Witchcraft-Handboo ks, manuals, e tc. 
Witchcraft-Periodicals 
Wi tc’hcraft-Poe try 
The fact remains, however, that form and genre are not, as a rule, an 
important finding aid in traditional systems. For instance, the work Final 
Environmental Impact Statement for the Green Mountain and Finger Laks 
NationalForests Land ResourceL2rlunagementPlan is assigned the folloning sub-
ject headings from the LCSH: 
Forest reserves-Vermont Green Mountain National Forest 
Forest reserves-New York (State)-Finger Lakes National Forest 
Forest management-Vermont Green Mountain National Forest 
Forest management-New York (State)-Finger Lakes National Forest 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 353 
Green Mountain National Forest (Vt.) 
Finger Lakes National Forest (N.Y.) 
Thus, this work can be retrieved by the names of either of the two 
national forests covered in the report and by two topics: forest reserves and 
forest management. It is not possible to retrieve this work as an environmental 
impact statement except for the coincidence that the terms appear in the title 
and would come up on a keyword search. There are many genres such as 
this one that serve a useful purpose as templates and are of interest in their 
own right, aside from the specific topic, but since this work is an example 
of an environmental impact statement, rather than a work about one, there 
is no subject heading assigned for this important aspect of the document. 
Some libraries recognize that genre and form are often perceived as 
“topical” and have made some additional access points to accommodate 
this. For instance, the Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections 
Libraiy at Duke University (http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu.genre-head-
ings.htm1) has an interesting set of auxiliary tools for searching its collec- 
tion. One of these is a Genre/Form list from which genre terms can be 
used for searching as if they were topics. Here is a sample of terms from 
that list: 
Accounts 
Business letters 
Manuscripts 
Official reports 
Pattern books 
Petitions 
Recipes 
Seals 
Subliterary papyri 
Tax returns 
Vouchers 
It is immediately obvious how very helpful such a list might be in study- 
ing the communicative forms of the cultures represented in the collection. 
HOWTO STUDYGENRE 
Having presented our case for understanding more about document 
genres in order to enhance retrieval of information from large digital col- 
lections, we turn now to the issues of precisely how we might study this phe- 
nomenon. Because genre is often an implicit and subtle notion, studying 
it in a systematic way presents many problems. Our overarching question 
is, Would identification of document genres improve information access 
technologies in large digital collections such as digital libraries and the 
354 LIBRARY TRENDS/FALL 2003 
Web? This question cannot be answered directly, given the current under- 
standing of genre or of genre’s role in information retrieval. Thus, we envi- 
sion a research agenda for investigating genre that proceeds through a 
series of componential studies, each of which we see as necessary for a full 
understanding. Thus, in answering the central question with respect to 
genre, it is necessary to investigate the following: 
The identification of Web document genres from the users’ perspective 
and articulated in the users’ own terms; 
The creation of a faceted (i.e., multidimensional) classification of these 
genres that can be used for controlled investigations in later stages of 
study; 
An investigation of how users integrate genre metadata into their own 
searching, evaluation, and use of documents; 
An evaluation of the degree to which incorporation of genre metadata 
in information-access systems makes a difference to the effectiveness of 
searching, sorting, ranking, and eventual use of documents; and 
An evaluation of various interfaces for visualidng and presenting genre 
metadata once it has been identified. 
We also recognize that studying genre cannot be a once-and-for-all 
endeavor, since new genres are emerging all the time and old ones are 
being used in ways that are different than originally conceived. Thus, we 
propose that any study of genre must also establish a conceptual franie- 
work from within which to design continuing investigations. That is, we 
need a set ofworking hypotheses based on what we know about genre as a 
social construct. How are genres recognized? How do they evolve and 
change? How are they used and understood? 
Studying Genwfrom the Urers’Perspectiue 
We take it as a given that studies of genres must be based in real situa- 
tions with real users. Since traditional designations of document genres 
will probably not adequately or accurately describe all the document types 
present and emerging on the Web and in digital libraries, it would make 
no sense to use such designations as a checklist against which digital gen- 
res are compared. Such a comparison would inevitably miss genres new or 
unique to the Web or, even more confusing, mistake traditional genres that 
have been adapted to new uses on the Web. 
Thus, we see the first step as a descriptive phase of inductively extracting 
from what people say about their terminology and sense of genres. At the 
same time, we recognize that studying the entire range of possible document 
genres and the tasks for which identification might be useful is not realistic. 
Furthermore, genres can be specific to a particular discourse community, so 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 355 
too broad a scope may make it difficult to identify a useful set of genres in 
a manageable time with limited resources. Thus, as a first step we suggest 
that document genres be studied for a particular set of users, such as 
lawyers, educators, city planners, real estate agents, and so on. 
If the right population is chosen, limiting the scope does not neces- 
sarily mean that only a small subset of genres will emerge. For instance, 
teachers can potentially search for a wide range of topics and utilize doc- 
uments of many genres, including a number that are particular to educa- 
tion, e.g., “lesson plans” and “academic standards.” This diversity means 
there would be a wide range of potential document types to study. On the 
other hand, in the domain of education there is a core set of tasks that pro- 
vides a base on which to study the impact of genre identification. Such tasks 
and situations for teachers include, for instance, writing a lesson plan, cre- 
ating a reading list, adapting an existing class, or developing tests and 
assignments. For administrators it might include conforming to educa- 
tional standards, managing human resources, writing reports, and com- 
municating with students and parents. Limiting the domain of inquiry will 
help focus a study, establish a reasonable scope, and provide a manageable 
set of situations with which to work and on which to test the impact of 
genre identification. 
We realize that limiting a study in this way also limits the ability to gen- 
eralize, but initially the aim is to show that genre identification is of value 
for certain tasks. Having demonstrated the basic concept for educators, for 
instance, we expect that it would be possible to then extend the principles 
beyond the domain of education. 
Iden tzjication of Genres 
In order to design effective empirical studies to investigate people’s 
use of genre, it is necessary to identify, describe, and categorize the range 
of document genres used by the target population and the tasks associated 
with these documents. There is a substantial body of work on analyzing 
genre in printed documents and some work studying them on the Web 
(e.g., Bretan, Dewe, Hallberg, & Wolkert, 1998; Crowston & Williams, 
2000; Dillon & Gushrowski, 2000; Furuta & Marshall, 1996;Karlgren, Bre- 
tan, Dewe, Hallberg, &Wolkert,1998;Stamatatos, Fakotakis, &Kokkinakis, 
2000). However, these studies have typically been top-down, that is, they 
analyzed a set of documents based on theoretical principles or according 
to a priori classifications. For example, Crowston and Williams (2000) 
based their classification on the Art and Architecture Thesaurus (Petersen, 
1994), and a number of studies used the categories of the Brown Corpus. 
A top-down approach to genre is problematic for two reasons. First, 
genres are socially constructed, so different social groups using documents 
with similar structural features may think about them and describe them 
356 LIBRARY T R E N D S / F A L L  2003 
differently.A document may be unfamiliar and difficult to understand for 
someone outside of the community in which the genre is used. Therefore, 
it is important to capture the users’ own language and understanding of 
these genres. Second, it is imperative to extend any investigation to genres 
that are not necessarily vetted by traditional schemes, such as those that 
come out of domain-specific work (e.g., “block-scheduled curriculum 
plans”).As pointed out by Dillon and Gushrowski (2000, p. 202), genres 
are no longer necessarily “slow-forming, often emerging only over gener- 
ations of production and consumption.” Thus, we assume that a traditional 
typology of genre or docunient forms will not be sufficient to describe the 
emerging and dynamic genres identifiable by users in general and our 
community in particular. 
Some researchers have attempted to identify genres bottom-up 
through relatively small-scale user studies (e.g., Dewe, Karlgren, & Bretan, 
1998;Nilan, Pomerantz, & Paling, 2001). However, we do not as yet have 
a fully articulated set of data that reveals what genres people recognize nor 
for what tasks they find documents of specific genres useful. 
In investigating the range of genres identified by users, we suggest that 
the following questions should be addressed: 
How do people talk about the genre of documents? 
Does the naming and identification of digital-document genres corre- 
spond to the naming of traditional nondigital genres? 
How do people understand and make use of new, unnamed, emcrging, 
and “colonized” genres (Beghtol, 2000) in digital collections? 
What clues do people use to identifji genre when engaged in informa- 
tion-access activities? 
What facets (basic attributes) of genre do people perceive? 
Creation of a Faceted (i.e., i2ilultidimensional) Classijication of Genres 
If genre is to be used as another facet of description for documents 
and queries, we are still left with the issue of how to describe genre itself 
in such a way that it can be implemented in a system. Genre itself is a mul- 
tidimensional phenomenon, incorporating form, function, and the nu- 
merous clues and components that allow us to discriminate one genre 
from another. Toward this cnd we see the need to create a rich and flexi- 
ble description of document genres that will do justice to their complexity 
while at the same time providing a structured tool for systematic inquiry. 
One way to achieve this is through a faceted classification. 
A classification will help determine the level of granularity that can be 
achieved in genre identification. Genre complexity can be managed by 
organizing the genres in a classification from more general to more spe- 
cific. By picking appropriate levels of specificity it might be possible to 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 357 
avoid having to identify hundreds of detailed genres, while still providing 
a basic level of distinction in areas of particular interest. 
Most organized lists of genres are structured as hierarchies. The criti- 
cism of traditional hierarchies is that they rely on a single organizing prin- 
ciple, which may not be useful for all cases. To overcome this problem we 
suggest using the facet analysis approach. Facet analysis identifies multiple 
fundamental dimensions along which objects, such as genres, can be 
described and then clustered. For example, a genre such as a “lesson plan” 
can be identified by its source, its purpose, its structural features, and so 
on. Each facet, or basic dimension, can be articulated following its own 
logic and subsequently can be used for its own type of clues for classifica- 
tion. In suggesting the use of facet analysis we follow the example of pre- 
vious genre-identification studies such as Paivarinta (1999),Tyrvainen and 
Paivarinta (1999), and Karjalainen, Paivarinta, Tyrvainen, and Rajala 
(2000), who looked at the management of enterprise documents, and 
Kessler, Nunberg, and Schuetze (1997), who sought to identify a limited 
set of facets for communicative purposes. 
A faceted approach to classification is pragmatic and not dependent 
on any one conceptual perspective. It allows for the development of 
description and clustering using a number of fundamental dimensions, 
rather than just one. The results of this process yield a classification that is 
flexible, expressive, and hospitable to new genres and genre combinations. 
It also allows a view of genres at a variety of conceptual levels, from the gen- 
eral and inclusive to the very specific, which will be useful in simulations 
in later phases of inquiry. 
How would a faceted approach to genres work? In principle, this 
approach requires several passes. The first pass identifies and labels facets 
that seem to be important. These might include form, content, style, 
implied use, and the relationship of that document to others. These facets 
serve as starting points, and new facets may emerge. After identifylng the 
basic facets, one must again review the entire corpus repeatedly to see 
the range of categories on which these facets are revealed-for instance, 
what do people use to describe “source”? The process continues until sat- 
uration is reached (i.e., no new categories emerge). If necessary, more data 
are collected. 
Once the Web genres are identified, it might be interesting to com- 
pare them to the more traditional sources of genres for overlaps of struc- 
ture and coverage. We expect that there will be a significant amount of 
redundancy among the genres identified in this way. The aim is to gener- 
ate a classification that reflects not only currently identified genres but will 
also flexibly accommodate identification of emerging and future genres 
(Beghtol, 2000; Kwasnik, 1999),thus providing a basis for future work in 
this area. 
358 L I B R A R Y  TRENDS/FALL 2003 
How Users Integrate Genre Metadata into ThPir Own Searching Evaluation, 
and Use of DocurnPnts 
Besides identifymg genres and their attributes, any study of genre 
effectiveness must also establish how people in fact utilize genre in search- 
ing, in generating queries, and in their evaluation of documents. To 
accomplish this, further observations are necessary in order to answer the 
following questions: 
In what contexts and for what tasks is the identification of genre useful? 
To what extent are documents of various genres specific to certain tasks 
as opposed to being generally useful? 
To what extent are people interested in documents of genres specific to 
their domain and environment vs. those used more widely? 
In summary, the results of the necessary initial phases of studying gen- 
res on the Web would be a better understanding of how users in the com- 
munity of interest describe the genre of documents and how they use 
genre when they work with documents to solve information problems. This 
phase should also provide a database of documents categorized according 
to their user-specified genre, genre features, user evaluations, and related 
information tasks. Such a database can be used as the baseline for simula- 
tions and evaluation studies in subsequent phases. It would also provide an 
inductively derived faceted classification scheme for usefully clustering 
genres and features and for determining granularity. 
Evaluating the Eflectiveness of Genre Identzjication 
Using the basic information discovered in the preliminary phases, it 
should then be possible to carry out controlled user studies whereby vari- 
ous aspects of genre use can be manipulated to see the differences in 
retrieval effectiveness associated with each manipulation. Thus, in this 
phase one can study how genre metadata can best be utilized in informa- 
tion-access tasks. By “best” we mean initially improving users’ performance 
(e.g., time, accuracy, or perceived usability) in information searching, fil- 
tering, and evaluation tasks. Ultimately, of course, “best” means improving 
the performance in the kinds of information tasks people face in their day- 
to-day work lives. 
This phase in the research plan must address several questions: 
How best to use genre metadata in information-access systems? 
To what extent does providing genre metadata improve performance 
and utility? 
Which specific facets of genre improve performance most? 
To what extent does using genre metadata to cluster and/or rank doc- 
uments improve performance and utility? 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 359 
Can genre metadata be used to inform other aspects of the process of 
searching, summarizing, or evaluating documents? 
To answer these questions, one approach would be to develop simu- 
lated information-access system interfaces that incorporate genre meta- 
data and then to conduct evaluations of the efficacy of these interfaces in 
controlled laboratory experiments. Depending on resources and available 
design expertise, one could implement these prototypes in various ways, 
starting with storyboards and paper mockups, scripted interfaces and, if 
possible, by implementing them on a real search engine. The following are 
some suggestions for scenarios in which genre information could be imple- 
mented in order to test its efficacy: 
Provide aids for query construction using genre metadata; 
Cluster documents based on genre metadata (explicitly labeled vs. 
labeled using other techniques vs. unlabeled) ; 
Show genre information in combination with other metadata; 
Raise or lower a document’s rank based on genre metadata; or 
Incorporate genre-specific information-access processes. 
The method of presentation of genre information will inevitably influ- 
ence its efficacy. For this reason, before any retrieval evaluation can take 
place, this aspect of genre must also be investigated. Specifically, studies 
should investigate: 
How best to represent and display genre metadata to the user and 
receive feedback? 
What level of granularity of genre metadata improves performance 
most (i.e., how specific should the description of genre be)? Is there, 
perhaps, a basic level of genre that is neither too general and abstract, 
nor too specific? 
To what extent does combining genre metadata with other kinds of 
metadata (e.g., subject) improve performance? For example, is it more 
useful to identify documents as “fifth-grade science lesson plans” or just 
as “lesson plans”? 
To what extent is the user’s performance degraded by miscategorization 
of documents based on genre? 
In answering these questions there are some general interface design 
issues that must also be addressed. For example, it is important to decide on: 
The choice between opaque and transparent modes of presentation 
(Roussinov et al., 2001). In transparent mode, the system will expose its 
identification of genre to the user by labeling or otherwise identifying 
360 LIBRARY TRENDS/FALL 2003 
it. In opaque mode, results will make use of genre metadata, e.g., for 
ranking, but the user will not be made explicitly aware of it; 
If the transparent mode is used, then one must make a choice between 
interfaces that explicitly name genres and those that use other methods 
of labeling (e.g., by providing example documents). 
A typical experiment might for instance contrast two interfaces. Par- 
ticipants could use one interface in the first half and a different interface 
in the second half of the experiment, with the order of presentation coun- 
terbalanced across subjects. An example task might be to find a relevant 
Web page for a given problem scenario. 
ANSWERINGTHE BIG QUESTION: DOESGENREHELP? 
Identifying Web document genres, observing how genre is used in 
searching and evaluation of search results, the multifaceted representation 
of genres, and finally the design of presentation and visualization tech- 
niques allows a systematic exploration of'the overall effectiveness and util- 
ity of genre information for Web documents. 
We know that people use genre information and that for many appli- 
cations it is perhaps the single most important piece of inforniation that 
can be provided. Nevertheless, the extent to which the general inclusion 
of genre information will enhance information access on the Web is an 
open question. There is much to understand before such information can 
be practically implemented. On the other hand if, as we suspect, genre 
information is helpful, then studying it in a systematic way, as we propose 
above, can provide the initial baseline understanding that must precede 
any automatic implementation. 
REFERENCES 
Bartlett, F. (1932 [19671). Rrmembm'ng:A study in rxprrim~ritaland .socialp.sycholqgy.Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Beghtol, C. (2000). The concept of genre and its characteristics. Bnllrtin ofthe American Soci-
rly for Infomatzon Science & Tpchnology, 26(5). 
Bretan, I., Dewe, J., Ilallberg, A,, & Wolkert, N. (1998). Webspecific genre visualization. 
Paper presented at the WebNet 1998Conference. Orlando, FL. 
Crowston, K., & Mrilliams,M. (2000). Reproduced and emergent genres of communication 
on the World Wide Web. In/orrn,ationSucietj, I 6 ( 3 ) ,201-216. 
Dewe,J., Karlgren,J., & Bretan, I. (1998).Assembling a balanced corpus from the Internet. 
Paper presented at the 11 th Nordic Computational Linguistics Conference. Copen- 
hagen, Denmark. 
Dewey, M.A, Mitchell,J. S. E., Beall, J. E., Matthews, 14'. E.J. E., &New, G. R. E. (Eds.). (1996). 
Dewey Dpciwial CIussiJiccction and Relative Index Set, 21st cd. Dublin: OCLC Forest Press. 
Dillon, A., & Gushrowski,B. (2000). Geni-es and the MJcb:Is the personal home page the first 
uniquely digital genre?JountcrZ ofthr Ammcan LSo&y f i  In jma t ion  Science, 5(12), 202-205. 
Furuta, R., &Marshall,C. C. (1996).Gm'rnieac r$kc-tion o f l ~ h r r o l o ~ gin the Wodd Ml'ideTWJ.[Tech-
nical Report]. College Station, TX: Hypermedia Research L.ab, Texas A&M. 
Kajalainen, .4.,Paivarinta, T., Tyrvainen, P., & Rajala,J. (2000). Genre-based metadata for 
enterprise document management. In Procerdings of thr 33rd Annual Hawaii Jntmational 
Conference on Sjstem Scirnrey. Los Alamos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
CROWSTON AND KWASNIK/DOCUMENT-GENRE METADATA 361 
Karlgren, J., Bretan, I., Dewe, J., Hallberg, A,, & Wolkert, N. (1998). Iterative information 
retrieval using fast clustering and usage-specific genres. Paper presented at the Eighth 
DELOS Workshop: User Interface in Digital Libraries. Stockholm, Sweden. 
Kessler, B., Nunherg, G., & Schuetze, H. (1997). Automatic detection of text genre. In Pro-
reedings ofthe 35th Annual Meeting ofthe Association for Computational Linguistics and the 8th 
Meeting ofthe European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linpistirs (pp. 32-38). 
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
Kwasnik, B. H. (1999). The role of classification in knowledge representation and discovery. 
Libra9 Trends, 48(1), 22-47. 
Kwasnik, B. H. (2002). Commercial Wehsites and the use of classification schemes: The case 
of amazon.com. In M.J. Lopez-Huertas (Ed.), Challenges in knowledge representation and 
organizationfo?-the 21st century: Inteqution of knowledge across boundaries. Proceedings of the 
Seventh International ISKO Confermce (pp. 279-285). Wurzhurg: Ergon Verlag. 
Kwasnik,B. H., Crowston, K., Nilan, M., & Roussinov,D. (2000). Identifying document genre 
to improve Web search effectiveness. Bulletin of the Amm'can Society for Information Science 
and lechnology, 27(2), 23-26. 
Kwasnik, B. H., & Liu, X. (2000). Classification structures in the changing environment of 
active commercial Wehsites: The case of eBay.com. In C. Beghtol, L. C. Howarth, & N. 
J. Williamson (Eds.) , Dynamism and stability in knowledge organization. Proceedings of the 
Sixth International ISKO Conjerence, 7( 10-13), 372-377. Toronto: Advances in Knowledgc. 
Organization. 
Longacre, R. (1983). Thegrammar of discourse. New York Plenum Press. 
Marcu, D. (1997). From discourse structures to text summaries. Paper presented at the 14th 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( m - 9 7 ) .  
Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarter4Journul o/Speech, 70, 151-167. 
Nilan, M. S., Pomerantz,J., & Paling, S. (2001). Genres from the bottom up: What has the 
Web brought us? In T. B. Hahn (Ed.), Information in  a networked world: Harnessing thejlow. 
Proceedings ( f t h e  ASIST 2001Annual Meeting. Washington, DC. 
Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (1994). Genre repertoire: The structuring of communicativr 
practices in organizations. Administrative Sciences Quarter$, 33, 541-574. 
Piivirinta, T. (1999). A genre approach to applying critical social theory to information sys- 
tems development. In C. H. J. Gilson, I. Grugulis, & H. Willmott (Eds.), Proceedings of thr 
1st Critical Managemmt Studies Confmence, information technology and critical theory stream. 
Hamilton, New Zealand: University of Waikato Management School. 
Petersen, T. (1994). Art and architecture theraurus. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Roussinov,D., Crowston, K.,Nilan, M., Kwasnik, B., Liu, X., & Cai,J. (2001). Genre-basednav-
igation on the Web. Paper presented at the 34th Hawaii International Conference on 
Systems Science (HICSS34).Maui, HI.. 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., & Kokkinakis, G. (2000). Automatic text categorization in terms 
of genre and author. Computational Linguistics, 26(4), 471-498. 
Swales,J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in  academic and rrsearch settings. New York: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
Tyrviiinen, P., & Paivarinta, T. (1999). On rethinking organizational document genres for 
electronic document management. In Proceedings of the32nd Annual Hawaii International 
Confwence on System Sciences. Los Alamos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
Yates,J., & Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). Genres of organizational communication: A structnra- 
tional approach to studying communications and media. Academy ofManagement Review, 
17(2), 299-326. 
Yates, S.J.,& Sumner, T. (1997). Digital genres and the new burden of fixity. In Hawaiian 
International Confermce on System Sciences (HICCS 30). Los Alamos, C A IEEE Computer 
Societv Press. 
