Internet genres 
1 
 
 
 
INTERNET GENRES 
 
Kevin Crowston 
Syracuse University School of Information Studies 
348 Hinds Hall 
Syracuse, NY 13244 
crowston@syr.edu 
Tel: +1 (315) 443–1676 
Fax: +1 (866) 265–7407 
 
 
This research was partially supported by NSF IIS Grant 04-14482. 
Internet genres 
2 
 
 
INTERNET GENRES 
ABSTRACT 
Rhetoricians since Aristotle have attempted to classify communications or 
documents into categories or “genres” with similar form, topic or purpose. This article 
surveys research on genre as it relates to Internet documents. The article briefly presents 
the concept of genre in general, and then reviews the evolution and emergence of 
genres on the Internet. It concludes with an examination of the possible use of genre for 
improving information access on the Internet, with specific discussion of the issues in 
developing taxonomies of genre and automatically recognizing document genre.  
 
 
Keywords: Genre, World-wide web, Internet, Digital documents, Information access 
 
Word count: 6908 words plus abstract, tables and references 
Internet genres 
3 
INTERNET GENRES 
INTRODUCTION 
Rhetoricians since Aristotle have attempted to classify documents into categories 
or “genres” with similar form, topic or purpose. (In this article, we adopt a broad 
definition of document as “signifying objects”(1), meaning something that serves as 
evidence, regardless of the particular medium or form.) Numerous definitions of genre 
have been debated in the applied linguistics community (e.g., 2, 3-7), while other 
groups have struggled with similar notions, such as discourse or document types, e.g., 
in SGML (8). This article, for example, is an instance of the encyclopedia article genre, 
commonly used to communicate the state of knowledge in a field. Other common 
genres include letters and memos, project team meetings and TV sitcoms, all immediately 
recognizable by their typical purpose and characteristic form. In this article, we provide 
a brief review of the concept of genre in general, drawing primarily on the cultural 
perspective of the New Rhetoric school (4, 9), before addressing the theory and 
applications of genre for digital documents found on the Internet. 
Genres define a class of similar documents. Such a categorization can be made on 
different bases and approaches to defining genre have focused on different aspects of 
documents (see 10 for a review of the development of the concept). Some genres are 
defined primarily in terms of the physical form, such as a booklet or brochure; still others 
in terms of the document form, such as lists or directories; while other genres are defined 
by purpose or function, such as a proposal or inquiry. However, most genres imply a 
combination of purpose and form (2), such as a newsletter, which communicates “the 
Internet genres 
4 
news of the day”, including multiple short articles and is distributed periodically to 
subscribers or members of an organization.  
There is a close relation between the terms “genre” and “text type”. Lee (11) 
distinguished between them by suggesting that the term “genre” is often used for 
definitions based on external criteria, such as purpose, while “text type” is used for 
definitions based on internal criteria, such as form, but goes on to conclude that genre 
can be used “to describe most of the corpus categories we have seen”. (Moessner (12) 
makes the same distinction.) For the purpose of this article, we will use the term genre 
as including aspects of both form and purpose.  
Campbell and Jamieson (2) suggested that genres arise as responses to recurrent 
communicative situations. Given a recognized need to communicate (i.e., a purpose, 
13), individuals will typically express similar social motives, themes and topics in a 
communication with similar physical and linguistic characteristics (i.e., form), that is, 
they will communicate in a recognized genre. Miller (6) argued that the situations that 
give rise to the use of genres are social situations and that the process of creating genre 
is one of typification, as similarities in situations are recognized. If the typification is 
useful, the use of the genre becomes routine. She further argued that genres must 
accomplish a recognized social function and criticized the labeling of environmental 
impact statements as a genre because they did not meet this criterion, but rather had 
multiple conflicting motives.  
Swales (7) similarly viewed genres as “a system for accomplishing social 
purposes by verbal means”. He suggested analyzing documents in terms of their 
exhibited characteristic moves, defined as “a functional unit, used for some identifiable 
Internet genres 
5 
rhetorical purpose” (14). For example, Swales (7) analyzed the introduction, methods, 
results, discussion and conclusion sections of research articles as well as briefly touching 
on other research process genres, such as abstracts, presentation, theses and grant 
proposals. Following Swales’s (7) approach, researchers have described other scientific 
genres such as research paper abstracts (15) and discussion sections (16), grant proposals (14), 
posters (17) and other visual presentations at scientific meetings (18) and French thesis 
defences (19). Researchers have examined as well as journalistic genres such as news (20, 
21), editorial letters (22) and magazine covers (23) and genres from the commercial world, 
such as business letters of negotiation (24), letters of application for jobs (25), Chinese sales 
letters (26), environmental impact statements (27), building reviews (28) and philanthropic 
direct mail (29).  
THEORY: DOCUMENTS AND GENRE  
Viewed from the perspective of the reader of a document, identification of a 
document’s genre makes the document more easily recognizable and understandable, 
thus reducing the cognitive load of processing it (30). Because we drew on the 
encyclopedia article genre in writing this article, for example, a reader should be able to 
more quickly determine the purpose and content of our communication and begin to 
evaluate its contribution. The form of the article gives hints to its meaning and 
appropriate uses. Similarly, following the form of the genre of a research article, letter of 
application, parking ticket or bank statement makes the corresponding documents easier to 
recognize, to assess and to use. This effect has been demonstrated experimentally: 
Vaughan and Dillon (31) found that readers of a Web newspaper that followed genre 
conventions reported better comprehension, usability and ease of navigation than 
Internet genres 
6 
readers of a purported newspaper that did not. Knowledge of genres can similarly help 
creators of documents by providing a known form for achieving a communicative 
purpose. Rather than having to innovate in all aspects of a document, a writer can reuse 
the form of a familiar genre to achieve their purpose. Teaching of genres is thus seen as 
an important aspect of teaching language and communication, e.g., in elementary (32), 
second language (33) and English for Special Purposes (34) education.  
In addition to helping senders and recipients singly, knowledge of genres can 
also facilitate interaction, since multiple communications may be performed in a 
recognizable pattern, what Bazerman (35) called a “genre system”. In other words, 
recognizing that a communication is of a particular genre may suggest the form 
expected for the reply. Swales (36) similarly defined a “genre chain” as a sequence of 
documents of different genres on a given topic. Examples include the sequence of 
examination and cross-examination in a trial, or the cycle of article submission to a journal 
or conference, reviews, final acceptance or rejection letters and publication. In each case, 
knowledge of the genre system provides information about how to proceed with the 
interaction. For example, Tardy (37) examined the genre system of research funding, 
identifying an interlocking set of genres such as a research agency’s mission statement and 
program information, informal meetings with program officers, applications, panel reviews and 
decisions. Antunes, Costas and Dias (38) analyzed genres related to electronic meetings. 
Features of a genre may enable their use in a genre system: for example, page numbers 
in a technical paper make it possible to more precisely cite concepts or quotations from 
the paper, thus binding the paper into the literature.  
For genres to be of aid in communication though, they must be shared across the 
members of particular discourse communities (7). Thus, genres are socially situated. 
Internet genres 
7 
Teachers and rhetoricians have acknowledged that learning about genres, and through 
genres, is learning how to participate in a community (e.g., 32). On the other hand, a 
genre may be unfamiliar or hard to understand for someone outside of the community. 
In fact, recognition of a particular genre is one sign of membership in a particular 
community (one needs only to witness the uncritical citing habits of college students 
who are not able to distinguish a popular Web genre from a serious scholarly one). 
Indeed, Freedman and Medway (39) suggest that incomprehensible genres may even be 
used deliberately to defend positions of privilege. Thus genres are not only a type of 
discourse but are themselves embodiments of social or communicative events (40). 
Leveraging the situated character of genres, Yates and Orlikowski (41, 42) 
proposed using them as a lens into organizational practices. Studying organizational 
discourse as examples of genres anchors and situates the investigation in a way that 
other approaches could not because each genre has within it the information for how it 
should be interpreted within a particular discourse community. For example, Yates, 
Orlikowski and Okamura (43) contrasted the explicit and implicit structuring of genres 
in the introduction of a new communications system, and Schryer and Spoel (44) 
examined genres as a way to understand professional identity formation of medical 
students and of midwives.  
To capture these social elements, Orlikowski and Yates (42) introduced the 
notion of a “genre repertoire”, that is, the set of genres in use within a community. They 
noted that different communities use different genres in their communication, and use 
common genres with different frequencies. (Hengst and Miller (45) refer to this 
situation as the “pervasive heterogeneity” of genres.) These differences provide one 
source of insight into the communicative (and other) practices of the community. For 
Internet genres 
8 
example, a community of social scientists and computer scientists can be distinguished 
by the frequency of use of different paper genres, as well as the paucity of computer 
programs and program documentation created in the former, reflecting different modes 
of research.  
Of course, the reality of documents and genre is not as clear-cut as the theory 
above suggests. First, not all communications or documents are necessarily generic. For 
example, Swales (7) ruled out conversation as a genre, arguing that the concept only 
applies to completed texts. Pieces of text or unfinished texts may not be generic. As 
well, if genres are formed in response to recurrent communicative needs, then 
communications in novel (or even relatively) novel situations may also not be generic. 
This circumstance may describe large portions of the communication taking place via 
the Internet (and so of the documents found there). Even in typified circumstances, an 
author may deliberately or inadvertently fail to reproduce the necessary form of a 
genre, again producing a non-generic document. Finally, the relation amongst genres in 
a genre system is rarely linear; in any given situation, there may be a set of appropriate 
responses (34).  
Furthermore, the boundaries between genres are often fuzzy and documents 
may show considerable variation in form even within a genre (12, 46). As a result, it 
may be helpful to think of genres defined by exemplars and documents as being more 
or less good examples of a genre rather than attempting to draw firm boundaries. As 
well, as Orlikowski and Yates (42) point out, some communications use multiple genres 
simultaneously, such as a proposal embedded in a memo or a book chapter in a book, along 
with table of contents or index. Other documents might have some mixed attributes, e.g., 
bibliography that is also an index to a document collection. As a result, the mapping of 
Internet genres 
9 
documents to genre may be one to many. This mixing of genres is likely to be 
particularly problematic for digital documents, which can have multiple forms of 
presentation.  
Further complicating the study of genre is the fact that knowledge of genres 
tends to be quite tacit and situated in use. Being able to recognize or use a genre is 
typically knowing “how to go on” (47) in a particular situation rather than formal 
articulable knowledge. The genre analyses cited above are research contributions 
precisely because they required research to uncover the hidden regularities in the 
documents. In practice, an individual may recognize and be able to use a document, 
while being unable to articulate a name for its particular genre or to say how they know 
what it is or which particular features are important for defining the form. When tested 
out of context, users may find genre hard to apply. For example, Santini (48) had 135 
users classify the genre of 25 Web pages and found high levels of agreement on only a 
handful of documents, while others attracted as many as four equally popular labels. 
Similarly, in a study with 102 webpages, Rosso (49) found a wide variety of genre terms 
(49) when three users were asked to pick their own labels. On the other hand, in a study 
with 257 users and 55 pages, he obtained a reasonable level of agreement (70%) when 
the choice was restricted to one of 18 terms, again suggesting that genre can be 
recognized more easily than produced.  
INTERNET GENRES 
We now turn our focus to genres of digital documents found on the Internet. The 
Internet and in particular the World-Wide Web provides a particularly interesting 
setting in which to study the use and development of genres for several reasons. First, 
Internet genres 
10 
the capabilities of the new medium have led to the development of many new genres of 
communication. Space limitations preclude a comprehensive review of the 
development of the Internet from the ARPAnet’s four computers in 1969 to the 
immense and nearly ubiquitous network of today, but we note that the increased 
functionality of the Internet has been paralleled by an explosion in Internet genres. In 
particular, the technology of the Web extends the notion of a document—and thus the 
notion of genre—because Web pages can provide functionality in addition to 
information. Indeed, some Web pages are more comparable to computer interfaces than 
to conventional paper documents. As a result, functionality may be important in 
understanding genres on the Internet. Furthermore, the rapid development of this 
medium suggests a high level of experimentation with potential genres. Bearman (50), 
for example, notes the rapid evolution in what he refers to as “forms of material” in 
electronic media in general. 
Second, since many Web sites are open to the public, many examples of Web 
communication are easily available for study. Furthermore, because there is no central 
management of the Internet or the Web, there is no explicit management or enforcement 
of genres of communication, as might happen in the introduction of a communication 
system in a corporate environment (51). Instead, individual Web developers 
individually choose how to present their information, drawing on their understanding 
as members of a community, what Orlikowski et al. (51) called implicit structuring (in 
this case, from the point of view of the Web page developer rather than the recipient of 
the communication). Yates and Sumner refer to the “democratization of genre 
production” as “communities evolve increasingly well-defined genres to better support 
their particular communicative needs and work practices” (52). However, even in this 
Internet genres 
11 
free-for-all, mutual acceptance of genre is important to enable communications. Yates 
and Sumner (52) argue that on the Web, genres help in both the production and 
consumption of documents because genre adds “fixity” in a medium that does not 
otherwise distinguish very well between text types (say, a book and a post-it). 
Finally, there are many communities meeting on the Web, bringing experiences 
with different genres and using the Web for many different purposes. The Web is 
sometimes used for direct communication where someone with a Web server “delivers” 
a document to members of a known community by giving them a URL. For example, 
some academics use the Web to communicate with colleagues by publishing their own 
papers, and with students by publishing syllabi and assignments. Another example of 
communication within a predictable community is computer companies announcing 
new products, publishing catalogs or providing troubleshooting tips on-line for their 
customers. However, in many other cases the audience is unpredictable. Unlike the 
Usenet or electronic mail groups, there is no clear separation of communities into 
different channels of communication (as is the case for journals or talks given at 
conferences, for which the audience is likely to have shared interests).  
Indeed, it seems a stretch to say that there is a single Web community at all. 
Instead, the genre repertoire reflected in a collection of Web pages will be the result of 
interactions within and among multiple communities. In some cases, a genre may act as 
a type of boundary object (53), providing a common point of contact between different 
groups (39). In others, this mixing may lead to genre confusion, meaning that there is a 
practical need to understand the way genres enable communication. For example, 
organizations have used the Web to publish information such as product brochures, 
annual reports, country, state, and city home pages, government agency press releases, etc. 
Internet genres 
12 
These organizations tend to use familiar genres when putting information on the Web. 
However, a person happening to reach a document on one of their Web sites has a good 
chance of being outside the community in which that genre evolved. As a result the 
document may be confusing and the communicative purpose lost. 
Evolution of Genres 
To understand the evolution of genres on the Web, we draw on studies of how 
pre-digital genres have evolved over time. Drawing on Giddens’ (47) structuration 
theory, Orlikowski and Yates (42) argued that, “People produce, reproduce and change 
genres through a process of structuring”. As members of the community draw on their 
knowledge of a genre repertoire to communicate, they reinforce the use of these genres, 
making them more appropriate or legitimate for use in the given situation. For example, 
by creating an order entry Web page that draws on the genre of a paper order form, a 
designer reinforces the appropriateness of the order form genre for this type of 
communication, making its use in future situations more likely. In other words, the set 
of genres in use (i.e., the genre repertoire) is both a product of and a shaper of the 
communicative practices of a community.  
Orlikowski and Yates (42) suggested that in a new situation (such as in the 
introduction of a new medium such as the Internet) individuals will typically draw on 
their existing genre repertoires, reproducing genres they have experienced as members 
of other communities. For example, Görlach (46) notes the emergence of new genres, 
such as the cooking recipe, that draw on early genres, in this case the medical recipe 
(though he uses the term text type rather than genre). However, people are also free to 
modify a genre and communicate in a way that invokes only some of the expected 
Internet genres 
13 
aspects of a form. If these changes become repeatedly used (i.e., typified), they too may 
become accepted and used together with or instead of existing genres, thus extending 
or altering the genre repertoire. Because the definition of genre relies on social 
acceptance, it is impossible to define the exact point at which a new genre emerges from 
the old one. Acceptance may take many years. However, after some period of 
coexistence, the new combination of form and purpose may become generally 
recognized and even named as a separate genre. As well, genres may be accepted in 
different communities at different rates. The emergence of distinctive new genres 
would be one sign of the formation of a new community with new communicative 
practices.  
Take for example the academic journal article, a distinctive genre with the 
communicative goal of reporting research results and establishing a researcher’s 
credentials and reputation. Journal articles have moved nearly intact to the Web and 
can be found in many online databases and on publishers’ Web sites, as well as on the 
Web sites of individual authors. These documents are often identical to the paper 
versions, an example of a reproduced genre (literally reproduced, as in many cases, the 
Web versions are simple scans of the paper form). However, in a few cases, the form of 
the journal article has begun to change to take advantage of the possibilities of linking 
or embedding information. For example, citations in papers may be hyperlinks to the 
referenced articles. In part to enable easier searching of results, some journals now 
require structured abstracts, a particular genre of abstract with a distinctive form. Some 
publisher sites allow users to comment on papers, enabling more interactive follow-up 
discussion. Such documents are examples of adapted genres. Even more interesting is 
the emergence of forms other than journal articles for reporting research results, such as 
Internet genres 
14 
datasets, software or other products of research, all examples of emergent genres. For 
example, researchers in genetics may publish gene sequences in a variety of specialized 
databases that can substitute in some case for a journal publication (54). Similar efforts 
are underway in other disciplines, meaning that the eventual form used for reporting 
research may bear only passing resemblance to the self-contained 20–25 page articles of 
today.  
Related changes are already visible at the level of journals. For example, while 
paper journals are often reproduced on a Web site, there are now journals that publish 
only on-line editions, which need not conform to typical page limits or even have 
volumes at all (an adapted genre). There are suggestions that the increased use of online 
databases for finding articles (either by topical search or citation indexing), as opposed 
to subscribing to a handful of specific journals, is blurring previously distinct 
publications into “the literature” (55). As a result, the need for individual journals with 
distinct missions and readerships may be reduced, as is the utility of the genre itself. 
Similarly, the widespread use of working paper archives and of general search engines 
that cover such “grey literature” (working papers, conference papers, etc.) may blur the 
boundary between these genres and journal articles and thus lead to hybrid or novel 
genres. (Indeed, such a shift may have already happened in disciplines that value 
conference papers on par with journal articles, reducing the distinction between the 
purposes of these genres.) 
These emergent genres may be immediately accepted or, more likely, there may 
be a transition period during which the limits of the genre are renegotiated. For 
example, the electronically distributed journal article is still in transition (56, 57). It is being 
used, but this adapted genre is not yet completely accepted or considered legitimate for 
Internet genres 
15 
all purposes (e.g., as evidence for a tenure case) by the academic community as a whole. 
As well, modifications of genres that are parts of genre systems may require 
corresponding changes to the rest of the system. For example, changes in citation habits 
will be necessary before page numbers can be dropped from the technical paper genre. 
Such interdependencies between genres will tend to slow the adoption of a new genre.  
Internet Genres 
While many genres have been reproduced more-or-less faithfully, as in the 
example of journal articles, the Internet has seen the rise of a few novel genres. In a study 
of 1000 Web documents, Crowston and Williams (58) were able to identify documents 
of many familiar genres and of a few genres that seemed to be new to the Web, such as 
the hotlist. A specific example of a novel genre is the home page. As early as 1996, Furuta 
and Marshall (59) noted the emergence of this genre as a result of the specific 
affordances of the Internet. While Bates and Lu in 1997 suggested that the home page 
genre was still inchoate (60), soon after Dillon and Gushrowski (61) found that the 
features of personal home pages seemed to have stabilized rather quickly. The FAQ 
(Frequently Asked Questions) document emerged as a distinct genre on the Usenet and 
was then translated to the Web. An AltaVista search done by Crowston and Williams 
(58) indicated approximately 170,000 Web pages with FAQ or “Frequently asked 
questions” in their title (a search in 2007 with Google finds more than 16 million such 
pages).  
Other authors have identified a variety of Internet specific genres. Some have to 
do with particular communications media used on the Internet, such as email message or 
Weblogs. Gains (62) analyzed small collections of business and academic email messages. He 
Internet genres 
16 
suggested that email as a whole has too many uses to be considered one genre and that 
the business emails analyzed “appear to follow the normal conventions for standard 
written business English”, suggesting that they did not include new genres. On the 
other hand, he noted that academic email messages had some conversational features and 
suggested that the collection might include new genres of communications. Gruber (63) 
analyzed contributions to two academic mailing lists as forming a single genre with 
features of academic letters and scholarly publication as well as of oral communication. (It 
should be noted that these analyses were carried out when the medium was still novel 
to many users.) More recently, Barron (64) analyzed the properties of unsolicited 
commercial email (UCE or “spam”). She noted similarities between spam and other 
promotional genres, with moves such as capturing attention, establishing credentials, 
introducing the offer and multiple moves soliciting a response. She noted differences 
though, such as the need to capture attention to get the message opened and the 
inclusion of offers to unsubscribe the recipient.  
A more recent innovation is the Weblog or blog. Based on an analysis of a random 
sample of 203 blogs, Herring et al. (65) characterized blogs as a “hybrid genre that draws 
from multiple sources” both offline and Internet. They distinguished several types of 
blogs with different forms and purposes as well as distinct origins. Most of their sample 
they characterized as journal blogs, which they suggested draw on the form and purpose 
of diaries, since they report the writer’s feelings rather than other content. A few were 
filter blogs, providing pointers to other content of interest and perhaps deriving from the 
earlier Web genre of hotlists or, they suggest, from the offline antecedent of letters to the 
editor. Other types of blogs identified include community, travel, memory and 
communications blogs, though these were rare in their sample.  
Internet genres 
17 
Other authors have analyzed particular genres of documents commonly 
appearing on the Internet, such as the personal home pages mentioned above (59-61, 66), 
Web resumes (67), Internet advertising (“netvertising”) (68) and online encyclopedias (69). 
Howard (70) went as far as to claim the existence of a “Web vernacular”, a particular 
form of Web page that was expected and so copied by commercial developers.  
Still others have examined non-textual documents, such as audio loops (short 
sound sample) (71), multimedia (72) and databases (73), as well as mixed media such as 
PowerPoint presentations (74). Exploration of genres of digital documents therefore 
blends at some point into the study of non-textual genres. The discussion above can be 
extended to such documents. For example, we can see the recreation of genres of music 
(e.g., pop song or concerto), even as the medium shifts from LP to CD to MP3, as well as 
adaptation of the genres of televisions shows to take advantage of the increased 
functionality (and decreased screen size) as they move from broadcast TV to Web 
distribution.  
Genre classification 
While we do not have a list of all of the genres on the Internet (nor is it clear that 
such a thing is even possible), there is a substantial body of work categorizing genre in 
printed documents and some work studying them on the Internet. Many attempts to 
develop a categorization of genres have been top-down, that is, they analyzed a set of 
documents based on theoretical principles or according to a priori classifications. A key 
difference in these efforts is the number of genre categories distinguished. Many studies 
of Web pages have used fewer broader categories: for example, zu Eissen and Stein (75) 
used only 8 genres (help; article; discussion; shop; portrayal, non-private; portrayal, private; 
Internet genres 
18 
link collection; and download). At the other extreme, Görlach (46) offered a catalog of 
some 2000 genre (or text type) terms, which is intended to be an exhaustive list of the 
terms used in English. Somewhere in between, Lee (11) categorized documents in the 
British National Corpus (BNC) into 70 genres or subgenres (with some document 
assigned more than one genre). However, he notes that the genre terms used were 
“meant to provide starting points, not a definitive taxonomy”, for example grouping 
textbooks and journal articles as academic texts that can be further distinguished by 
medium.  
If the classification includes more than a handful of terms, it is useful to group 
together similar terms and necessary to deal with terms of different levels of generality 
(11). For example, social science papers might be grouped with computer science 
implementation papers, biology research papers and so on as examples of academic papers. 
These genres share some similarities, such as a title, abstract and bibliography, but 
differ in other particulars, such as the expected section headings, types of arguments or 
evidence. Many organized lists of genres are structured as single hierarchies. Figure 1 
shows a small section of the hierarchy of genres of Web documents identified by 
Crowston and Williams (58). Advertisements and announcements are both examples of 
declaratory document genres; classified advertisements are a special kind of advertisement, 
and so on. Similarly, social science papers, computer science papers and biology papers might 
be seen as examples of a more general genre of research papers, which are in turn 
examples of papers or articles.  
An advantage of a hierarchy is that it avoids the need to predetermine the level 
of detail needed in the classification. Depending on the circumstances, we can consider 
genres at any of these different levels and different levels might be more or less useful 
Internet genres 
19 
for different purposes. Of course, there is no guarantee that convenient and well-known 
terms will exist for all levels of the hierarchy. A second criticism of traditional 
hierarchies is that they rely on a single organizing principle, which may not be useful or 
appropriate for all cases. Harrell and Linkugel (5) note that there are multiple bases on 
which such a classification could be constructed. To overcome this problem, Kwaśnik 
and Crowston (76) suggested using the facetted-analysis approach, following the 
example of previous genre-identification studies such as Päivärinta (77), Tyrväinen and 
Päivärinta (78) and Karjalainen et al. (79) who looked at the management of enterprise 
documents, and Kessler, Nunberg and Schuetze (80) who sought to identify a limited 
set of facets for communicative purposes. Crowston and Williams (58) based their 
classification of genres on the Art and Architecture Thesaurus (81), which is also a facetted 
classification overall.  
The previously discussed classification schemes can be described as top-down or 
a priori. Though this approach is quite common in conventional settings, given the 
communal nature of genres, a top-down approach to classification seems problematic. 
As genres are socially constructed, different social groups using documents with similar 
structural features may think about them and describe them differently (i.e., as different 
genres, though perhaps similar text types 11). While many genres may be widely 
shared, even more will be local to particular groups. Documents may be of genres that 
are not necessarily vetted by traditional schemes, particularly documents that come out 
of domain-specific work. Furthermore, while genres have always been conceptualized 
as dynamic, Dillon and Gushrowski (61) point out that genres are no longer necessarily 
“slow-forming, often emerging only over generations of production and 
consumption…”. Thus, a static typology of genre or document forms may not be 
Internet genres 
20 
sufficient to describe the emerging and dynamic genres in use on the Internet. It seems 
important instead to capture users’ own language and understanding of genres.  
Some researchers have attempted to identify genres bottom-up through user 
studies. Dewe, Karlgren and Bretan (82) asked users to provide lists of genres found on 
the Web and received 67 responses. They noted though that users tended to conflate 
genre and topic. Nilan, Pomerantz and Paling (83) surveyed 242 Web users in person 
and via the Web about their purpose in searching the Web, the genre of document 
expected and the actual document found, and collected 1335 example pages; genres 
could be assigned for 1076, giving a total of 116 genres. They then grouped the genres 
given, first following the plan of the Art and Architecture Thesaurus and second based 
bottom-up on the user responses. The second classification was much broader and 
shallower than the first, and some genres were classified in multiple locations, 
suggesting that there may be difference between genres in use and formal structured 
knowledge. Freund, Clarke and Toms (84) developed a list of 16 genres based on 
interviews with users and analysis of document repositories in a particular 
organization. They found that the 16 genres covered about 75% of documents randomly 
sampled from the repositories.  
APPLICATIONS OF GENRE IN INFORMATION SCIENCE  
In this final section, we discuss how ideas about genre might be applied to 
system design. Researchers have addressed a variety of information systems design 
questions, such as the use of genre to design electronic meeting systems (38) or to guide 
assembly of output documents from a content management system, e.g., creating 
training documents by reusing content from operations manuals (79, 85). We will focus 
Internet genres 
21 
on one particular question likely to be of interest and importance to information 
scientists, namely how genre metadata might be used to improve information access on 
the Internet.  
A significant problem in information access is that topic alone is not enough to 
define an information problem. Different users may require different solutions for 
seemingly similar topics because the situation (or context) of the user determines not 
only what topics are requested and what strategies are invoked in searching and 
evaluating output, but also what types of resources are considered relevant and useful. 
For example, “methods for learning mathematics” (a topic) will be construed differently 
by a student, by a parent and by a classroom teacher because of their different 
information-use situations. Indeed, even the same user may require different 
information at different times.  
Although we know that it is important to understand the situation of the user, 
the actual representation of situations and then their implementation in a system 
remains a difficult problem. Our efforts to create user profiles, universal situation 
grammars, and so on suffer from limitations of scope to specific domains and lack of 
extensibility and flexibility. However, in a study using TREC data, Karlgren (86) found 
significant differences in style between documents judged relevant and not relevant, 
suggesting that non-topical metadata can be helpful. In particular, inclusion of genre 
information as non-topical characteristics of the documents might be useful as a signal 
to their purpose and so fit the user information need. For example, a university 
professor looking for information about computer database systems for the class that 
she teaches would most likely be interested in documents of educational genres (e.g., 
syllabi, assignments, class notes). On the other hand, when working on a research paper in 
Internet genres 
22 
the database area, the same professor would more likely appreciate scholarly work (e.g., 
research papers, annotated biographies, calls for papers). The relevant documents for these 
two searches would be quite different, even though the topic and query keywords 
might be nearly the same.  
Explicit identification of genre seems likely to be particularly important for large 
digital collections (the Web being the largest) because—unlike earlier collections of 
documents comprising a limited set of genres (e.g., a document database containing 
primarily journal articles)—these collections contain documents addressing a diversity of 
discourse communities with a diversity of genres (e.g., journal articles but also magazine 
articles, hot lists, memos, home pages, class syllabi, etc.). A user searching such a diverse 
document collection by topic will likely receive some documents of relevant genres 
along with many documents of irrelevant genres—a low precision result—even if all 
retrieved documents conform to search specifications regarding the topical content of 
the document. This analysis suggests that one way to exploit genre information is to 
create specialized search engines that retrieve only documents of a particular genre. 
This approach has already been followed by several systems, such as Indeed for job 
listings, CiteSeer and Google Scholar for academic articles and various Google specialized 
searches for blogs, books, business addresses, news articles, patents, product sales pages and 
source code (but excluding those specialized by media, e.g., searches for images or 
video).  
A second way to use genre information is to enrich queries with information 
about expected genres of the results, e.g., as a form of relevance feedback (86, 87). 
Because most genres are characterized by both form and purpose, identifying the genre 
of a document provides information as to the document’s purpose and its fit to the 
Internet genres 
23 
user’s situation, which can be difficult to assess otherwise. When medical information is 
sought, identical keywords might retrieve a newsletter, a personal home page, a journal 
article or a hospital’s patient-information site. A person searching for one of these genres 
is unlikely to be satisfied by the others.  
Knowledge of the form of genres can also help in the process of matching 
documents to queries. For example, an FAQ document is divided into question and 
answer pairs (indeed, documents of many genres have a form with repeated subpieces). 
Requiring search terms to be found in the same question-answer pair (or subpiece) may 
reduce spurious matches or false drops.  
Once a search is completed, document genre may be useful to improve the 
accuracy of relevance judgments made to rank order search results. It has been noted 
that some genres are less likely to be relevant for the majority of search tasks. This 
implies that certain Web pages could be promoted or demoted in the ranked results if 
their genre were known. For example, it has been claimed that most searchers are not 
interested in retrieving personal home pages (88), so the latter could be moved down the 
results list by request. Bretan (89) suggested using genre to group search results while 
Freund, Clarke and Toms (84) suggest filtering results.  
Finally, a one-size-fits-all approach to summarizing or evaluating Web 
documents is likely to misrepresent many documents when confronted with diverse 
genres. For example, a newspaper article can often be summarized by the first few 
paragraphs of the document, but such an approach will not work for a home page or 
FAQ (90). Rehm (91) analyzed the necessary components for a document to be an 
academic home page as a prelude to extracting information for further processing. 
Internet genres 
24 
Automatic Identification of Document Genre 
For genre to be useful in large-scale systems, techniques will be needed to 
automatically assign genre to large collections of documents. Researchers have tried 
numerous approaches to automatic genre identification; a sampling of studies is shown 
in Table 1. This work has used statistical (e.g., regression or discriminant analysis) or 
machine learning techniques (e.g., decision trees or support vector machines) to classify 
documents into genres based on features in the documents (Sebastiani (92) has 
reviewed these techniques). Comparing the algorithm’s assignment to the known genre 
measures the success of the classification. Table 1 presents accuracy, though the some 
authors compute both precision and recall. For example, Freund, Clarke and Toms (84) 
suggest that for filtering, higher recall might be preferred even at the cost of lower 
precision, to ensure that all documents of a given genre are presented to the user.  
Document features that have been suggested for use in genre recognition include 
counts of specific words or of closed-class words (e.g., days of the week), counts and 
ratios of parts of speech, word and sentence length, layout features (93), punctuation 
(94), URLs and HTML tags (95) and even the level of spelling and typing errors in the 
document (96). There has been a trend towards the use of larger and more 
comprehensive feature sets, from which the machine learning techniques can pick 
useful subsets. Which features are useful and necessary is still a topic for research. For 
example, Dewdney et al. (93) suggested that presentation features alone were sufficient 
to recognize genre, while Ferizis and Bailey (97) found that POS tagging was not 
needed for genre recognition; since it is computationally expensive, avoiding these 
features may be desirable. Dong et al. (98) found that more features increased recall but 
decreased precision, and that including more types of features improved both.  
Internet genres 
25 
For statistical analysis or machine learning to be successful requires a large set of 
categorized documents to use as a training set. Creating such corpuses is time-
consuming, so early studies used preexisting ones, such as the Brown corpus, which 
includes 500 samples (802 documents) in 15 text categories (press reportage; press editorial; 
press reviews; religion; skill and hobbies; belles letters; miscellaneous US government and house 
organs; learned; fiction general; mystery and detective fiction; science fiction; romance and love 
story; and humour). However, this corpus is not very suitable for the purpose as the 
average of 30 samples per genre is small for training and the categories mix topics and 
genres. More recent studies have created corpuses that are more focused and often 
larger (as large as 5–10 thousand pages with hundreds of examples of each genre). A 
concern here is the diversity of the documents included. Techniques applied to a corpus 
that includes only particular genres will yield more precise results than would be 
obtained with a more diverse sample.  
Another key issue is number of genres to be recognized. Most studies have used 
small number of categories (from 4 to a maximum of 32, with a median of 10 in the 
studies in Table 1), which is small compared to the hundreds found in the user studies 
and general Web surveys reviewed above. Experimenters have examined fewer genres 
because increasing the number to be detected reduces precision and demands a larger 
corpus for training. But as Boese (99) noted, definitions of broader categories have be 
“softer” to include more documents and so very broad categories may be less useful to 
users or for the information access systems discussed above. Another concern is that the 
design of classification interacts with the features chosen. Grouping together documents 
with similar purposes but dissimilar structural features (i.e., genres as opposed to text 
types) may be useful for users, but create problems for automatic classification. With a 
Internet genres 
26 
facetted classification, different techniques could be used recognize individual facets 
(100). Researchers have experimented with recognizing speech acts in email (101), a 
document’s degree of expertise, detail and subjectivity (102) or positive and negative 
tone in reviews (103).  
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
The research reviewed in this article suggests that genre provides a useful lens 
for examining Internet documents. First, knowing the set of genres in use by a target 
audience can help ensure that information presented is easily understood and used. As 
well, there seems to be good potential to incorporate genre meta-data in information 
access systems. However, to realize these benefits, more research is needed. First, we do 
not as yet have a fully articulated set of data that reveals what genres various target 
groups recognize nor for what tasks they find documents of specific genres useful. 
Second, while genre recognition has improved, it is still limited in the number of genres 
that can be detected reliably. These two research agenda interact, as better knowledge 
of the genres in use will inform our attempts to recognize and use them in future 
Internet systems.  
 
Internet genres 
27 
REFERENCES 
1: Buckland, M. K. What is a "document"? Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science 1997, 48 (9), 804–809. 
2: Campbell, K. K.;  Jamieson, K. H. Eds., Form and genre: Shaping rhetorical action 
(Speech Communication Association, Fall Church, VA, 1978) 
3: Johns, A. M.; Bawarshi, A.; Coe, R. M.; Hyland, K.; Paltridge, B.; Reiff, M. J.;  Tardy, 
C. Crossing the boundaries of genre studies: Commentaries by experts. Journal of Second 
Language Writing 2006, 15 (3), 234-249. 
4: Hyon, S. Genre in three traditions: Implications for ESL. Tesol Quarterly 1996, 30 (4), 
693-722. 
5: Harrell, J.;  Linkugel, W. A. On rhetorical genre: An organizing perspective. Philosophy 
and Rhetoric 1978, 11, 262–281. 
6: Miller, C. R. Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech 1984, 70, 151–167. 
7: Swales, J. M. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings; Cambridge 
University Press: New York, 1990. 
8: Dollar, C., in Conference on Electronic Records in the New Millennium. (Vancouver, BC, 
1994) pp. 25–38 
9: Muntigl, P.;  Gruber, H. Introduction: Approaches to Genre Folia Linguistica 2005, 39 
(1–2), 1–18. 
10: Breure, L. (Information and Computing Sciences, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands, 2001), vol. 2007, 
11: Lee, D. Y. W. Genres, registers, text types, domains, and styles: Clarifying the concepts 
and navigating a path through the BNC jungle. Language Learning & Technology 2001, 
5 (3), 37–72. 
12: Moessner, L. Genre, text type, style, register: A terminological maze? European Journal 
of English Studies 2001, 5 (2), 131–138. 
13: Bitzer, L. F. The rhetorical situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric 1968, 1, 1–14. 
14: Connor, U.;  Mauranen, A. Linguistic Analysis of Grant Proposals: European Union 
Research Grants. English for Specific Purposes 1999, 18 (1), 47-62. 
15: Martín, P. M. A genre analysis of English and Spanish research paper abstracts in 
experimental social sciences. English for Specific Purposes 2003, 22 (1), 25-43. 
16: Peacock, M. Communicative moves in the discussion section of research articles. System 
2002, 30 (4), 479-497. 
Internet genres 
28 
17: MacIntosh-Murray, A. Poster presentations as a genre in knowledge communication: A 
case study of forms, norms and values. Science Communication 2007, 28 (3), 347–376. 
18: Rowley-Jolivet, E. Visual Discourse in Scientific Conference Papers: A Genre-Based 
Study. English for Specific Purposes 2002, 21 (1), 19-40. 
19: Maingueneau, D. Analysis of an academic genre. Discourse Studies 2002, 4 (3), 319-342. 
20: Vestergaard, T. That's not news: Persuasive and expository genres in the press. In 
Analysing Professional Genres; A. Trosborg, Ed.; John Benjamins: Amsterdam, 2000, 
97–119 
21: Ljung, M. Newspaper genres and newspaper english. In English Media Texts-Past And 
Present. Language And Textual Structure; F. Ungerer, Ed.; John Benjamins: Amsterdam, 
2000, 131-149 
22: Flowerdew, J.;  Dudley-Evans, T. Genre analysis of editorial letters to international 
journal contributors. Applied Linguistics 2002, 23 (4), 463-489. 
23: Held, G. Magazine covers: A multimodal pretext-genre. Folia Linguistica 2005, 39 (1–2), 
173–196. 
24: Pinto dos Santos, V. B. M. Genre analysis of business letters of negotiation. English for 
Specific Purposes 2002, 21 (2), 167-199. 
25: Henry, A.;  Roseberry, R. L. A narrow-angled corpus analysis of moves and strategies of 
the genre: "Letter of application". English for Specific Purposes 2001, 20 (2), 153-167. 
26: Zhu, Y. Rhetorical moves in Chinese sales genres, 1949 to the present. Journal of 
Business Communication 2000, 37 (2), 156–172. 
27: Bazerman, C.; Little, J.;  Chavkin, T. The production of information for genred activity 
spaces: Informational motives and consequences of the environmental impact statement 
Written Communication 2003, 20 (4), 455–477. 
28: Caballero Rodriguez, R. Metaphor and Genre: The Presence and Role of Metaphor in the 
Building Review. Applied Linguistics 2003, 24 (2), 145-167. 
29: Upton, T. A. Understanding Direct Mail Letters as a Genre. International Journal of 
Corpus Linguistics 2002, 7 (1), 65-85. 
30: Bartlett, F. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology; University 
Press: Cambridge, England, 1932/1967. 
31: Vaughan, M. W.;  Dillon, A. Why structure and genre matter for users of digital 
information: A longitudinal experiment with readers of a web-based newspaper. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 2006, 64, 502–526. 
32: Chapman, M. L. Situated, social, active: Rewriting genre in the elementary classroom. 
Written Communication 1999, 16 (4), 469-490. 
Internet genres 
29 
33: Hyland, K. Genre-based pedagogies: A social response to process. Journal of Second 
Language Writing 2003, 12 (1), 17-29. 
34: Swales, J. M. Languages for specific purposes. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 
2000, 20, 59–76. 
35: Bazerman, C. Systems of genres and the enactment of social intentions. In Genre and the 
New Rhetoric; A. Freedman, P. Medway, Eds.; Taylor and Francis: London, 1995, 79–
101 
36: Swales, J. M. Research Genres: Exploration and Applications; Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge, 2004. 
37: Tardy, C. M. A genre system view of the funding of academic research. Written 
Communication 2003, 20 (1), 7–36. 
38: Antunes, P.; Costa, C. J.;  Pino, J. A. The use of genre analysis in the design of electronic 
meeting systems. Information Research-an International Electronic Journal 2006, 11 (3). 
39: Freedman, A.;  Medway, P. Locating genre studies: Antecedents and prospects. In Genre 
and the New Rhetoric; A. Freedman, P. Medway, Eds.; Taylor and Francis: London, 
1994, 1–22 
40: Askehave, I.;  Swales, J. M. Genre identification and communicative purpose: A problem 
and a possible solution. Applied Linguistics 2001, 22 (2), 195-212. 
41: Yates, J.;  Orlikowski, W. J. Genres of organizational communication: A structurational 
approach to studying communications and media. Academy of Management Review 1992, 
17 (2), 299–326. 
42: Orlikowski, W. J.;  Yates, J. Genre repertoire: The structuring of communicative 
practices in organizations. Administrative Sciences Quarterly 1994, 33, 541–574. 
43: Yates, J.; Orlikowski, W. J.;  Okamura, K. Explicit and implicit structuring of genres in 
electronic communication: Reinforcement and change of social interaction. Organization 
Science 1999, 10 (1), 83–103. 
44: Schryer, C. F.;  Spoel, P. Genre theory, health-care discourse, and professional identity 
formation Journal of Business and Technical Communication 2005, 19, 249–279. 
45: Hengst, J. A.;  Miller, P. J. The heterogeneity of discourse genres: Implications for 
development. World Englishes 1999, 18 (3), 325-341. 
46: Görlach, M. Text Types and the History of English, Trends in Linguistics. Studies and 
Monographs 139; Mouton de Gruyter: New York, 2004. 
47: Giddens, A. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration; 
University of California: Berkeley, 1984. 
Internet genres 
30 
48: Santini, M. Zero, single, or multi? Genre of web pages through the users’ perspective. 
Information Processing and Management 2007. 
49: Rosso, M. A., in 5th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital libraries. (Denver, CO, 
2005) 
50: Bearman, D. Electronic Evidence: Strategies for Managing Records in Contemporary 
Organizations; Archives and Museum Informatics: Pittsburgh, 1994. 
51: Orlikowski, W. J.; Yates, J.; Okamua, K.;  Fujimoto, M. Shaping electronic 
communication: The metastructuring of technology in the context of use. Organization 
Science 1995, 6 (4), 423–444. 
52: Yates, S. J.;  Sumner, T. Digital genres and the new burden of fixity Paper presented at 
the Hawaiian International Conference on System Sciences (HICCS 30); Wailea, HA, 
1997. 
53: Star, S. L.;  Griesemer, J. R. Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundary objects:  
Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39. In 
Social Studies of Science Sage: Newbury Park, 1989; 19, 387–420 
54: Krawczak, M.; Ball, E. V.; Fenton, I.; Stenson, P. D.; Abeysinghe, S.; Thomas, N.;  
Cooper, D. N. Human gene mutation database: A biomedical information and research 
resource. Human Mutation 2000, 15 (1), 45–51. 
55: Nunberg, G. The places of books in the age of electronic reproduction. Representations 
1993, 42 (Spring), 13–37. 
56: Kling, R.;  Covi, L. Electronic journals and legitimate media in the systems of scholarly 
communication. The Information Society 1995, 11 (4), 261–271. 
57: Harter, S. P. Scholarly communication and electronic journals: An impact study. Journal 
of the American Society for Information Science 1998, 49 (6), 507–516. 
58: Crowston, K.;  Williams, M. Reproduced and emergent genres of communication on the 
World Wide Web. Information Society 2000, 16 (3), 201-215. 
59: Furuta, R.;  Marshall, C. C. Genre as Reflection of Technology in the World-Wide Web  
(1996) (Hypermedia Research Lab, Texas A&M  
60: Bates, M. J.;  Lu, S. An exploratory profile of personal home pages: Content, design, 
metaphors. Online & CDROM review 1997, 21 (6), 331–340. 
61: Dillon, A.;  Gushrowski, B. Genres and the Web: Is the personal home page the first 
uniquely digital genre? Journal of the American Society for Information Science 2000, 51 
(2), 202–205. 
Internet genres 
31 
62: Gains, J. Electronic mail–A new style of communication or just a new medium?: An 
investigation into the text features of e-mail. English for Specific Purposes 1999, 18 (1), 
81–101. 
63: Gruber, H. E-mail discussion lists: A new genre of scholarly communication? Wiener 
Linguistische Gazette 1997, 60/61, 24–43. 
64: Barron, A. Understanding spam: A macro-textual analysis. Journal of Pragmatics 2006, 
38 (6), 880-904. 
65: Herring, S. C.; Scheidt, L. A.; Bonus, S.;  Wright, E. Bridging the gap: A genre analysis 
of weblogs Paper presented at the the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2004. 
66: Killoran, J. B. The gnome in the front yard and other public figurations: Genres of self-
presentation on personal Home Pages. Biography-an Interdisciplinary Quarterly 2003, 
26 (1), 66-83. 
67: Killoran, J. B. Self-published Web resumes - Their purposes and their genre systems. 
Journal of Business and Technical Communication 2006, 20 (4), 425-459. 
68: Fortanet, I.; Palmer, J. C.;  Posteguillo, S. The emergence of a new genre: Advertising on 
the internet (netvertising). Hermes 1999, 23, 93-113. 
69: Emigh, W.;  Herring, S. C. Collaborative authoring on the web:  A genre analysis of 
online encyclopedias Paper presented at the the 38th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, 2005. 
70: Howard, R. G. Toward a theory of the world wide web vernacular: The case for pet 
cloning. Journal of Folklore Research 2005, 42 (3), 323–367. 
71: Stillar, G. Loops as genre resources. Folia Linguistica 2005, 39 (1–2), 197–212. 
72: Lemke, J. L. Multimedia genres and traversals. Folia Linguistica 2005, 39 (1–2), 45–56. 
73: Manovich, L. Database as a genre of new media. AI & Society 2000, 14, 176–183. 
74: Myers, G. Powerpoints: Technology, lectures, and changing genres. In Analysing 
Professional Genres; A. Trosborg, Ed.; John Benjamins: Amsterdam, 2000, 177-191 
75: zu Eissen, S. M.;  Stein, B. Genre classification of web pages: User study and feasibility 
analysis Paper presented at the the 27th Annual German Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (KI 04); Ulm, Germany, 2004. 
76: Kwasnik, B. H.;  Crowston, K. A framework for creating a facetted classification for 
genres: Addressing issues of multidimensionality Paper presented at the the Hawai'i 
International Conference on System Science (HICSS), 5–9 January; Big Island, Hawai'i, 
2004. 
Internet genres 
32 
77: Päivärinta, T. A genre approach to applying critical social theory to information systems 
development Paper presented at the the 1st Critical Management Studies Conference, 
Information Technology and Critical Theory stream; Manchester, England, 1999. 
78: Tyrväinen, P.;  Päivärinta, T. On rethinking organizational document genres for 
electronic document management Paper presented at the the 32nd Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences; Los Alamitos, CA, 1999. 
79: Karjalainen, A.; Päivärinta, T.; Tyrväinen, P.;  Rajala, J. Genre-based metadata for 
enterprise document management Paper presented at the the 33rd Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences; Los Alamos, CA, 2000. 
80: Kessler, B.; Nunberg, G.;  Schuetze, H. Automatic detection of text genre Paper presented 
at the the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 
8th Meeting of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics; 
Madrid, 1997. 
81: Petersen, T. Art and Architecture Thesaurus; Oxford: New York, 1994. 
82: Dewe, J.; Karlgren, J.;  Bretan, I., in 11th Nordic Conference of Computational 
Linguistics. (Copenhagen, Denmark, 1998) 
83: Nilan, M.; Pomerantz, J.;  Paling, S. Genres from the bottom up: What has the Web 
brought us? Paper presented at the Asist 2001: the 64th Asist Annual Meeting, Vol 38, 
2001, 2001. 
84: Freund, L.; Clarke, C. L. A.;  Toms, E. G. Towards genre classification for IR in the 
workplace In ACM International Conference Proceeding: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2006; 
176, 30–36 
85: Honkaranta, A., in 8th CAiSE/IFIP8.1 EMMSAD ’03 workshop (2003) 
86: Karlgren, J. Stylistic experiments in information retrieval. In Natural Language 
Information Retrieval; T. Stralkowski, Ed.; Kluwer: Dordrecht, 1998 
87: Roussinov, D.; Crowston, K.; Nilan, M.; Kwasnik, B. H.; Liu, X.;  Cai, J., in Thirty-
Fourth Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science (HICSS–34). (IEEE, Maui, 
HI, 2001) 
88: Chen, H.; Schuffels, C.;  Orwig, R. Internet categorization and search: A self-organizing 
approach. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 1996, 7 (1), 88–
102. 
89: Bretan, I.; Dewe, J.; Hallberg, A.;  Wolkert, N., in WebNet '98. (Orlando, 1998) 
90: Marcu, D., in 14th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-97). (1997) 
Internet genres 
33 
91: Rehm, G. Towards automatic Web genre identification: a corpus-based approach in the 
domain of academia by example of the Academic's Personal Homepage Paper presented 
at the the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2002. 
92: Sebastiani, F. Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing 
Surveys 2002, 34 (1), 1–47. 
93: Dewdney, N.; VanEss-Dykema, C.;  MacMillan, R. The form is the substance: 
Classification of genres in text Paper presented at the Workshop on Human Language 
Technology and Knowledge Management, ACL 2001 Conference, 6-7 July 2001; 
Toulouse, France, 2001. 
94: Stamatatos, E.; Fakotakis, N.;  Kokkinakis, G. Automatic text categorization in terms of 
genre and author. Computational Linguistics 2000, 26 (4), 471–498. 
95: Lim, C. S.; Lee, K. J.;  Kim, G. C. Multiple sets of features for automatic genre 
classification of web documents. Information Processing & Management 2005, 41 (5), 
1263-1276. 
96: Stubbe, A.; Ringlstetter, C.;  Schulz, K. U., in IJCAI-2007 Workshop on Analytics for 
Noisy Unstructured Text Data. (Hyderabad, India, 2007) pp. 9–16 
97: Ferizis, G.;  Bailey, P., in WWW 2006 Conference. (Edinburgh, Scotland, 2006) 
98: Dong, L.; Watters, C.; Duffy, J.;  Shepherd, M., in Hawai'i International Conference on 
System System (HICSS-41). (Kona, Hawai'i, 2008) 
99: Boese, E. S. Stereotyping the web: Genre classification of web documents MS Thesis, 
Colorado State University (2005) 
100: Kim, Y.;  Ross, S., in Hawai'i International Conference on System System (HICSS-41). 
(Kona, Hawai'i, 2008) 
101: Carvalho, V. R.;  Cohen, W. W., in HLT-NAACL Workshop on Analyzing Conversations 
in Text and Speech (ACTS). (New York, NY, 2006) pp. 35–41 
102: Dimitrova, M.; Finn, A.; Kushmerick, N.;  Smyth, B. (2002) 
103: Finn, A.;  Kushmerick, N. Learning to classify documents according to genre. Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology 2006, 57 (11), 1506–1518. 
104: Crowston, K.;  Williams, M. Reproduced and emergent genres of communication on the 
World-Wide Web. The Information Society 2000, 16 (3), 201–216. 
105: Karlgren, J.;  Cutting, D. Recognizing text genres with simple metrics using discriminant 
analysis Paper presented at the the 15th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics; Kyoto, Japan, 1994. 
Internet genres 
34 
106: Wolters, M.;  Kirsten, M. Exploring the use of linguistic features in domain and genre 
classification Paper presented at the the 9th conference of the European chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics; Bergen, Norway, 1999. 
107: Bisant, D. An application of neural networks to sequence analysis and genre 
identification. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 
2005, 19 (2), 199-215. 
 
 
TABLES AND FIGURES 
 
<declaratory document genres>  
 advertisements  
  classified 
advertisements 
Short paid announcements appearing in a periodical 
sorted according to the good or service being offered or 
requested 
 announcements Printed or published statements or notices that inform the 
reader of an event or other news  
  custom 404 page A Web page announcing that the requested Web page 
could not be found on the server 
  news bulletins  
   press releases Official or authoritative statements giving information for 
publication in newspapers or periodicals  
Figure 1. A section of a hierarchy of document genres (from 104). 
 
Internet genres 
35 
Table 1. Studies of automated classification of documents by genre. 
Study Techniques Features Corpus Typology Results 
Karlgren & 
Cutting (105) 
Discriminant 
analysis 
20 linguistic 
features, such as 
adverb count, 
character count, 
first person 
pronoun count, 
type/token ratio 
Brown corpus. Brown corpus categories 52% accuracy 
overall; 
grouping all 
fiction together 
improved 
accuracy to 65% 
Kessler, 
Nunberg & 
Schütze (80) 
Logistic 
regression and 
neural nets 
55 features 
including 
structural, lexical, 
character-level 
and derivative 
cues 
Brown corpus. Three part classification of 6 
genres: reportage; editorial; 
scitech; legal; nonfiction; and 
fiction; plus “brow” (popular, 
middle, upper-middle and 
high) and narrative (yes or 
no)  
“Good results“ 
for reportage 
and fiction but 
not for other 
genres.  
Only small 
difference 
between using 
surface and 
structural cues 
Dewe et al. 
(82) 
Classification 
rules 
40 features 
including lexical, 
textual and genre 
specific features 
Own corpus of 
1358 Web pages 
11 genres: informal/private; 
public/commercial; 
searchable indices; 
journalistic material; reports; 
other running text; FAQs; link 
collections; asynchronous 
multi-party correspondence; 
and error messages 
90% accuracy on 
first split; 66-
75% on 
remaining 
decisions.  
Internet genres 
36 
Study Techniques Features Corpus Typology Results 
Wolters & 
Kirsten (106) 
k-nearest 
neighbour 
classification, 
RIBL; learning 
vector 
quantization; 
IBL 
100, 500 or 1000 
lemma features 
and 54 part of 
speech tags  
LIMAS, a 
German corpus 
of 500 
documents 
modelled on the 
Brown corpus 
33 categories taken from the 
Deutsche Bibliographie (not 
all genres); but experiments 
run with fewer: academic 
texts from humanities and 
from science and technology; 
press texts; fiction; politics; 
law; and economy 
75–100% 
precision in 
assignment, but 
each genre done 
separately 
noted that the 
corpus provided 
too little 
material for 
training 
Stamatatos, 
Fakotakis & 
Kokkinakis 
(94) 
Regression and 
discriminant 
analysis 
suggest that 
regression 
works better 
than other 
techniques with 
a small number 
of training 
instances  
22 features: 
token-level 
measures (e.g., 
word counts) and 
outputs from 
NLP processing 
(e.g., number of 
noun phrases 
detected, average 
length of a noun 
phrase) 
Own corpus of 
250 modern 
Greek 
documents, 25 
of each genre.  
10 genres: press editorial; 
press reportage; official 
documents; literature; 
recipes; curricula vitae; 
interviews; planned speeches; 
and broadcast news, scripted.  
82% accuracy 
overall.  
Press editorial 
and press 
reportage often 
confused.  
Dewdney, 
VanEss-
Dykema & 
MacMillan 
(93) 
SVM, decision 
tree and naïve 
Bayes.  
323 word features 
and 89 
presentation 
features: closed-
class words, parts 
of speech, word 
and sentence 
length, 
punctuation, 
layout features 
CMU corpus of 
9750 
documents.  
7 genres: advertisement; 
bulletin board; frequently 
asked questions; message 
board; radio news; Reuters 
newswire; television news 
89% accuracy.  
Presentation 
features alone 
were sufficient 
to classify genre. 
Internet genres 
37 
Study Techniques Features Corpus Typology Results 
Lim, Lee & 
Kim (95) 
TiMBL 329 features in 
five sets: URL, 
HTML tags, token 
information, 
lexical 
information and 
structural 
information.  
Own corpus of 
1224 Web 
pages.  
16 genres: Dewe et al.’s (82) 
taxonomy, plus product 
specifications and image 
collections, and splitting 
public and commercial 
homepages in two, and 
reports into research reports, 
official materials and 
informative materials 
74% accuracy in 
assignment; 
improved 
slightly with 
optimal subset 
of features. 
Could not 
reliably 
determine genre 
for input pages 
and other.  
Bisant (107) Neural network 
with hidden 
layer, decision 
trees, SVM  
89 features 
including part of 
speech and 
characters. 
Analysis shows 
25 aren’t useful 
Own corpus of 
5000 emails and 
webpages 
10 genres: advertisement, 
business correspondence, 
data entry forms, e-mail 
administration, e-zine, friend 
correspondence, internet chat, 
news, notices and technical 
data 
86% overall 
accuracy using 
neural nets with 
considerable 
variation. 
Decision trees 
79% accurate.  
Notices 
confused with 
news.  
Boese (99) Bayes Net, 
decision trees, 
logit boost, 
bagging 
Considered 1600 
features: style, 
form, content. 
Narrowed to a set 
of 78.  
Own corpus of 
343 Web pages 
Developed classification of 
115 genres but used 10 for 
experiments: abstract; call for 
papers; FAQ; how-to; 
hub/sitemap; job description; 
resume/CV; statistics; 
syllabus; and technical paper. 
91% accuracy 
using logit boost 
and 78 features. 
Internet genres 
38 
Study Techniques Features Corpus Typology Results 
Freund, 
Clarke & 
Toms (84) 
SVM light “Bag of words”, 
but no structural 
features.  
Own corpus of 
800 documents 
(about 50 per 
genre) drawn 
from 
repositories in a 
single 
organization. 
16 genres (manuals; 
presentations; product 
documents; technotes, tips; 
tutorials and labs; white 
papers; best practices; design 
patterns; discussions/forums; 
cookbooks & guides; 
engagement summaries; 
problem reports; technical 
articles) developed within a 
specific organization.  
81–97% recall, 
but lower 
precision.  
Stubbe, 
Ringlstetter, 
& Schulz (96)  
Decision trees Hand selected 
sets of genre-
specific features: 
form, vocabulary 
and parts of 
speech, complex 
patterns, level of 
typing errors.  
Own corpus of 
1280 Web 
pages, 40 of 
each genre.  
32 genres in 8 broad classes: 
journalism, literature, 
information, documentation, 
directory, communication, 
nothing. 
78% accuracy at 
first level; 72% 
at second level 
with 
considerable 
variation.  
Dong et al. 
(98) 
Naïve Bayesian  5, 20 or 100 
features from 
form, content and 
functionality 
Corpus of 1280 
web pages; 170 
of 4 genres (3 
from (48)) plus 
600 random 
pages 
4 genres: FAQ; news; e-
shopping; personal home 
pages  
86-92% accuracy 
(precision). 
Precision 
improved by 
fewer features, 
but recall by 
more. More 
types of features 
improved both.  
 
