 
 
Performance Evaluation of Machine Learning Algorithms in 
Post-operative Life Expectancy in the Lung Cancer Patients  
Kwetishe  Joro  Danjuma1 
 
 1 Department of Computer Science, Modibbo Adama University of Technology, 
Yola, Adamawa State, Nigeria 
 
 
Abstract 
The nature of clinical data makes it difficult to quickly select, 
tune and apply machine learning algorithms to clinical prognosis. 
As a result, a lot of time is spent searching for the most 
appropriate machine learning algorithms applicable in clinical 
prognosis that contains either binary-valued or multi-valued 
attributes. The study set out to identify and evaluate the 
performance of machine learning classification schemes applied 
in clinical prognosis of post-operative life expectancy in the lung 
cancer patients. Multilayer Perceptron, J48, and the Naive Bayes 
algorithms were used to train and test models on Thoracic 
Surgery datasets obtained from the University of California 
Irvine machine learning repository. Stratified 10-fold cross-
validation was used to evaluate baseline performance accuracy of 
the classifiers. The comparative analysis shows that multilayer 
perceptron performed best with classification accuracy of 82.3%, 
J48 came out second with classification accuracy of 81.8%, and 
Naive Bayes came out the worst with classification accuracy of 
74.4%. The quality and outcome of the chosen machine learning 
algorithms depends on the ingenuity of the clinical miner. 
 
Keywords: Thoracic Surgery, Data Mining, Multilayer 
Perceptron Algorithm, J48 Decision Tree Algorithm, Naive 
Bayes Algorithm, Machine Learning Algorithm. 
1. Introduction 
In clinical medicine, time plays crucial role in disease 
prognosis as well as data collection and decision-making. 
The healthcare system generates an unprecedented 
terabytes of data leading to information overload, and the 
ability to make sense of such data is becoming increasingly 
important with in-depth knowledge of exploratory data 
analysis and machine learning scheme [1]. The healthcare 
system is data rich, information poor. The system generates 
unprecedented volume of data, but lack effective analysis 
tools to extract and discover hidden knowledge. It is 
almost impossible to make sense of very large data without 
appropriate computer programs such as Spreadsheet, data 
visualization software, statistical packages, OLAP (Online 
Analytical Processing) application, and data mining [1]. 
The advances in data collection and processing require 
new techniques and tools to intelligently transform the 
unprecedented volume of data into useful information [2] 
that support clinical prognosis and patient care. Data 
mining is a process of nontrivial extraction of implicit, 
previously unknown and potentially useful information 
from the data stored in a database [3]. Data mining finds 
correlation and patterns among attributes in a very large 
datasets to build up knowledgebase based on the given 
constraint. The knowledge extraction, transformation and 
representation in human understandable structure for 
further use are often referred to as Knowledge Discovery 
in Databases [4], which deals with inconclusive, noisy and 
sparse data to finding valid, useful, novel and 
understandable patterns in data [2]. The concept of 
knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) encompasses 
data storage and access, and scaling machine learning 
algorithms to very large datasets and interpreting the 
results [4]. KDD also involves different data mining 
algorithms used to build models that enable unknown data 
to learn to identify new information. The most commonly 
associated feature of data mining techniques regardless of 
origin is the automated discovery of relationships and 
dependencies of attributes in the observed data [5]. The 
automated discovery of relationships is supported by many 
machine learning algorithms such as Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN), Cluster Analysis (CA), Genetic 
Algorithms (GA), Support Vector Machines (SVM), and 
Decision Trees (DTs) to predict future trends and 
behaviours, allowing businesses to make proactive, 
knowledge-driven decisions [6]. Though C4.5, k-means, 
SVM, Apriori, EM (expectation maximization), PageRank, 
AdaBoost, kNN (k-nearest neighbours), Naïve Bayes, and 
Classification and Regression Tree (CART) have been 
identified as the most influential algorithms for 
classification, clustering, regression, association rules, and 
network analysis ranked based on expert nominations, 
citation counts, and a community survey [7].  
Predictive analytics comprises of machine learning 
algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANN) and 
decision trees (DTs) among a myriad of other algorithms 
used in knowledge extractions, and apply the obtained 
knowledge to detect or predict trends in new data [8]. The 
widespread availability of new computational methods and 
tools for data analysis and predictive modelling requires 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 189
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
medical informatics and clinicians to systematically select 
the most appropriate strategy to cope with clinical 
prediction problems [9]. The machine learning process 
support clinicians and medical informatics to analyse 
retrospective data, and to exploit large amount of data 
routinely collected in their day-to-day activity [10]. The 
data is analysed to extract useful information that supports 
disease prognosis and to develop models that predict 
patient’s health more accurately [6]. Data mining can be 
used in a predictive manner in a variety of application for 
fraud and intrusion detection, market basket analysis 
(MBA), customer segmentation and marketing, phenomena 
of “beer & baby diapers”, corporate surveillance and 
criminal investigation, financial and risk management, and 
medical and healthcare [11]. In this paper, we set out to 
identify and evaluate the performance of machine learning 
classification schemes applied in the prediction of post-
operative life expectancy in the Lung Cancer patients. 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Application of Data Mining in Clinical Medicine 
In clinical diagnosis and prognosis, machine learning 
classification schemes are classified into three categories: 
those used for disease diagnosis, disease prognosis, or both 
diagnosis and prognosis [3]. Clinical prognosis 
encompasses the science of estimating the complication 
and recurrence of disease and to predict the survival of 
patient or group of patients. In other words, it involves 
prediction modelling estimation of different parameters 
related to patient’s health. Survival analysis applies various 
techniques to estimate the survival of a particular patient 
suffering from disease over a particular time period, 
defined as a patient remaining alive for a specified time 
period of 10 years or longer after the disease diagnosis. 
Unfortunately, survival estimates developed using such a 
definition of survival may not accurately reflect the current 
state of treatment and the probability of survival. However, 
improvement in early detection and treatment will increase 
the expectations of survival [12]. The most influential of 
these data mining techniques for classification, clustering, 
regression, association rules, and network analysis ranked 
based  on expert nominations, citation counts and 
community survey were identified in the work of [7] to 
include C4.5, k-means, Support Vector Machine (SVM), 
Apriori, Expectation Maximization (EM), PageRank, 
Adaboost, k-nearest neighbor (kNN), Naïve Bayes, and 
CART.  
2.2 Application of Predictive Data Mining in Clinical 
Prognosis 
In disease prognosis, [13] examined potential use of 
classification based data mining techniques such as Rule 
based DT, Naïve Bayes and ANN in the prediction of heart 
attack. In an analysis of cancer data in building prediction 
models for prostate cancer survivability, [14] used DT, 
ANN and SVM alongside logistic regression to develop 
prediction models for prostate cancer survivability. A k-
fold cross-validation methodology was used in model 
building, evaluation and comparison, and SVM performed 
best followed by artificial neural networks and decision 
trees. In the investigation of expected survival time of 
patients with pancreatic cancer, [15] demonstrated that 
machine learning algorithms such as ANN, Bayesian 
Networks, and SVM are capable of improved prognostic 
predictions of pancreatic cancer patient survival as 
compared with logistic regression alone. A review of 349 
patients who underwent ACL reconstruction at outpatient 
surgical facility, [16] developed machine learning 
classifiers based on logistic regression, BayesNet, 
Multilayer perceptron, SVM, and Alternating decision tree 
(ADTree) to predict which patients would require 
postoperative  Femoral Nerve Block (FNB). The Machine 
Learning algorithms specifically the ADTree outperformed 
traditional logistic regression with regards to Receiver 
Operating Curve (ROC), and vice-versa with regard to 
kappa statistics and percent correctly classified. In 
prognosis of tumor detection and classification in digital 
mammography, [17] applied back-propagation neural 
networks and constraint form association rule mining for 
tumor classification in mammograms. The formal proved 
to be less sensitive at a cost of high training times 
compared to the latter with better results than reported in 
related literatures. 
In prediction of breast cancer prognosis, [18] developed an 
ANN, a Bayesian network, and a hybrid Bayesian network 
(HBN) that combined ANN and Bayesian network  to 
obtain a good estimation of prognosis as well as a good 
explanation of the results. The HBN and ANN models 
outperformed the Bayesian network model in breast cancer 
prognosis. [19] Presented a comparative analysis of the 
Naïve Bayes, the back-propagated neural network, and the 
C4.5 decision tree algorithms in prediction of breast cancer 
survivability rate. The C4.5 algorithm had a much better 
performance compared to others. In cancer prognosis, [20] 
investigated a hybrid scheme based on fuzzy decision trees 
for cancer prognosis. Performance comparisons suggest 
hybrid fuzzy decision tree classification is more robust and 
balanced than independently applied crisp classification. A 
comparative analysis of algorithms show that DTs, ANNs 
and Bayesian are the well-performing algorithms used for 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 190
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
disease diagnosis, while ANNs is the well-performing 
algorithm, followed by Bayesian, DTs and Fuzzy 
algorithms.  
2.3 Uniqueness of Clinical Data Mining and Ethics 
Clinical researchers from other disciplines are often 
unaware of the particular constraints and difficulties 
involved in mining privacy-sensitive, heterogeneous, and 
voluminous clinical data. The miner has the responsibility 
to conduct valid research in a manner that ensures patient 
confidentiality by anonymizing data. The select of 
medicine as a researcher resource should be secondary to 
patient-care activity [21]. The ethical, security and legal 
aspects of clinical data mining includes data ownership, 
fear of lawsuits, expected benefits, and special 
administrative issues [22]. Patient medical records almost 
always encompass patient’s age, diseases suffer or suffered 
from, and whether they smoke cigarettes or not, are often 
elicited to serves as basis for preliminary diagnosis and or 
prognosis. Clinical data often originate from clinical 
consultation with patients, medical images, ECG, EEG and 
RTG signals, physician's notes and interpretations and 
other screening results that may bear upon clinical analysis 
and treatment of the patient [22-23]. The data may contain 
noise, contradiction, missing values and important 
information (signs, symptoms, clinical reasoning, and so 
on) that may be stored in an unstructured way. However, 
the assessment of clinical data quality, data coding quality, 
unstructured data transformation to structure aid detection 
of medical errors that bears upon clinical prognosis. A 
much better approach to deal with clinical data have been 
developed to support the retrieval of narrative or imaging 
documents, to classify medical reports automatically, and 
to preserve the patient's privacy and confidentiality in 
medical reports for secondary usage [24]. 
 
Often time, clinical appointment is gathered in decision 
table with conditional and decisional attributes. The 
conditional attribute is defined as the set  isssS ,..,, 21  
where S is symptoms, and the decisional attribute is 
defined as the set  kdddD ,...,, 21 where D  represent 
diseases. If  NpppP ,..,, 21  is defined as the set of 
patients, then the decision table can be constructed as the 
set of quadruple in Eq. (1)  
 },,,{ pDSPT   (1) 
Where  is a function represented in Eq. (2) 
 }{)(* dkwDSPp   
(2) 
The values of symptoms are marked with the symbol niv , , 
which denote a symptom value for thi  symptom and 
thn patient. The values of diseases are marked with 
dkkw ,  for thk  disease and thdk  value. The values of 
niv ,  are usually binary with 1 denotes occurrence of 
symptoms and 0 denotes lack of occurrence. Often time 
clinical data are positive-valued (except in the case of 
ECG), and the values of symptoms ordinarily fit into 
definite range. For instance resting blood pressure is no 
lower than 30 and no higher than 300 [23].   
2.4 Handling Imbalanced Clinical Data 
Clinical data are often noisy and incomplete resulting in 
missing values. In clinical prognosis, it is difficult to 
specify a likely range of values to replace missing values 
without biasedness [23]. The missing values could be 
substituted with a) most likely values; b) all possible 
values for that attribute; and c) intermediate approach of 
specifying a likely range of values in an unbiased manner, 
instead of only one most likely [22]. Another simple 
method to handle missing values imputation includes; a) 
data reduction and elimination of all missing values; b) use 
of most common values, mean or median; and c) closest fit 
approach and methods based on machine learning 
algorithms such as k-nearest neighbor, neural networks and 
association rules [25]. A dataset is said to be imbalanced 
when the number of instances of one class is much lower 
than the instances of the other class, often referred to as 
“rare classes” [26], or when the classification categories 
are not approximately equally represented due to class 
distribution or costs of errors instances. Resampling 
techniques such as random sampling with replacement, 
random under-sampling, focused oversampling, focused 
under-sampling, oversampling with synthetic generation of 
new samples based on the known information, and 
combinations of the above techniques have been used in 
handling imbalanced data [27]. Data imbalance can be 
resolved either at: a) data level using either oversampling 
the minority class (Positive instances) or under-sampling 
the majority class (Negative instances) or both; or b) 
algorithmic level adjusting classifier to be trained by 
modifying the class cost, establishing a bias towards the 
positive class, learning from just one class (recognition 
based learning) instead of learning from two classes 
(discrimination based learning) [26].  
Sampling techniques such as under-sampling the majority 
class, oversampling the minority class, changing score-
based classifier decision threshold, and modifying 
algorithms to incorporate different weights for errors on 
positive and negative instances are used to handle 
imbalanced data [28]. In an attempt to re-balance 
imbalanced datasets, [29] proposed the use of: a) under-
sampling of the majority class; b) over-sampling of the 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 191
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
minority class; c) modify the sensitivity of the classifier so 
that errors on minority class (positive), to be costlier than 
errors on the majority class (negative); and d) Synthetic 
Minority Oversampling Techniques (SMOTE). SMOTE 
creates new synthetic training data for the minority class by 
adding random value (SMOTE-Randomize) to some 
features of the original training data, and providing new 
data that lies close to the original ones in the multi-
dimensional space of the problem. Support vector 
machines (SVM) in which asymmetrical margins are tuned 
to improve recognition of rare positive cases; and a new 
resampling approach in which both oversampling and 
under-sampling rely on synthetic cases (prototypes) 
generated through class specific sub-clustering are used in 
solving data imbalance problem [30]. [31] Proposed a 
hybrid sampling technique which incorporates both over-
sampling and under-sampling, with an ensemble of support 
vector machines (SVM) for learning from imbalanced data 
to improve the prediction performance. 
3. Predictive Data Mining Algorithms to 
Compare  
3.1 Decision Tree Algorithm 
Decision Tree is a popular classifier in machine learning 
environment that is simple and easy to implement, and 
requires no domain knowledge or parameter setting and 
can handle high dimensional data, more appropriate for 
exploratory knowledge discovery and analysis [32-33]. 
Decision tree is a non-parametric supervised learning 
algorithms that model non-linear relations between 
predictors and outcomes and for mixed data types 
(numerical and categorical), isolates outliers, and 
incorporates a pruning process using cross-validation as an 
alternative to testing for unbiasedness with a second data 
set [34]. It predicts the value of a target variable by 
learning simple decision rules inferred from the data 
features [35]. It is the most widely used machine learning 
algorithms in clinical prognosis capable of handling 
continuous attributes that are essential in case of medical 
data [23]. The decision tree is popular and widely used 
because of its shorter learning curve and interpretability, 
and the tree ability to handle covariates attributes measured 
at different level [36]. Decision trees are significantly 
faster than neural networks with a shorter learning curve 
that is mainly used in the classification and prediction to 
represent knowledge. The instances are classified by 
sorting them down the tree from the root node to some leaf 
node. The nodes are branching based on if-then condition 
[37].  
There are many variants of decision tree such as CART, 
ID3, C4.5, SLIQ, and SPRINT [38]. The classification and 
regression tree (CART), Chi-squared automatic interaction 
detector (CHAID), quick-unbiased efficient statistical tree 
(QUEST), C4.5 and Interactive Dichotomiser (ID3) are 
more suitable than classical statistical methods. It uses 
recursive partitioning to assess the effect of specific 
variables on survival, thereby generating groups of patients 
with similar clinical features and survival times in a tree-
structured model that can be analyzed to assess its clinical 
utility [34] & [5]. Also, decision trees are praised for their 
transparency, allowing bioinformatics experts to examine 
and understand the decision model and its workings, and 
each path in the decision tree can be regarded as a decision 
rule [9]. The decision tree is built of nodes which specify 
conditional attributes – symptoms  isssS ,...,, 21 , 
branches which show the values of kiv ,  i.e. the thh  
range for thi   symptom and leaves which present 
decisions  kdddD ,...,, 21   and their binary values, 
 1,0dkw . A decision tree may be converted to a set of 
association rules by writing down each path from the root 
to the leaves in a form of rules [23]. For instance, the 
decision tree in Fig.1 can be written as a set of association 
rule in Eq. (3). 
 
Fig.1 Sample decision tree applicable in Clinical Prognosis 
      1,, 11,221,11  dvSvS  
     0,, 12,221,11  dvSvS  
     1,, 21,332,11  dvSvS  
     0,, 22,332,11  dvSvS  
   1, 33,11  dvS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 192
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
3.2 Naïve Bayes Algorithm  
Bayesian network has been successfully applied in 
diagnosis and antibiotic treatment of pneumonia, and 
Naïve Bayes algorithm performance has been tested 
against a colorectal cancer. It takes domain experts and 
structure learning such as genetic algorithm (GA) to 
successfully construct network topology from training data 
[23] & [18]. The principle of Naïve Bayes is based on 
Bayes rules of simple conditional probability used to 
estimate the likelihood of a property given small amount of 
training data to estimate parameters such as mean and 
variance necessary for classification [39]. Naïve Bayes is a 
statistical classifier which assumes no dependency between 
attributes but attempts to maximize the posterior 
probability in determining the class. The performance of 
Naïve Bayes has been observed to be consistent before and 
after attributes reduction [32]. The probabilities applied in 
the Naïve Bayes algorithm is intended to learn the 
probability of the likelihood of some symptom S with the 
highest posterior probability distribution, given some 
observation or prognosis x where there exist a dependence 
relationship between S and x , denoted as )|( xSP , and 
the posterior probability distribution can be computed as 
shown in Eq. (4).  
 
)()|(
)(
)()|(
)|( SpSxp
xp
SpSxp
xSp   
 
(4) 
 
The posterior probability distribution is proportional to the 
product of two terms; the marginal 
likelihood )|( Sxp with respect to x , and the prior 
probability of the symptom )(Sp . Naïve Bayes model 
forms a network of nodes that are interconnected with 
directed edges and form a directed acyclic graph [23], used 
to model the dependencies among variables [15]. Each 
node in the directed acyclic graph represents a stochastic 
variable and arcs represent a probabilistic dependency 
between a node and its parents [9]. 
3.3 Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) Algorithm  
ANN models are based on a set of multilayered 
interconnected equation which uses non-linear statistical 
analysis to reveal previously unrecognized relations 
between given input variables and an output variable. It 
has been found accurate and reliable in disease diagnosis 
and prediction outcome in diverse clinical trials, by means 
of symptoms routinely available to clinicians. It has also 
been found promising for studying neurodegenerative 
disorders [40]. Despite the complexity and difficulties 
involved in understanding ANN’s prediction, it has been 
successfully applied in clinical prognosis especially in the 
phase of coronary artery disease prediction, EEG signals 
processing and the development of novel antidepressants 
[23]. ANN is a computational model that is biologically 
inspired, highly sophisticated analytical techniques, 
capable of modelling extremely complex non-linear 
functions [41]. It is a network of highly interconnected 
processing neurons inspired by biological nervous systems 
operating in parallel through a subgroup of processing 
element known as layer in the network. It consists of Input 
layer, the hidden layer and the output layer, which are 
trained to perform specific functions by adjusting the 
values of the weights between elements [42-43]. ANN 
model is formed by an input layer, one or more hidden 
layers, and the output layer. The number of neurons and 
layers depends on the complexity of the system being 
studied. The neurons in the input layer receive the data, 
transfer the data to neurons in the hidden layers through 
the weighted links for processing, and the result is 
transferred to the neurons in the output layer for analysis 
[44]. ANN are systems modelled based on the cognitive 
learning process and the neurological functions of the 
human brain, consisting of millions of neurons 
interconnected by synapses [45], and capable of predicting 
new observations after learning from existing data. As the 
human brain is capable to, after the learning process, draw 
assumptions based on previous observations, neural 
networks are also capable to predict changes and events in 
the system after the process of learning [37]. The 
interconnected sets of neurons are divided into three: input, 
hidden, and output ones.  
In clinical medicine, the patient’s symptoms could serve as 
input set S , and disease could serve as output set D  to 
the neural network. The hidden neuron processes the 
outcome of preceding layers. The process of learning in 
ANN is to solve a taskT , having a set of observations and 
a class of functions F , which is to find as the 
optimal solution to the task [23]. The most popular of the 
ANN is Multilayer Perceptron algorithm (MLP). MLP is 
most suitable for approximating a classification function, 
and consists of a set of sensory elements that make up the 
input layer, one or more hidden layers of processing 
elements, and the output layer of the processing elements 
[5]. The Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with back-
propagation (a supervised learning algorithm) is arguably 
the most commonly used and well-studied ANN 
architecture capable of learning arbitrarily complex 
nonlinear functions to arbitrary accuracy levels [46], and 
its ability to process complex problems which a single 
hidden layer neural network cannot solve [47]. It is 
essentially the collection of nonlinear neurons 
(perceptron’s) organized and connected to each other in a 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 193
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
feed forward multi-layer structure. Error! Reference 
source not found. presents a graphical depiction of ANN 
for clinical prognosis. 
 
Fig.2 Graphical depiction of ANN for clinical prognosis 
4. Model Evaluation Metrics 
Though empirical studies have shown that it is difficult to 
decide which metric to use for different problem, each of 
them has specific features that measure various aspects of 
the algorithms being evaluated [48]. It is often difficult to 
state which metrics is the most suitable to evaluate 
algorithms in clinical medicine due to large weighted 
discrepancies that often arise between predicted and actual 
value or otherwise [23]. The performance evaluation of 
machine learning algorithms is assessed based on 
predictive accuracy, which is often inappropriate in case of 
imbalanced data and error costs vary remarkably [27]. 
Machine learning performance evaluations involve certain 
level of trade-off between true positive and true negative 
rate, and between recall and precision. Precision, Recall 
and F-Measure are commonly used in the information 
retrieval as performance measure [49]. Receiver Operating 
Characteristic (ROC) curve serves as graphical 
representation of the trade-off between the false negative 
and false positive rates for every possible cut off. 
4.1 K-Fold Cross-Validation  
To train and evaluate model statistical performance on the 
same data yields an overoptimistic result. Cross-validation 
was used to fix such a problem, starting from the remark 
that testing the output of the algorithm on new data would 
yield a good estimate of its performance accuracy [50]. 
Cross-validation is a statistical method that evaluates and 
compares machine learning schemes by dividing data into 
train and test set. The train set is used to learn or train a 
model and test set is used to validate the model. In 
practice, the training and validation sets must cross-over 
successively such that each data point has a chance of 
being validated against [51]. k Fold cross-validation is 
often used to minimize the bias associated with the random 
sampling of the training and hold-out data samples in 
comparing the baseline performance accuracy of two or 
more methods or classifiers [12]. 
In k fold cross-validation, the data is first partitioned 
into k  equally (or near equally) sized folds. The k  
iterations are subsequently trained and validated such that 
within each iteration, a different fold of the data is held-out 
for validation while the remaining 1k folds are used for 
learning. Prior to data splits into k folds, the data is 
stratified to rearrange the data so as to ensure each fold is a 
good representative of the entire datasets [51]. The folds 
are often stratified since cross-validation accurately 
depends on the random assignment of the individual cases 
into k distinct folds. The folds are stratified in a manner 
that they contain approximately the same proportion of 
predictor labels as the original dataset [12] and [14]. In 
k fold cross-validation, the given dataset S is randomly 
split into k mutually exclusive subsets ),...,,( 21 kSSS of 
approximately equal size. The classifier is trained and 
tested k times. Each time t ϵ },...,2,1{ k , it is trained on 
all but one fold tS and tested on the remaining single 
fold tS . The cross-validation estimate of the overall 
accuracy is calculated simply as the average of the 
k individual accuracy measures as shown in Eq. (5) 
 
CVA = 

k
i
iA
1
 
 
(5) 
where CVA stands for cross-validation accuracy, k is the 
number of folds and A is the accuracy measure of each 
fold [14].  
 
4.2. Accuracy, Sensitivity & Specificity 
The efficiency of any machine learning model is 
determined using measures such as True Positive Rate, 
False Positive Rate, True Negative Rate and False 
Negative Rate [52]. The sensitivity and specificity 
measures ae commonly used to explain clinical diagnostic 
test, and to estimate how good and consistent was the 
diagnostic test [53]. The sensitivity metrics is the true 
positive rate or positive class accuracy, while specificity is 
referred to as true negative rate or negative class accuracy. 
However, there is often a trade-off between the four 
performance measure metrics in “real world” applications 
[54] 
 
 
 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 194
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
a) Accuracy – Eq. (6) compares how close a new test 
value is to a value predicted by if ... then rules [22].  
 
Accuracy %100
FNFPTNTP
TNTP


  
 
(4) 
b) Sensitivity – Eq. (7) measures the ability of a test to be 
positive when the condition is actually present. It is 
also known as false-negative rate, recall, Type II error, 
β error, error of omission, or alternative hypothesis 
[22]. 
 
Sensitivity %100
FNTP
TP

  
 
(5) 
c) Specificity – Eq. (8) measures the ability of a test to 
be negative when the condition is actually not present. 
It is also known as false-positive rate, precision, Type 
I error, α error, error of commission, or null 
hypothesis [22].  
 
Specificity %100
FPTN
TN

  
 
(6) 
d) Predictive Accuracy – Eq. (9) gives an overall 
evaluation. It is also known as the percentage 
proportion of correctly classified cases to all cases in 
the set. The larger the predictive accuracy the better 
the situation.  
 
             PA %100
FNFPTNTP
TNTP


  
 
 
(7) 
4.3. Recall, Precision and F-measure 
Eqs. (10-12) are additional parameters that could help 
physician determine exactly whether a patient is ill or not. 
Recall is the same in application as sensitivity. F-measure 
is the harmonic mean of both recall and precision, while 
specificity is the reverse of sensitivity.  
 
Precision
FPTP
TP

  
 
(8) 
 
Recall
FNTP
TP

  
 
 
(9) 
 
F-measure
recallprecision
recallprecision


**2
 
 
 
(10) 
 
4.4. Error Costs and Estimation 
Some of the widely used errors variants incorporated into 
most machine learning tool(s) include [23].  
 
a) Mean absolute error (MAE): Eq. (13) is the average of 
individual errors while neglecting the signs to 
diminish the negative effects of outliers [23].  
 
n
apap nn ||...|| 11   
 
(11) 
b) Root mean square error 
 
 
n
apap nn
22
11 )(... 
 
(12) 
c) Relative absolute error  
 
||...||
||...||
1
11
aaaa
apap
n
nn


 
(13) 
where 
i
ai
n
a
1
denotes a total absolute error 
normalized by the error of a predictor which uses 
an average of the actual values from a dataset 
[23]. 
 
d) Root relative squared error: 
 
22
1
22
1
||...||
)(...)(
aaaa
apap
n
nn


 
 
 
(14) 
where p is predicted target values nppp ,...,, 21 while a  
represents actual value: naaa ,...,, 21  
 
4.4 Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC)    
ROC summarizes classifier performance over a range of 
trade-offs between true positive TP  and false 
positive FP error rates. The Areas under the Curve (AUC) 
is accepted performance metric for the Receiver Operating 
Characteristic (ROC) curve. On the ROC curve, the ROC 
plots the curve with X axis to represents percentage (%) 
of false positive FP ; 
)(
)%(
FPTN
FP
FP

 and plot 
the curve with Y axis to represents percentage (%) of 
true positive TP ; 
)(
)%(
FNTP
TP
TP

 , and the ideal 
point on the ROC Curve would be an interval between 
(0,100) [27]. ROC is useful for exploring the trade-offs 
among different classifiers over a range of scenarios, 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 195
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
which is not ideal for situations with known error costs. 
The area under the curve (AUC) is most preferred because 
the larger the area the better the model. The AUC also has 
a nice interpretation as the probability that the classifier 
ranks a randomly chosen positive instance above a 
randomly chosen negative one [55]. Area under the ROC 
Curve (AUC) is a useful metric for classifier performance 
as it is independent of the decision criterion selected and 
prior probabilities. AUC can establish a dominance 
relationship between classifiers. If the ROC curves are 
intersecting, the total AUC is an average comparison 
between models [27].  
5. Empirical Results and Analysis  
5.1 Thoracic Surgery Dataset 
The thoracic surgery database was obtained from the 
University of California Irvine (UCI) machine learning 
repository database [56]. The thoracic datasets is dedicated 
to classification problem related to the post-operative life 
expectancy in the lung cancer patients: class 1 - death 
within one year after surgery, class 2 - survival; recoded as 
Risk1Y: 1 year survival period - (T)rue value if died (T, 
F), where the class value (Risk1Y) is binary valued. The 
thoracic surgery datasets are not approximately equally 
distributed. The data was collected retrospectively at 
Wroclaw Thoracic Surgery Centre for patients who 
underwent major lung resections for primary lung cancer 
for period of 4 years [57]. The dataset contains 470 
instances, and 17 attributes, 14 of which are nominal and 3 
numeric – Age, PRE4 and PRE5 as shown in Table 1.  
Although random over-sampling can increase the 
likelihood of over-fitting occurring, it may introduce an 
additional computational task if the dataset is already fairly 
large but imbalanced. Synthetic Minority Over-sampling 
Technique (SMOTE) in WEKA was used to generate 
synthetic minority examples to over-sample the minority 
class. The aim is to form new minority class examples by 
interpolating between several minority classes examples 
that lie together, using the concept of k-nearest neighbour. 
In this way, the over fitting problem was avoided causing 
the decision boundaries for the minority class to spread 
further into the majority class space [58]. The predicted 
class Risk1Y: 1 year survival period - (T)rue value if died 
(T, F), where the class value (Risk1Y) is binary valued, 
initially had a sample distribution of T (70) and F (400). 
After repeated application of Synthetic Minority Over-
sampling Technique (SMOTE) randomize in WEKA, the 
same sample distribution was now T (560) and F (400).   
 
Table 1 Thoracic Surgery database 
Thoracic 
Dataset 
Recode 
                            Attributes 
Description  Values  
(Nominal/Numeric) 
DGN Diagnosis-specific 
combination of ICD-10 codes 
for primary and secondary as 
well multiple tumors if any 
DGN3,DGN2,DGN
4,DGN6,DGN5, 
DGN8,DGN1  
PRE4 Forced vital capacity - FVC  Numeric 
PRE5 Volume that has been exhaled 
at the end of the first second 
of forced expiration - FEV1  
Numeric 
PRE6 Performance status - Zubrod 
scale  
PRZ2,PRZ1,PRZ0 
PRE7 Pain before surgery T, F 
PRE8 Haemoptysis before surgery  T, F 
PRE9 Dyspnoea before surgery T, F 
PRE10 Cough before surgery T, F 
PRE11 Weakness before surgery T, F 
PRE14 T in clinical TNM - size of the 
original tumor, from smallest 
to largest 
OC11,OC14,OC12,
OC13 
PRE17 Type 2 DM - diabetes mellitus  T, F 
PRE19 MI up to 6 months T, F 
PRE25  PAD - peripheral arterial 
diseases 
T, F 
PRE30 Smoking T, F 
PRE32 Asthma T, F 
AGE Age at surgery  Numeric 
Risk1Yr 1 year survival period - (T)rue 
value if died (T,F)  
T, F 
 
6. Results and Discussion 
Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) 
was used to simulate the baseline performance accuracy of 
the classifiers in a more convenient manner to determine 
which scheme is statistically better than the other [59]. 
Stratified 10-fold cross-validation was used to rearrange 
the data to ensure that each fold is a good representation of 
the whole datasets. The stratified 10-fold cross-validation 
(k = 10) is the most common [60], and universal [50] 
evaluation models, with lower sample distribution variance 
compared to the hold-out cross-validation. Final analysis 
show that Multilayer Perceptron classifier performed best 
with classification accuracy of 82.3%, with True Positive 
rate of 82.4% and a ROC Area (AUC) of 84.7% with a 
minimum error rate of 21.6% (mean absolute error) and 
maximum error rate of 78.4% (root relative squared error). 
J48 classifier came out to be second best with a 
classification accuracy of 81.8%, with True Positive rate of 
81.9% and a ROC Area (AUC) of 82.2% with a minimum 
error rate of 22.7% (mean absolute error) and maximum 
error rate of 80.6% (root relative squared error). The Naive 
Bayes classifier came out to be worst of the three 
algorithms with a classification accuracy of 74.4%, with 
True Positive rate of 74.5% and a ROC Area (AUC) of 
79.2% with a minimum error rate of 29.0% (mean absolute 
error) and maximum error rate of 91.2% (root relative 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 196
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
squared error). Table 2 and Fig. 3 present the detail results 
of the comparative analysis for better visualization and 
analysis.  
 
Table 2 10-fold cross-validation performance evaluation comparison 
Performance Metrics MLP  J48 Naïve Bayes 
Correctly Classified Instances 82.3 81.8 74.4 
Mean absolute error                       21.6 22.7 29.0 
Root mean squared error 38.6 39.7 44.9 
Relative absolute error 44.5 46.7 59.7 
Root relative squared error 78.4 80.6 91.2 
True Positive (TP) Rate 82.4 81.9 74.5 
False Positive (FP) Rate 20.7 20.1 33.2 
Precision 82.5 81.8 76.8 
Recall 82.4 81.9 74.5 
F-Measure 82.1 81.8 72.7 
ROC Area (AUC) 84.7 82.2 79.2 
 
 
Fig.3 10-fold Stratified cross-validation performance comparison 
7. Conclusions 
This work was to identify and evaluate the performance of 
machine learning classification schemes applied in the 
prediction of post-operative life expectancy in Lung 
Cancer patients. Thoracic surgery dataset used for this 
study was obtained from the University of California Irvine 
(UCI) machine learning repository database. Data was 
collected retrospectively at Wroclaw Thoracic Surgery 
Centre for patients who underwent major lung resections 
for primary lung cancer for period of 4 years [57]. The 
dataset contained 470 instances, and 17 attributes, 14 of 
which are nominal and 3 numeric – Age, PRE4 and PRE5. 
The thoracic surgery datasets are not equally distributed. 
Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) 
was used to generate synthetic minority examples to over-
sample the minority class and smoothen the sample 
distribution from T (70) and F (400) to T (560) and F (400) 
after repeated application of Synthetic Minority Over-
sampling Technique (SMOTE) randomize in WEKA. 
SMOTE operates by interpolating between several 
minority classes examples that lie together, using the 
concept of k-nearest neighbor to avoid over fitting causing 
the decision boundaries for the minority class to spread 
further into the majority class space [58].  
In this study, the thoracic datasets is dedicated to 
classification problem related to the post-operative life 
expectancy in the lung cancer patients: class 1 - death 
within one year after surgery, class 2 - survival; recoded as 
Risk1Y: 1 year survival period - (T)rue value if died (T, F), 
where the class value (Risk1Y) is binary valued. 
Multilayer Perceptron, J48 and Naive Bayes machine 
learning algorithms were calibrated to optimize the 
baseline performance accuracy of each classifier. Also 
stratified 10-fold cross-validation was used to measure the 
unbiased predictive accuracy of each classifier compared. 
Based on the stratified 10-fold cross-validation 
comparative analysis, Multilayer Perceptron achieved 
classification accuracy of 82.3%, true positive (TP) rate of 
82.4%, and a ROC Area (AUC) of 84.7%. The J48 
classifier achieved a classification accuracy of 81.8%, true 
positive (TP) rate of 81.9%, and a ROC Area (AUC) of 
82.2%. And Naive Bayes classifier achieved a 
classification accuracy of 74.4%, true positive (TP) rate of 
74.5%, and a ROC Area (AUC) of 79.2%. 
Constraints involved in mining privacy-sensitive, 
heterogeneous and voluminous data must be considered in 
clinical mining. It is the responsibility of the researcher to 
anonymize data to ensure privacy-preserved clinical 
mining [21]. The clinical data contains either unique 
binary-valued attributes or multi-valued attributes from 
positive defined interval such as blood pressure or body 
temperature; and negative values resulting from screening 
diagnosis such as ECG, and RTG [23]. The uniqueness of 
clinical data requires researchers to take into consideration 
ethical, security and legal aspects of clinical mining, such 
as data ownership, fear of lawsuits, expected benefits, and 
special administrative issues [22]. However, the quality of 
machine learning algorithms applicable in clinical 
prognosis is dependent on the ability of the researcher to 
carefully choose, tune and apply machine learning 
classification to clinical prognosis.  
References 
[1]  M. J. Glenn, Making Sense of Data - A Practical Guide to 
Exploratory Data Analysis and Data Mining, Hoboken, New 
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007.  
[2]  U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth and R. 
Uthurusamy, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, Menlo Park, California: AAAI Press, 1996. A. A. 
Name, and B. B. Name, Book Title, Place: Press, Year. 
[3]  E. Kolce and N. Frasheri, "A Literature Review of Data 
Mining Techniques Used in Healthcare Databases," in ICT 
Innovations 2012, Web Proceedings, 2012.  
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 197
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
[4]  V. Patil and V. B. Nikam, "Study of Data Mining algorithm 
in cloud computing using MapReduce Framework," Journal 
of Engineering, Computers & Applied Sciences (JEC&AS), 
vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 65-70, July 2013.  
[5]  E. Osmanbegović and M. Suljić, "Data Mining Approach For 
Predicting Student Performance," Economic Review – 
Journal of Economics and Business, vol. X, no. 1 , pp. 3-12, 
May 2012.  
[6]  X. Geng and Z. Yang, "Data Mining in Cloud Computing," 
International Conference on Information Science and 
Computer Applications (ISCA 2013）, pp. 1-7, 2013.  
[7]  H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang and V. C. Storey, "Business 
intelligence and analytics: From big data to big impact," MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1165-1188, December 2012.  
[8]  A. Guazzelli, "Predictive analytics in healthcare: The 
importance of open standards," IBM Corporation, 2011. 
[9]  R. Bellazzi and B. Zupan, "Predictive data mining in clinical 
medicine: Current issues and guidelines," International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 81-97, 
February 2008.  
[10]  R. Bellazzi, F. Ferrazzi and L. Sacchi, "Predictive data 
mining in clinical medicine: a focus on selected methods and 
applications," WIREs Data Mining Knowledge and 
Discovery, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 416-430, 11 February 2011.  
[11]  J. K. Pal, "Usefulness and applications of data mining in 
extracting information from different perspectives," Annals 
of Library and Information Studies, vol. 58, pp. 7-16, 2011.  
[12]  D. Delen, G. Walker and A. Kadam, "Predicting breast 
cancer survivability: a comparison of three data mining 
methods," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 34, no. 2, 
pp. 113-127, 2005.  
[13]  K. Srinivas, B. K. Rani and A. Govrdhan, "Applications of 
Data Mining Techniques in Healthcare and Prediction of 
Heart Attacks," International Journal on Computer Science 
and Engineering (IJCSE), vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 250-255, 2010.  
[14]  D. Dursun, "Analysis of cancer data: a data mining 
approach," Expert Systems: The Journal of Knowledge 
Engineering, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 100-112, February 2009.  
[15]  S. Floyd, "Data Mining Techniques for Prognosis in 
Pancreatic Cancer," 2007. 
[16]  T. Patrick, S. Laduzenski, D. Edwards, N. Ellis, A. P. 
Boezaart and H. Aygtug, "Use of machine learning theory to 
predict the need for femoral nerve block following ACL 
repair," Pain Medicine, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1566-1575, 2011.  
[17]  M.-L. Antonie, O. R. Za¨ıane and A. Coman, "Application of 
Data Mining Techniques for Medical Image Classification," 
in Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on 
Multimedia Data Mining (MDM/KDD'2001), San Francisco, 
USA, 2001.  
[18]  J. P. Choi, T. H. Han and R. W. P. , "A Hybrid Bayesian 
Network Model for Predicting Breast Cancer Prognosis," 
Journal of Korean Society of Medical Informatics, vol. 15, 
no. 1, pp. 49-57, 2009.  
[19]  B. Abdelghani and E. Guven, "Predicting breast cancer 
survivability using data mining techniques," Ninth Workshop 
on Mining Scientific and Engineering Datasets in 
conjunction with the Sixth SIAM International, vol. 58, no. 
13, pp. 10-110., 2006.  
[20]  M. U. Khan, J. P. Choi, H. Shin and M. Kim., "Predicting 
breast cancer survivability using fuzzy decision trees for 
personalized healthcare," in In Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society (EMBS) 2008. 30th Annual International 
IEEE EMBS Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, 2008.  
[21]  J. J. Berman, "Confidentiality issues for medical data 
miners," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 26, no. 1, p. 
25–36, March 2002.  
[22]  K. J. Ciosa and G. W. Moore, "Uniqueness of medical data 
mining," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 26, no. 1, p. 
1–24, 2002.  
[23]  K. Aftarczuk, "Evaluation of selected data mining algorithms 
implemented in Medical Decision Support Systems," 
Blekinge Institute of Technology School of Engineering, 
Blekinge, 2007. 
[24]  J. Iavindrasana, G. Cohen, A. Depeursinge, H. Müller, R. 
Meyer and A. Geissbuhler, "Clinical Data Mining: a 
Review," Switzerland, 2009. 
[25]  J. Kaiser, "Dealing with Missing Values in Data," Journal of 
Systems Integration, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 42-51, 2014.  
[26]  A. S. G. M. J. d. J. Fernández and F. Herrera, "A study of the 
behaviour of linguistic fuzzy rule based classification 
systems in the framework of imbalanced data-sets," Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems, vol. 159, no. 18, pp. 2378-2398, 2008.  
[27]  N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall and W. P. 
Kegelmeyer, "SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling 
Technique," Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, p. 
321–357, 2002.  
[28]  A. K. Menon, H. Narasimhan, S. Agarwal and S. Chawla, 
"On the Statistical Consistency of Algorithms for Binary 
Classification under Class Imbalance," In Proceedings of the 
30th International Conference on Machine Learning, Atlanta, 
Georgia USA, 2013.  
[29]  E. Stamatatos, "Stamatatos, Efstathios.”Author identification: 
Using text sampling to handle the class imbalance problem." 
Information Processing & Management," Information 
Processing & Management, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 790-799, 2008.  
[30]  G. Cohen, M. Hilario, H. Sax, S. Hugonnet and A. 
Geissbuhler, "Learning from imbalanced data in surveillance 
of nosocomial infection," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 
vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 7-18, 2006.  
[31]  Y. Liu, X. Yu, J. X. Huang and A. Aijun, "Combining 
integrated sampling with SVM ensembles for learning from 
imbalanced datasets," Information Processing & 
Management, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 617-631, 2011.  
[32]  M. E. Anbarasi, Anupriya and N. C. S. N. Iyengar, 
"Enhanced prediction of heart disease with feature subset 
selection using genetic algorithm," International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Technology, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 
5370-5376., 2010.  
[33]  J. Soni, U. Ansari, D. Sharma and S. Soni, "Predictive data 
mining for medical diagnosis: An overview of heart disease 
prediction," International Journal of Computer Applications, 
vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 43-48, 2011.  
[34]  M. Ture, F. Tokatli and I. Kurt, "Using Kaplan–Meier 
analysis together with decision tree methods (C&RT, CHAID, 
QUEST, C4. 5 and ID3) in determining recurrence-free 
survival of breast cancer patients." Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 2017-2026, 2009.  
[35]  B.Venkatalakshmi and M. Shivsankar, "Heart Disease 
Diagnosis Using Predictive Data mining," in 2014 IEEE 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 198
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
 
 
International Conference on Innovations in Engineering and 
Technology (ICIET’14), Tamil Nadu, India, 2014.  
[36]  D. Van Den Poel and C. Kristof, "Churn prediction in 
subscription services: An application of support vector 
machines while comparing two parameter-selection 
techniques," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 34, no. 1, 
p. 313–327, 2008.  
[37]  B. Milovic and M. Milovic, "Prediction and Decision 
Making in Health Care using Data Mining," International 
Journal of Public Health Science (IJPHS), vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 
69-78, December 2012.  
[38]  M. Hemalatha and S. Megala, "Mining Techniques in Heath 
Care: A Survey of Immunization," Journal of Theoretical and 
Applied Information Technology, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 65-70, 
2011.  
[39]  B. K. Bhardwaj and S. Pal, "Data Mining: A prediction for 
performance improvement using classification," International 
Journal of Computer Science and Information Security 
(IJCSIS), vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1-5, 2011.  
[40]  N. Chaudhary, Y. Aggarwal and R. K. Sinha, "Artificial 
Neural Network based Classification of Neurodegenerative 
Diseases," Advances in Biomedical Engineering Research 
(ABER), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-8, 2013.  
[41]  A. S. Fathima, D. Manimegalai and N. Hundewale, "A 
Review of Data Mining Classification Techniques Applied 
for Diagnosis and Prognosis of the Arbovirus-Dengue," 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI), vol. 
8, no. 6, pp. 322-328, November 2011.  
[42]  Q. K. Al-Shayea, "Artificial Neural Networks in Medical 
Diagnosis," International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
(IJCSI), vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 150-154, 2011.  
[43]  I. S. H. Bahia and Q. K. Al-Shayea, "Urinary System 
Diseases Diagnosis Using Artificial Neural Networks," 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and 
Network Security, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 118-122, 2010.  
[44]  F. Amato, A. López, E. M. Peña-Méndez, P. Vaňhara, A. 
Hampl and J. Havel, "Artificial neural networks in medical 
diagnosis," Journal of Applied Biomedicine, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 
47–58, 2013.  
[45]  S. Gupta, D. Kumar and A. Sharma, "Data mining 
classification techniques applied for breast cancer diagnosis 
and prognosis," Indian Journal of Computer Science and 
Engineering, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 188-193, 2011.  
[46]  M. Kumari and S. Godara, "Comparative Study of Data 
Mining Classification Methods in Cardiovascular Disease 
Prediction," International Journal of Computer Science and 
Technology (IJCST), vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 304-308, June 2011.  
[47]  I. Y. Khan, P. Zope and S. Suralkar, "Importance of Artificial 
Neural Network in Medical Diagnosis disease like acute 
nephritis disease and heart disease," International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Innovative Technology (IJESIT), 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 210-217, 2013.  
[48]  X. Li, G. C. Nsofor and L. Song, "A comparative analysis of 
predictive data mining techniques," International Journal of 
Rapid Manufacturing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 50-172, 2009.  
[49]  C. Chao, A. Liaw and L. Breiman, "Using random forests to 
learn imbalanced data," University of California, Berkeley, 
2004. 
[50]  S. Arlot and A. Celisse, "A survey of cross-validation 
procedures for model selection," Statistics Surveys, vol. 4, pp. 
40-79, 2010.  
[51]  P. Refaeilzadeh, L. Tang and H. Liu, "Cross-validation," in 
In Encyclopedia of database systems, 2009.  
[52]  S. Deepa and V. Bharathi, "Textural Feature Extraction and 
Classification of Mammogram Images using CCCM and 
PNN," IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering (IOSR-JCE), 
vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 07-13, June 2013.  
[53]  R. Chitra and V. Seenivasagam, "Heart Disease Prediction 
System Using Supervised Learning Classifier," Bonfring 
International Journal of Software Engineering and Soft 
Computing, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-7, March 2013.  
[54]  M. Agrawal, G. Singh and R. K. Gupta, "Predictive Data 
Mining for Highly Imbalanced Classification," International 
Journal of Emerging Technology and advanced Engineering, 
vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 139-143, 2012.  
[55]  H. W. Ian, E. Frank and M. A. Hall, Data Mining-Practical 
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 3rd ed., Burlington, 
MA USA: Morgan Kaufmann - Elsevier, 2011.  
[56]  K. Bache and M. Lichman, "UCI Machine Learning 
Repository," 2013. 
[57]  M. Ziaba, J. M. Tomczak, M. Lubicz and J. Swiatek, 
"Boosted SVM for extracting rules from imbalanced data in 
application to prediction of the post-operative life expectancy 
in the lung cancer patients," Applied Soft Computing, vol. 14, 
pp. 99-108, 2014.  
[58]  S. Kotsiantis, D. Kanellopoulos and P. Pintelas, "Handling 
imbalanced datasets: A review," GESTS International 
Transactions on Computer Science and Engineering, vol. 30, 
no. 1, pp. 25-36, 2006.  
[59]  R. R. Bouckaert, E. Frank, M. Hall, R. Kirkby, P. Reutemann, 
A. Seewald and D. Scuse, "Waikato Environment for 
Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) Manual for Version 3-7-8," 
The University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2013. 
[60]  L. T. H. L. Payam Refaeilzadeh, "Cross-Validation," in In 
Encyclopedia of database systems, US, 2009. 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 2, March 2015 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
www.IJCSI.org 199
2015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues
