 
 
Towards the Development of a Cyber Analysis & Advisement Tool 
(CAAT) for Mitigating De-Anonymization Attacks  
Siobahn C. Day, Henry Williams, Joseph Shelton, Gerry Dozier 
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, U.S.A 
Center for Advanced Studies in Identity Science 
{scday, hcwillia, jashelt1} @aggies.ncat.edu , {gvdozier} @ncat.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We are seeing a rise in the number of Anonymous Social Net-
works (ASN) that claim to provide a sense of user anonymity. 
However, what many users of ASNs do not know that a person 
can be identified by their writing style.  
In this paper, we provide an overview of a number of author con-
cealment techniques, their impact on the semantic meaning of an 
author's original text, and introduce AuthorCAAT, an application 
for mitigating de-anonymization attacks. Our results show that 
iterative paraphrasing performs the best in terms of author con-
cealment and performs well with respect to Latent Semantic 
Analysis. 
 Introduction   
 Anonymous Social Networks (ASN) can provide users 
with a false sense of anonymity; however, research in the 
area of Author Identification (Attribution) has shown that 
users can be identified simply by their writing style 
(Stamatatos 2009). Narayanan et al. (2012), introduces the 
concept of a de-anonymization attack where hackers apply 
sophisticated Author Identification techniques (AITs) in an 
effort to uncover the identity of an author of a text. Once 
this occurs the hackers can track a victim across the web 
and even through other ASNs. 
 Recently researchers, M. Brennan, Afroz, and 
Greenstadt (2012); Kacmarcik and Gamon (2006); Rao and 
Rohatgi (2000),  have developed a number of techniques 
for author concealment. These techniques as well as their 
ability to conceal one’s writing style are as follows: adver-
sarial stylometry, iterative language translation and itera-
tive paraphrasing.  
 Presently there exist two forms of adversarial stylometry 
(Afroz, Brennan, and Greenstadt 2012; M. Brennan et al. 
2012; M. R. Brennan and Greenstadt 2009). The first form, 
obfuscation, is when an author tries not to write like them-
                                                
Copyright held by the author(s). 
 
selves while the second form, imitation, is when an author 
tries to ‘mimic’ the writing style of another author. Re-
search shows that both of these techniques are effective in 
concealing one’s writing style. In the case of disguising 
one’s writing style, M. Brennan et al. (2012) demonstrate 
that obfuscation and imitation are easy on the short term 
but more difficult to maintain on the long term.  In Section 
IV, it will be shown how AuthorCAAT can be used to pro-
vide authors with the ability to perform long-term adver-
sarial stylometry. 
 Another form of author concealment is Iterative Lan-
guage Translation (ILT) (Mack, Bowers, Williams, Dozier, 
and Shelton 2015). ILT is where an original text is trans-
lated to another language and then back to its original lan-
guage. This technique was first presented in Rao and 
Rohatgi (2000), where the authors describe this approach 
as being “somewhat facetious” and “drastic.” They be-
lieved that this approach would change the meaning of a 
message thus making it an impractical approach. It was 
also mentioned by Kacmarcik and Gamon (2006), that this 
approach could be a good starting point for someone look-
ing to “scramble” their words. ILT is effective in conceal-
ing the writing style of an author; however, it is vulnerable 
to fingerprinting, (Caliskan and Greenstadt 2012). If one 
knows the language used in translating the text, one can 
then recover the original writing style of the author. 
 The last form of author concealment is Iterative Para-
phrasing (IP). The use of IP was originally mentioned in 
Kacmarcik and Gamon (2006). In IP, one will take the 
original text and use a paraphrasing tool to convert it into a 
paraphrased text. Concerning IP, to the authors’ 
knowledge, no one has as of yet analyzed its effectiveness 
in author concealment, semantics, and its vulnerability to 
fingerprinting (this will be discussed in Section III).  
      The remainder of the paper will be as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we discuss our experiments. In Section III, we dis-
cuss our results. In Section IV, we provide a brief discus-
Siobahn C. Day et al. MAICS 2016 pp. 41–45
41
sion of AuthorCAAT. In Section V, we provide our con-
clusion and future work.  
 
Author Concealment & Fingerprinting Exper-
iments 
Our Dataset 
 The datasets we used for our experiments were gathered 
from blogs written by 100 different authors. For every au-
thor in our dataset, there are 4 instances. Those instances in 
the dataset are as follows: the first instance served as the 
probe and the remaining 3 instances served as the gallery. 
This results in 100 instances in the probe set and 300 in-
stances in the gallery set.  
Our Translators & Paraphrasers 
 Our ILT dataset, used Google translation tools for Eng-
lish to Spanish, Spanish to English, English to Chinese, 
and Chinese to English. The ILT text was prepared in itera-
tions. We consider an iteration to be a full round trip cycle 
of translation (e.g. English-Spanish-English and English-
Chinese-English). Therefore, Iteration 1 would be E-X-E, 
Iteration 2 would be E-X-E-X-E, and Iteration 3 would be 
E-X-E-X-E-X-E, where E stands for English and X ∈ 
{Spanish, Chinese}. Therefore, a total of six ILT datasets 
were developed consisting of 300 gallery instances of the 
100 authors.  
 Our IP dataset was created using an online tool known 
as Plagarisma. The Iterations for IP are similar to ILT. 
Combining ILT with IP we have X ∈ {Spanish, Chinese, 
Paraphraser}. Therefore, three IP datasets were developed 
consisting of 300 gallery instances of the 100 authors. For 
ILT/IP, there were a total of nine datasets. 
Experiment I: Author Concealment via ILT/IP  
For Experiment I, the feature extractor used in Mack, 
Bowers, Williams, Dozier, and Shelton (2015), referred to 
as the Hybrid-II Author Identification System (AIS), was 
applied to the instances of the nine datasets (and the probe 
set) to create feature vectors where each feature vector 
consisted of 1282 features. The Hybrid-II AIS, is com-
posed of 95 features from the Unigram feature extractor 
(Forsyth 1997), 170 stylometric features from De Vel, An-
derson, Corney, and Mohay (2001) feature extractor, as 
well as 256 features in the form of function words and 761 
features that come from the Stanford Parser in the form of 
Parts-of-Speech parent child pairs for a total of 1282 fea-
tures.  
In Experiment I, the baseline performance was the au-
thor recognition rate of the 100 authors (English only) us-
ing no ILT/IP iterations. While, the ILT/IP experiments 
were used to determine how well ILT/IP reduces the author 
recognition rate with respect to the baseline. 
 
Experiment II: Fingerprinting the Translators 
and the Paraphrasers 
For Experiment II, a tool known as JGAAP, Java Graph-
ical Author Attribution Program, (Juola, Sofko, and Bren-
nan 2006) was used to fingerprint the translators and the 
paraphraser. This tool allows for text analysis using vari-
ous stylometry and textometry techniques.  We used the 
first 100 authors from each ILT/IP Iteration using the first 
gallery instance as the ‘unknown’ author and the remaining 
two instances from the gallery as the ‘known’ authors. The 
‘known’ authors were labeled by languages and/or para-
phraser. This was used for all three Iterations of ILT/IP. 
The analysis was processed by using WEKA SMO, with 
the results ordered with event culling from most to least. 
Character N Grams, where n=2, was used as the event 
driver.   
 
Experiment III: Fingerprinting the Number of 
Iterations Used to Conceal an Author’s Writing 
Style 
In Experiment III, the ‘unknown’ authors were chosen 
from the first gallery instances of all Iterations of ILT/IP. 
The ‘known’ authors were chosen from the remaining two 
instances of the gallery and were labeled by the number of 
ILT/IP Iterations that were applied. The same settings as 
Experiment II were used with respect to the event driver, 
analysis, and event culling. 
 
Results 
Results of Experiment I 
The results of Experiment I, Author Concealment via 
ILT/IP, are shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 shows the affect 
that ILT/IP has on the accuracy of the AIS. In Figure 1, the 
x-axis represents the iteration number (Iteration 1, Iteration 
2, Iteration 3) and the y-axis represents the accuracy of the 
AIS.  
     In Figure 1, the accuracy of the AIS is 54% percent. 
In the first iteration of ILT/IP, the author identification 
rates drop. At Iteration 1, ILT-Spanish has the best perfor-
mance in terms of reducing the AIS rate to 6%, followed 
by IP at 7% and ILT-Chinese at 10%. In the second itera-
tion, IP has the best performance in reducing the AIS rate 
to 1%, followed by ILT-Chinese at 11% and ILT-Spanish 
at 6%. At Iteration 3, IP continues to outperform ILT. At 
Iteration 3, IP reduces the AIS rate to 6 %, followed by 
ILT-Spanish at 7% and ILT-Chinese at 11%. These results 
show the effectiveness of ILT/IP in concealing an authors 
identity. 
 
Siobahn C. Day et al. MAICS 2016 pp. 41–45
42
Figure 1: A Comparison of the Effectiveness of ILT/IP on Reduc-
ing Author Recognition Rates 
 
Prior research suggests, (Caliskan and Greenstadt 2012; 
Kacmarcik and Gamon 2006; Rao and Rohatgi 2000), that 
ILT/IP is naïve as well as problematic due to the resulting 
text being unable to retain its original meaning. In in order 
to address this issue, we applied Latent Semantic Analysis 
(LSA) on all iterations of the dataset.  
     Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) “…is a theory and 
method for extracting and representing the contextual-
usage meaning of words by statistical computations ap-
plied to a large corpus of text” (Landauer, Foltz, and 
Laham 1998). Using a LSA tool developed by the Univer-
sity of Colorado Boulder, we compared our original text 
with the resulting text of ILT/IP.  
     In the Table 1, the results of using the LSA tool on our 
dataset are shown.  Given two samples of text, the LSA 
tool will provide an output of 1 if the semantics of the two 
text samples are exact and -1 if the semantics of the two 
text samples do not match at all. Given the output of the 
LSA tool on our dataset, we ran an ANOVA test as well a 
t-test to break the performances of ILT/IP into equivalence 
classes as shown in Table 1.  
     In Table 1, the first column represents the ILT/IP meth-
od used, the second column represents the average output 
of the LSA tool with the standard deviation in parenthesis, 
and the third column, labeled EC, represents the equiva-
lence class.  The equivalence classes are ordered from best 
to worst in terms of performance. The equivalent classes 
were determined by applying ANOVA and a t-test to check 
for statistical significance. The p-value used for the ANO-
VA test was 0.05.  
     The results displayed in Table 1, show that the resulting 
text from ILT-Spanish is closest to the semantics of the 
original text with an output of 0.862 followed by IP at 
0.802 and ILT-Chinese at 0.773. This indicates that ILT/IP 
is not only non-problematic but effective at preserving the 
semantics of the original text. 
 
 
Table 1: LSA Results from Comparing the Original Text with 
Resulting Text from ILT/IP 
ILT/IP Method LSA Results EC 
Spanish 0.862 (0.11) 1 
Paraphraser 0.802 (0.09) 2 
Chinese 0.773 .16) 3 
 
Results of Experiment II 
The results of Experiment II, Fingerprinting the Transla-
tors and the Paraphrasers, are shown in Figure 2. In Figure 
2, the x-axis shows the iterations (Iteration 1, Iteration 2, 
Iteration 3) and on the y-axis it shows the accuracy in de-
termining the ILT/IP method used. In Figure 2, one can see 
as the number of iterations increases so does the accuracy 
for each ILT/IP method that is being used.  
    In Figure 2, at Iteration 1, ILT-Spanish has the best fin-
gerprinting accuracy at 93%, followed by ILT-Chinese at 
90%, and IP at 86%. In Iteration 2, ILT-Spanish leads at 
98% followed by ILT-Chinese 97%, and IP at 91%. In 
Iteration 3, ILT-Chinese comes in at 99%, followed by 
ILT-Spanish at 98%, and IP at 95%. The results not only 
show that the translators can be accurately fingerprinted, 
but they also show that of the three IP is hardest to finger-
print but only at the first iteration. On the other hand, these 
results show that the translator and paraphrasers are able to 
be identified which can potentially allow for reversibility 
or the uncovering of the original text, thus revealing an 
authors writing style.   
 
 
Figure 2: A Fingerprinting Analysis of ILT/IP over 3 Iterations 
Results of Experiment III 
The results of Experiment III, Fingerprinting the Num-
ber of Iterations Used to Conceal an Author’s Writing 
Style, are shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3, the x-axis shows 
the iterations (Iteration 1, Iteration 2, Iteration 3) and the y-
axis shows the accuracy of an iteration of ILT/IP in being 
fingerprinted. Figure 3 shows determining which Iteration 
Siobahn C. Day et al. MAICS 2016 pp. 41–45
43
of ILT/IP of a given text proves to be more difficult; how-
ever, the accuracy rises over iterations.  
     In Figure 3, at Iteration 1, ILT-Spanish leads at 70%, 
followed by ILT-Chinese at 61%, and IP at 47%. At Itera-
tion 2, IP performs best at 31%, followed by ILT-Spanish 
at 18%, and ILT-Chinese at 15%. At Iteration 3, ILT-
Chinese is the best performer at 60%, followed by ILT-
Spanish at 53 % and IP at 49% making it the worst per-
former. The results show that fingerprinting ILT/IP by iter-
ation is harder to fingerprint but not impossible. Thus al-
lowing an original text and author to be revealed.  
 
 
Figure 3: A Fingerprinting Analysis of the Number of Iterations 
of ILT/IP over 3 Iterations 
DISCUSSION: THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
AUTHORCAAT 
 The results presented earlier show that translators and 
paraphrasers can be fingerprinted. Even the iterations can 
be fingerprinted. In order to conceal one’s identity in an 
efficient and effective way, the authors’ believe that a sys-
tem must be developed that will allow a user to use all of 
the author concealment methods mentioned in this paper 
simultaneously while authoring a text. The Center for Ad-
vanced Studies in Identity Sciences (CASIS) has devel-
oped such a system for author concealment known as Au-
thorCAAT (Author Cyber Analysis & Advisement Tool).  
 Figure 5 provides a screenshot of AuthorCAAT. Au-
thorCAAT has a window that allows an author to type in 
text. As the author types, their writing style is analyzed. 
The feature vector associated with their writing style is 
shown just below the window. To the right of the window, 
is a pane that displays the author samples that match the 
sample written within the window based on a user speci-
fied by the slide bar. For example, if the slide bar is at ‘10’ 
this means that the pane will display the authors whose 
writing samples are within the closest 10% to the author 
sample that was typed in the window. 
 Below the Matches to, pane is a drop-down box that will 
allow an author to translate what is currently in the window 
in either Spanish, Chinese, or Paraphrase and back to Eng-
lish. Once a language or paraphraser has been selected, the 
user (author) presses the ‘Translate’ button to execute one 
cycle of ILT on the text currently within the author win-
dow. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: AuthorCAAT 
 
 In Figure 5, one can see that AuthorCAAT allows a user 
to perform both forms of Adversarial Stylometry. If the 
user sees that their writing style is detected and shown in 
the pane, then they can choose to re-write their text is such 
a way that it is not shown in the pane. A user can also 
monitor the pane in an effort to perform imitation author-
ship. As long as a particular author ID is shown in the pane 
(while their author ID is not in the pane) then they are writ-
ing like that particular author.  
 Finally, AuthorCAAT allows for ILT/IP at the sentence 
level. For example, an author can type in the first sentence 
and apply ILT/IP to that sentence. After this, the author can 
add a second sentence and then apply ILT/IP to both sen-
tences in the window and/or edit the resulting sentences 
further (Adversarial Stylometry). 
 
Conclusions and Future Work 
 In this paper, ILT/IP dramatically reduces the author 
recognition rate. Secondly, translators and paraphraser are 
good enough to preserve the semantics. This is based on 
our results from our LSA table. Thirdly that not only can 
language translators be fingerprinted but we can fingerprint 
paraphrasers too. Lastly we show that the iteration of a 
particular ILT/IP can be fingerprinted as well. This all 
leads to a development tool, AuthorCAAT that can do all 
of things at the sentence level.  This will allow fingerprint-
ing to be more difficult. Our Future work will include in-
creasing our dataset from 100 to 1000 to see if the finger-
Siobahn C. Day et al. MAICS 2016 pp. 41–45
44
printing becomes more accurate with more authors in terms 
of ILT/IP. We suspect the accuracy of fingerprinting itera-
tions at Iteration 1 and 2 will increase with the number of 
authors analyzed. This is a contrast to what was stated in 
Caliskan and Greenstadt (2012). 
Acknowledgments 
 This research is based upon work supported by the 
United States Government including the National Science 
Foundation. The views and conclusions contained herein 
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as 
necessarily representing the official policies or 
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. 
Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to 
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental 
purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation 
thereon. 
References 
Afroz, S., Brennan, M., & Greenstadt, R. (2012, May). Detecting 
hoaxes, frauds, and deception in writing style online. In Security 
and Privacy (SP), 2012 IEEE Symposium on (pp. 461-475). 
IEEE. 
Brennan, M. R., & Greenstadt, R. (2009, July). Practical Attacks 
Against Authorship Recognition Techniques. In IAAI. 
Brennan, M., Afroz, S., & Greenstadt, R. (2012). Adversarial 
stylometry: Circumventing authorship recognition to preserve 
privacy and anonymity.ACM Transactions on Information and 
System Security (TISSEC), 15(3), 12. 
Caliskan, A., & Greenstadt, R. (2012, September). Translate 
once, translate twice, translate thrice and attribute: Identifying 
authors and machine translation tools in translated text. 
In Semantic Computing (ICSC), 2012 IEEE Sixth International 
Conference on (pp. 121-125). IEEE. 
De Vel, O., Anderson, A., Corney, M., & Mohay, G. (2001). 
Mining e-mail content for author identification forensics. ACM 
Sigmod Record, 30(4), 55-64. 
Forsyth, R. S. (1997). Short substrings as document discrimina-
tors: An empirical study. In ACH-ALLC (Vol. 97). 
Free Online Plagiarism Checker for Students, Teachers, Scholars, 
Educators, Scientists, Essayists, Writers. Free TurnItIn and Copy-
scape Alternative. (n.d.). Retrieved February 02, 2016, from 
http://plagiarisma.net/  
Google Translate. (n.d.). Retrieved February 04, 2016, from 
https://translate.google.com/  
Juola, P., Sofko, J., & Brennan, P. (2006). A prototype for author-
ship attribution studies. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21(2), 
169-178. 
Kacmarcik, G., & Gamon, M. (2006). Obfuscating document 
stylometry to preserve author anonymity. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Main conference poster 
sessions. 
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction 
to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284. 
LSA @ CU Boulder. (n.d.). Retrieved February 02, 2016, from 
http://lsa.colorado.edu/  
Narayanan, A., Paskov, H., Gong, N. Z., Bethencourt, J., Stefa-
nov, E., Shin, E. C. R., & Song, D. (2012, May). On the feasibil-
ity of internet-scale author identification. In Security and Privacy 
(SP), 2012 IEEE Symposium on (pp. 300-314). IEEE. 
Nathan Mack, Jasmine Bowers, Henry Williams, Gerry Dozier, 
and Joseph Shelton, "The Best Way to a Strong Defense is a 
Strong Offense: Mitigating Deanonymization Attacks via Itera-
tive Language Translation," International Journal of Machine 
Learning and Computing vol.5, no. 5, pp. 409-413, 2015. 
Rao, J. R., & Rohatgi, P. (2000). Can pseudonymity really guar-
antee privacy? Paper presented at the USENIX Security Sympo-
sium. 
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution 
methods.Journal of the American Society for information Science 
and Technology,60(3), 538-556. 
 
 
Siobahn C. Day et al. MAICS 2016 pp. 41–45
45
