Classifying informative and imaginative prose using complex networks
Henrique F. de Arruda
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of São Paulo, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil
Luciano da F. Costa
São Carlos Institute of Physics
University of São Paulo, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil
Diego R. Amancio∗
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of São Paulo, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil
Statistical methods have been widely employed in recent years to grasp many language properties.
The application of such techniques have allowed an improvement of several linguistic applications,
which encompasses machine translation, automatic summarization and document classification. In
the latter, many approaches have emphasized the semantical content of texts, as it is the case of
bag-of-word language models. This approach has certainly yielded reasonable performance. How-
ever, some potential features such as the structural organization of texts have been used only on a
few studies. In this context, we probe how features derived from textual structure analysis can be
effectively employed in a classification task. More specifically, we performed a supervised classifica-
tion aiming at discriminating informative from imaginative documents. Using a networked model
that describes the local topological/dynamical properties of function words, we achieved an accuracy
rate of up to 95%, which is much higher than similar networked approaches. A systematic analysis
of feature relevance revealed that symmetry and accessibility measurements are among the most
prominent network measurements. Our results suggest that these measurements could be used in
related language applications, as they play a complementary role in characterizing texts.
I. INTRODUCTION
The ever-growing amount of available documents in the
Web has propelled the development of statistical natural
language processing methods in recent years. Examples
of related applications trying to “understand” unstruc-
tured data include machine translation [1], text summa-
rization [2–5], information retrieval [6, 7] and content
analysis [8]. An application of special importance for
the organization of electronic data is the classification
task, which automatically assigns one or more labels for
a word, sentence, paragraph or entire documents [9–12].
Traditional textual categorization methods usually serve
to identify the relevance of texts (i.e. whether it is a spam
or not) or the meaning conveyed by words and expres-
sions [13–17]. Recent classification tasks, however, have
emphasized other textual aspects. For example, the cat-
egorization of texts according to the their polarity (e.g.
positive or negative) has become a relevant task for an-
alyzing e.g. customer reviews [18] or global variations
in mood via polarity analysis of twitter messages [19].
Note that most of these classification tasks are depen-
dent on text content, since the presence of one or more
specific words provides clues about the classes being in-
ferred. While the semantic content is crucial for the suc-
cess of these applications, the structure of texts might
play an important role in classifications problems where
the semantics of words is not crucial for the purpose of
categorization. This is the case of identifying the style of
texts, since documents on the same subject might display
different writing styles. In contrast to semantic-based
traditional classification tasks, in this paper we probe
the relevance of textual structure to provide useful fea-
tures for text classification. More specifically, we probe
how textual structure depends on two distinct stylistic
writing styles: imaginative and informative prose. The
structure and organization of texts is studied via net-
worked models, an well known representation of complex
systems.
Networks are discrete models that basically represent
the interrelations between interacting agents in a com-
plex system. Owing to the simplicity and generality of
the model, it has been employed to model a myriad of
real and artificial systems [20]. Despite being very differ-
ent in nature, networks modelling distinct systems share
several structural patterns [21]. Of special relevance to
this paper, are the networked models of language and
texts, which have been useful to unveil universal prop-
erties including the scale-free and small-world phenom-
ena [22]. In practical terms, networked models have been
useful to grasp several features of texts, such as qual-
ity [23], complexity [24] and authenticity [25]. Particu-
larly, in this study, we used the so-called word adjacency
model, which is a approximation of text networks formed
by syntactical links [26]. Because the topological analy-
sis of word adjacency networks does not depend on the
interpretation of texts, it has been applied with relative
success to study the underlying structure of texts, even
ar
X
iv
:1
50
7.
07
82
6v
1 
 [
cs
.C
L
] 
 2
8 
Ju
l 2
01
5
2
when textual content is entirely unknown [25]. Here we
applied such representation to discriminate informative
and imaginative prose. We have extended the traditional
model in a twofold fashion: (i) we analyzed the local
structure of particular nodes (words); and (ii) we consid-
ered novel topological/dynamical that are able to unfold
the general structure of the network of concepts. As we
shall show, both extensions provided competitive classi-
fication performance when compared to traditional sty-
lometry methodologies. In special, we have found that
symmetries and accessibilities were the most important
network measurements. We believe that the proposed ex-
tended model could be used to improve the performance
of several related problems where the textual structure
plays a prominent role in the characterization of docu-
ments [27].
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
present the word adjacency model. Section III describes
the pattern recognition methods used to perform the
classification. This section also presents a method for
measuring feature relevance in a multivariate fashion.
The results obtained with the proposed methodology are
described in Section IV. Finally, Section V provides a
perspective for further studies and improvements of the
model.
II. REPRESENTATION AND
CHARACTERIZATION OF TEXTS AS
NETWORKS
In this section, we present how a text can be repre-
sented as a complex network. We also swiftly describe
the main topological network measurements employed to
characterize the structure of networks.
Modeling texts as complex networks
A complex network can be represented as a graph,
which is defined as a set of nodes and edges [21]. An
usual representation of a network is the adjacency ma-
trix A = {aij}. The elements are defined as:
aij =
{
1 if there is a link i→ j,
0 otherwise.
(1)
In the text mining community, several networked repre-
sentations of texts have been proposed [28]. If the stylis-
tic properties of texts are relevant for the task being tack-
led, syntactical relations are employed to establish the
links between words [26]. If the application requires the
extraction of semantic features, words are connected ac-
cording to semantic relations, such as those present e.g.
in the WordNet [29] or in free association graphs [30].
In this study, we aim at grasping textual features that
are independent of semantic content. For this reason, we
used a model that is able to capture stylistic textual fea-
tures [12, 31]. This model, henceforth referred to as word
adjacency model, denotes each distinct word as a node.
The edges are established between words appearing in
the same context. It has been shown that if one con-
siders the context as the interval of two adjacent words,
most of the syntactical relations are recovered [26]. This
model has been successfully applied to study many lan-
guage applications and related systems [31].
To create a word adjacency network, usually some
pre-processing steps are applied. First, all punctuation
marks, line breaks, spaces, numbers and special charac-
ters are removed. Particularly, we are mostly interested
in the relationship between words conveying semantic in-
formation. For this reason, stopwords (or function words)
can be optionally removed from the analysis. In the next
step, a lemmatization step is performed in order to map
words representing the same concept into the same node.
To assist the lemmatization process, the part-of-speech
tag of each word is extracted according to the proce-
dure described in [32]. The part-of-speech labelling is re-
quired to solve ambiguities, because the same word form
might be mapped into distinct lemmas. After the pre-
processing step, each remaining distinct word becomes a
node and edges are established between adjacent words.
Complex network measurements
Currently, there are more than a hundred measure-
ments employed to characterize the topological structure
of networks [33]. Some measurements might depend not
only on the structure, but also on a dynamical process
(e.g. random walks) occurring on the structure. Below
we swiftly describe the measurements used in this study.
• Number of nodes (V ): in a word adjacency net-
work, the number of nodes is the set of different
words in the text. In other words, the number of
nodes is the vocabulary size of the pre-processed
text.
• Degree (k): the simplest connectivity measure-
ment is the node degree [34], which corresponds to
the total number of edges connected with node i.
This measurement is defined for directed networks
as k(in) =
∑
i aij and k
(out) =
∑
j aij for in- and
out- degree, respectively. If one considers the undi-
rected and unweighted version of the network, the
degree ki =
∑
j aji =
∑
j aij can be understood as
the number of distinct bi-grams that a given word
appears. If one considers edges weights, then the
degree is proportional to the word frequency.
• Neighborhood connectivity (N): this measure-
ment is defined as the number of nodes that can
3
be reached when, starting from the reference node,
walks of length h are performed. Note that the
traditional degree measurement is recovered when
h = 1.
• Clustering coefficient (cc): given a node i, the
probability of its neighbors to be connected is called
clustering coefficient (cci) [35]. This measurement
is defined as
cci =
3N∆(i)
N3(i)
, (2)
where N∆(i) is the total number of triangles (i.e.
a click comprising three nodes) connected with
node i, and N3(i) denotes the number of connected
triples, which is defined as the amount of differ-
ent connections between i and each pair of nodes.
This measurement is traditionally used to quantify
the local connectivity of real-world networks [36].
In word adjacency networks, this measurement has
been applied to quantify the specificity of words ac-
cording to the number of distinct contexts in which
they appear [37].
• Betweenness centrality (B): to define this mea-
surement, consider all paths connecting any pair
of nodes in the network are followed via shortest
paths [38]. The betweenness of a node u is defined
as being proportional to the number of paths that
passes through node u. More specifically,
Bu =
∑
ij
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j)
, (3)
where σ(i, u, j) is the number of shortest paths be-
tween i and j that passes through node u and σ(i, j)
is the total amount of shortest paths between i and
j. According to equation 3, the betweenness cen-
trality can be interpreted as the network flow [39–
41], which is a relevant quantity for the analysis of
robustness of power-grid networks [42, 43]. When
applied to the analysis of text networks, this mea-
surement has been interpreted as being useful to
quantify the generality of words in which the word
appears [44], which is in part motivated by the use
of this measurement in community detection meth-
ods [45]. Unlike the clustering coefficient, the be-
tweenness centrality uses the global connectivity in-
formation to quantify the specificity/generality of
concepts [44].
• Closeness centrality (C): unlike the betwenness
centrality, which is based on the number of shortest
paths, the closeness centrality [46] uses the length of
the shortest paths. If dij is the shortest distance be-
tween nodes i and j, the closeness centrality is cal-
culated as Ci = V −1
∑
j dij . Geodesic paths have
been reinterpreted in the context of text networks
as a measure of word relevance. Actually, a word is
deemed relevant if it is very frequent in the text or if
it appears related to other very frequent words [37].
• Eccentricity (E): this measurement quantifies
the maximum geodesic distance between the ref-
erence node and all other nodes [47]. Therefore,
the maximum eccentricity value corresponds to the
network diameter. This measurement is calculated
for each node i as Ei = maxj(dij).
• Eigenvector centrality (Ec): the eigenvector
centrality can be understood as an extension of de-
gree centrality [48], because the relevance of the
reference node relies both on the number and rel-
evance of neighbors. Considering the adjacency
matrix A, the eigenvector centrality is defined as
the eigenvector associated with the leading eigen-
value. There are many linguistic applications that
uses this centrality measurement. It has been ap-
plied, for example, in the text summarization task
in order to select the most relevant extracts in texts
modelled as graphs [4].
• PageRank (Pr): the PageRank is widely known
to be part of the Google’s web search [21, 49]. In
texts networks, this measurement has been success-
fully applied e.g. to disambiguate word senses [50].
This measure is based on the eigenvector centrality,
and it is defined in matrix terms as
Pr = αAD−1Pr + β1, (4)
where α and β are positive constants (convention-
ally β = 1), 1 is a vector (1, 1, 1, . . .)T and D is a
diagonal matrix represented as
Dij =
{
max{k(out)i , 1} if i 6= j,
0 otherwise.
(5)
In contrast with eigenvector centrality, PageRank
considers a weighted sum of neighbors importance
reflecting the neighbors degree. In this way, the rel-
evance associated to a node is proportionally trans-
ferred to its neighbors.
• Accessibility (A(h)): the accessibility is an exten-
sion of the concept of neighborhood connectivity
because it measures the effective number of nodes
reached at the h-th concentric level [51]. The ef-
fective number of nodes accessed after h steps is
computed considering the distribution of proba-
bilities of access via self-avoiding random walks.
Mathematically, it is defined using the Shannon en-
tropy [52] of the probabilities of access at the h-th
4
1/6 1/6
1/6
1/61/6
1/6
4/6
1/6 1/6
(h=2)A  = 2.38
(h=1)A  = 6.00
FIG. 1. Quantification of accessibility for the local neighbour-
hood of the blue node. The probabilities near nodes represent
the probabilities of access in self-avoiding random walks of
length h = 1 (orange nodes) or h = 2 (green nodes). In the
second hierarchical level, the accessibility is lower than the
total number of nodes (green nodes). This occurs because
the access to the second level is uneven.
concentric level:
A
(h)
i = exp
−∑
j
p
(h)
ij log p
(h)
ij
 , (6)
where p(h)ij is the probability of a walker start-
ing from i to reach node j in h steps. In text
networks, this measurement has been applied to
generate summaries and to identify keywords and
styles [2]. An example of the computation of acces-
sibility is shown in Fig. 1.
• Generalized accessibility (Ag): the generalized
accessibility is an extension of the accessibility that
does not rely on a particular length of walk. In-
stead, the probabilities of transition are computed
considering all possible lengths, which is imple-
mented via definition of a modified random walk,
the so called accessibility random walk [53]. This
measurement is defined as
Agi = exp
−∑
j
Pij logPij
 , (7)
where P is a quantity that depends on the prob-
ability of the transition i → j considering walks
of variable length. The matrix P representing the
probability of transition is calculated as P = W/e,
where
W =
∞∑
k=0
1
k!
P k = eP . (8)
Note that, according to equation (8), the highest
weights are assigned to the nearest nodes. The gen-
eralized accessibility has been applied e.g. to iden-
tify influential spreaders in spatial networks [53].
• Symmetry (S): the symmetry concept is found in
many real systems [54, 55]. Symmetric properties
can also occur in written texts as a consequence of
grammatical or stylistic constraints [59]. For this
reason, we have quantified this property in word
adjacency networks. To model such property, re-
cently, some network measurements have been cre-
ated [56–59]. In this paper, we used the quantities
introduced in [58, 59], as it allows to capture sym-
metric patterns in a multi-scale fashion. The defi-
nition of symmetry measures rely upon the charac-
terisation of hierarchic levels. The hierarchic level
Γh(i) for a given node i is the set comprising all
nodes h hops away from i. The symmetry mea-
sures are based on the accessibility measurement,
because the same network dynamics is taken for
the analysis. In addition, the symmetry measure-
ment can be seen as a normalization of the acces-
sibility. Thus, using self-avoiding random walks, a
node is considered to be symmetric if the access to
its neighbors (in a given hierarchic level) is sym-
metric. The symmetry (or regularity) of the access
is measured in terms of the entropy:
Sh(i) =
exp
{
−
∑
j ∈Γh(i)
p
(h)
ij log p
(h)
ij
}
|Γh(i)|+
∑h−1
r=0 ηr
, (9)
where ηr denotes the total number of dead ends
in the r-th hierarchical level and p(h)ij is the same
quantity used to define the accessibility in equa-
tion (6). There are two variations of the quantity
proposed in equation (9). The backbone symmetry
(Sb), a variation of the the concept of radial sym-
metry, removes all edges between nodes in the same
hierarchical level. The merged symmetry (Sm), on
the other hand, is based on the concept of angu-
lar symmetry, which can be obtained by merging
linked nodes in the same hierarchical level. To ex-
emplify both variations of the symmetry concept,
we show in Fig. 2 the transformations applied to a
hierarchical neighborhood before the computation
of equation (9).
• Modularity (Q): a community structure is de-
fined as a network subgraph with a large number
of intra-links and a few edges connected to the oth-
ers nodes of the network. To quantify whether a
network is organized in communities, the modular-
ity compares the number of internal links with the
expected value of the same quantity in a equivalent
5
1/6
1/6 1/6
1/6
1/61/62/6
2/6
2/6
1/6
1/6
1/6
3/6
2/6
5/12
3/12
ORIGINAL SUBGRAPH
BACKBONE
PATTERN
MERGED
PATTERN
(h=1)Sb  = 1.00
(h=2)Sb  = 1.00
(h=1)Sm  = 0.87
(h=2)Sm  = 0.98
FIG. 2. Example of merged and backbone patterns for the quantification of local symmetry. The fractions represent the
probabilities to reach a given node in a random walk of length h = 1 (orange) or h = 2 (green). To create the backbone
pattern, edges among nodes in the same hierarchical levels are removed. Differently, merged patterns are computed by merging
connected nodes into a single node.
random network [60]. This quantity is computed
as
Q =
1
2M
∑
i
∑
j
(
aij −
kikj
2M
)
δ(ci, cj), (10)
whereM = 1/2
∑
ij aij is the total number of edges
in the network, ci and cj are the communities to
which nodes i and j belong, and
δ(ci, cj) =
{
1 if ci = cj ,
0 otherwise.
(11)
Usually, word adjacency networks display low val-
ues of modularity. A more consistent organization
in communities can be found e.g. in semantic net-
works such as the WordNet [29].
Characterization of texts with complex networks
So far we have presented several topological/dynamical
measurements of complex networks. The objective here
is to use these quantities to characterise styles in texts.
Note that several measurements are locally defined, i.e.
each node possess a value. There are several possibilities
to use these local measurements to characterise the net-
works. In this paper, we have used the following three
distinct methodologies:
• Global strategy without stopwords (GS): in
this approach, we sum up the local measurements
to characterise the networks. The most natural
summarisation procedure is to take the average
〈X〉, where 〈X〉 = V −1
∑
iXi andX is a local mea-
surement. We also used the following quantities:
the standard deviation σ(X), the median (X̃), the
maximum value (max(X)) and the minimum value
(min(X)). The only global measurement, the mod-
ularity, was also used considered in this strategy.
Following several approaches for grasping textual
features with networks, we have removed all stop-
word before the formation of the networks. These
words were disregarded from the analysis because
they just serve to connect content words in the word
adjacency model.
• Local strategy without stopwords (LS): in
this approach, the value of each measure X for each
word becomes a feature. Similarly to the GSW, all
stopwords are removed from the analysis. Because
features are defined for each word, global networks
measurements are not considered in this case.
• Local strategy with stopwords (LSS): this is
the same local approach adopted in the LS method.
However, this variation also considers all stopwords
in the analysis.
6
III. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND
EVALUATION
In this section, we present the methodology for analyz-
ing the relationship between the texts and the categories
(informative and imaginative). More specifically, we de-
scribe the pattern recognition methods employed and the
methods to compute the quality of the classification and
relevance of the proposed features (see Section II).
Pattern recognition methods
To study the relationship between complex network
measurements and text style, we used a feature selection
algorithm and three different supervised classifiers. The
method used to select the features was the information
gain [61], which is a supervised attribute filter known as
mutual information [62]. Given the random variables X
and Y , the mutual information I(X,Y ) is computed as
I(X,Y ) =
∑
x∈X
∑
y∈Y
p(x, y) log
p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
, (12)
where p(x) and p(y) are probability functions and p(x, y)
is the joint probability.
The information gain corresponds to the mutual in-
formation when X is the values obtained for a given at-
tribute and Y is a vector of corresponding classes. This
technique is used to create a decreasing sorted ranking
of relevance. Thus, the most relevant attributes, i.e. the
ones with the highest values of information gain, are se-
lected to perform the classification. An important char-
acteristic of this method is that the attributes are evalu-
ated separately, i.e. the information of a given attribute
does not influence the others.
In our experiments, the following pattern recognition
methods were used:
• Nearest neighbors: theK nearest neighbors clas-
sifier (KNN) considers the local neighborhood of
the test instance [63]. Given a test instance, the
class chosen is the majority class in the set of the
K nearest neighbors in the training dataset. Fur-
ther details concerning this method can be found
in [64].
• Classification and regression tree: this method
represents the patterns found in the dataset as a
tree, a data structure storing nested rules. Even
though there are several tree algorithms, we chosen
to use the classification and regression tree (CART)
method [65] because it has some advantages as it
is relatively simple for interpret and the the pre-
dictor variables are not previously assumed [66]. A
major advantage of tree-based pattern recognition
algorithms the patterns found in the dataset are
not hidden from the user, as it happens in artificial
neural networks methods [64].
• Naive Bayes: the Naive Bayes algorithm is based
on the Bayes theorem [67]. Assuming feature inde-
pendence, the correct class c̃ of an instance is given
by
c̃ = arg max
ck
[
logP (ck) +
∑
fj∈F
logP (fj |ck)
]
,
where ck is one of the possible classes, fj ∈ F
is a particular feature. To compute the quantity
P (fj |ck) we assumed that the likelihood of the fea-
tures follows a bell shape [68].
We have chosen the aforementioned methods because
they yield good performance when set with default pa-
rameters [69]. The evaluation of the performance of
the methods when set with default parameters was per-
formed with the “leave one out” algorithm [70]. This eval-
uation procedure consists in selecting one element of the
dataset to be used as an test instance, while the remain-
ing instances are used in the training phase. This pro-
cedure is then repeated until all instances of the dataset
have been chosen as an test instance.
Quantifying feature relevance
To quantify the relevance of features for the classifi-
cation task, the following method was used. Let F =
{f1, f2, . . .} be the set of attributes comprising Φ dis-
tinct attributes. We generate a set Fc comprising all 2Φ
combinations of features. For a particular classification
method, we compute the accuracy rate obtained for each
classifier in Fc. The accuracy rate is then employed to
sort (in decreasing order) the classifiers in Fc. A function
is associated for each attribute in F :
Ω(fi, k) =
k∑
j=1
ω(fi, j) (13)
where ω(fi, j) = 1 if the j-th best classifier in Fc used
the i-th attribute. If the i-th feature was not used in
the j-th best classifier, then ω(fi, j) = 0. Note that the
function Ω quantifies how frequent a given feature is in
the best classifiers. If this function has a fast growth for
low values of k, then it is a relevant feature because it
appears in the classifiers with the highest accuracy rates.
To quantify how frequent a given feature fi is among the
best classifiers, the following index of feature relevance
can be defined:
R(fi) =
2Φ−1∑
k=1
Ω(fi, k) =
2Φ−1∑
k=1
k∑
j=1
ω(fi, j). (14)
7
Unlike traditional index devised to measure the relevance
of attributes, the index defined in eq. (14) takes into
account the non-trivial inter-relationship between fea-
tures [71].
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we analyze the proposed technique for
discriminating informative and imaginative prose. We
also compare the proposed technique with other tradi-
tional natural language processing methods. In our ex-
periments, we used the Brown University Standard Cor-
pus of Present-Day American English (a.k.a. Brown Cor-
pus) [72]. Because the set of informative texts comprises
several short texts, for this class we have selected only
the 126 longest texts. As such, in our experiments, each
class is represented by the same number of instances.
Each class can also be classified in subclasses. The set of
informative texts used in this study comprises 80 scien-
tific manuscripts, 30 miscellaneous texts and 16 biogra-
phies and related subjects. The set of imaginative doc-
uments comprises general fiction, romances, love stories
and others. Note that we have not used this fine-grained
description in our experiments.
Complex network approach
Following the steps in the methodology, we created
a word adjacency network for each document in the
dataset. The topological measurements were extracted
and the 15 most relevant features were selected according
to the information gain criterion. In the global strategy,
the following features have been selected:
Vocabulary size: V ;
Degree connectivity: 〈k〉;
PageRank: P̃ r, 〈Pr〉, σ(Pr) and max(Pr);
Clustering coefficient: σ(cc) and 〈cc〉;
Closeness centrality: min(C), σ(C), 〈C〉 and C̃;
Generalized accessibility: 〈Ag〉; and
Betweenness centrality: 〈B〉 and B̃.
In this case, the accuracy rate reached a maximum
value of 78% with the Naive Bayes algorithm. Note
that this result is statistically significant, as the p-value
associated with this accuracy rate is p < 1.0 × 10−10.
The accuracy rate obtained for the other classifiers are
shown in the first row of Table I.
When the local strategy (LS) was used to perform
the classification, the accuracy rate improved by a large
margin: all three classifiers reached an accuracy rate of
92%. The largest improvement in performance occurred
for the KNN classifier; the accuracy rate went from 72%
to 92%. The features employed in this case were:
TABLE I. Accuracy rate obtained with the three proposed
network approaches. Note that, the most accurate results
occur when the
Complex network approach KNN CART Bayes
Global strategy without stopwords 72% 78% 75%
Local strategy without stopwords 92% 92% 92%
Local strategy with stopwords 95% 95% 95%
6 4 2 0 2 4 6 84
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Informative Prose
Imaginative Prose
First principal component
Se
co
nd
 p
rin
cip
al 
co
m
po
ne
nt
FIG. 3. Principal component analysis performed using local
topological properties in networks formed with stopwords. To
create the visualization, only the features with no correlation
with the frequency were used.
Backbone symmetry: Sb(h), for h = {2, 3, 4};
Merged symmetry: Sm(h), for h = {2, 3, 4}; and
Accessibility: A(h), for h = {2, 3}.
Note that these local measurements were chosen
because they do not correlate with the frequency. The
local strategy with stopwords (LSS) displayed an slight
better classification performance. In this case, the
accuracy rate reached 95% with KNN, CART, and Naive
Bayes classifiers. The principal component analysis
projection provided in Fig. 3 confirms the suitability of
this network model for discriminating informative from
imaginative prose. In this case, the features employed
were:
Backbone symmetry: Sb(h), for h = {2, 3, 4};
Merged symmetry: Sm(h), for h = {2, 3, 4};
Acessibility: A(h), for h = 2; and
Generalized accessibility: (Ag).
Note that, in both local strategies, the accuracy
rates in the classification are much higher than the
ones obtained with the global strategy, which suggests
that a few words account for the informativeness of the
topological approach. To better understand the factors
8
behind the network ability to discriminate informative
from imaginative prose, we evaluated the relative im-
portance of features employed in the best approach, i.e.
the local strategy with stopwords. The method employed
to quantify the relevance of features is described in
the methodology. According to this method, the most
relevant features, in decreasing order of relevance were:
(i) Merged symmetry: Sm(h=2)(the)
(ii) Merged symmetry: Sm(h=3)(by)
(iii) Backbone symmetry: Sb(h=4)(by)
(iv) Merged symmetry: Sm(h=3)(an)
(v) Generalized accessibility: Ag(have)
(vi) Merged symmetry: Sm(h=4)(by)
(vii) Generalized accessibility: Ag(it)
(viii) Generalized accessibility: Ag(by).
Note that the most relevant features are those re-
lated to the symmetry of specific words. Interestingly,
this is consistency with recent results showing that
symmetry measurements tend to be more discriminative
than other traditional network measurements [73].
It is relevant to highlight that most of the network ap-
proaches for text classification focus on the global prop-
erties of networks. Our results reveal, conversely, that
the informativeness of the topological strategy concen-
trates in a few nodes. Particularly, the informativeness
was found to be mostly hidden in the symmetry patterns
of specific function words. For this reason, we believe
that the local strategies (LS and LSS) could be useful
not only for the studied task, but also in several related
tasks, where the topology of specific words plays a promi-
nent role in characterizing texts.
Comparison with traditional methods
To compare the performance of the proposed technique
with other traditional techniques, we first analysed if the
classes can be discriminated via Latent Semantic Anal-
ysis [74], which considers as features the frequency of
words. The projection obtained with this technique is
shown in Fig. 4. Note that a good discrimination was ob-
tained in this case, mainly because some words are more
common in informative documents (e.g. state, system
and program, while others occur more often in imagina-
tive texts (e.g. say and mr.). A more accurate classifica-
tion system based on stylistic attributes can be created
if one considers as features the frequency of the most
informative stopwords. To select the most informative
stopwords, we used the information gain criterion. Using
the KNN classifier (the best classifier), the performance
reached 97% of accuracy. This high accuracy level can be
observed in the principal component analysis provided in
Fig. 5. Another traditional strategy in stylometry con-
sists in counting the frequency of character bigrams [27].
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.00.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Informative Prose
Imaginative Prose
Words
-0.029 -0.012 0.0050.04
0.08
0.12
state
saymr
getgosystem
school
program
mike
First dimension
Se
co
nd
 d
im
en
si
on
FIG. 4. Latent semantic analysis performed to distinguish
informative from imaginative prose. First ten more frequent
words were used as features. Note that the style can be identi-
fies by measuring the proximity to specific words. While state
and system characterize informative documents, say and mr.
characterize imaginative texts.
8 6 4 2 0 2 4 68
6
4
2
0
2
4
Informative Prose
Imaginative Prose
First principal component
Se
co
nd
 p
rin
cip
al 
co
m
po
ne
nt
FIG. 5. Principal component analysis performed to distin-
guish informative from imaginative prose. The frequency of
the most informative stopwords were used as features. Note
that the style developed in informative documents is much
more regular than the style observed in imaginative texts.
Considering the most informative bigrams, the accuracy
rate reached 98%. A visualisation of the data provided
by this set of features is shown in Fig. 6.
All in all, the results obtained with traditional classi-
fiers demonstrate that the local topological approach is
effective as our best results differs only 3% from the most
efficient traditional system. This result is consistent with
similar studies showing that the topology plays a relevant
role in characterising complex systems, especially those
conveying information [2, 12, 37, 44]. Because the pro-
posed representation is complementary to the traditional
approaches, we advocate that the combination of features
9
8 6 4 2 0 2 4 6 84
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Informative Prose
Imaginative Prose
First principal component
Se
co
nd
 p
rin
cip
al 
co
m
po
ne
nt
FIG. 6. Principal component analysis performed to distin-
guish informative from imaginative prose. The frequency of
character bigrams were used as features. As it happened in
Fig. 5, the variability of styles is much higher in imaginative
texts.
of distinct nature (traditional and topological) could lead
to the improvement of similar tasks relying on the accu-
rate characterisation of stylistic marks.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have evaluated the ability of network
measurements to identify two textual categories, which
are related to informative and imaginative documents.
We have extended previous models in a twofold manner.
First, the local topology of nodes representing specific
words was studied. We have thus emphasized partic-
ular network regions to characterize the local topology
of texts. This approach differs from previous networked
representations because traditional topological analyses
consider with equal relevance the topological analysis of
all nodes of the network. Another proposed extension
is the use of novel network measurements that are able
to grasp more relevant information than traditional mea-
surements. Particularly, we have used symmetry mea-
surements that are able to quantify the homogeneity of
access to neighbours. The concept of node degree was
also extended via introduction of accessibility measure-
ments, which are able to measure the effective number of
(accessed) neighbours.
Computational simulations revealed that the proposed
extensions are able to improve the efficiency of classi-
fication tasks. The best improvement in performance
when comparing the traditional model and the proposed
method occurred with the KNN classifier. An improve-
ment of 23% was observed, thus confirming the efficiency
of the proposed methodology. A systematic analysis of
feature relevance revealed that among the most infor-
mative attributes are the symmetry and accessibility in-
dexes applied to particular nodes. These results confirm
the complementary role played by these measurements in
characterizing text networks, since they do not correlate
with traditional natural language processing methods.
Owing to the generality of the proposed representation
and characterization, we believe that it could be extend
to a myriad of related applications where the quantifica-
tion of style is relevant for text categorization. As further
works, we intend to combine network methods and tra-
ditional statistical methods to improve the performance
of the classification. We expect, in this case, that the
interwoven combination of methodologies will be able to
overcome the limitations of each technique.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
HFA thanks CAPES for financial support. LdFC is
grateful to CNPq (Brazil) (grant no. 307333/2013-2),
FAPESP (grant no. 11/50761-2), and NAP-PRP-USP
for sponsorship. DRA acknowledges financial support
from São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) (grant
no. 14/20830-0).
∗ Corresponding author: diego@icmc.usp.br
[1] W. J. Hutchins and H. L. Somers, An introduction to
machine translation, Vol. 362 (Academic Press London,
1992).
[2] D. R. Amancio, M. G. Nunes, O. N. Oliveira, and L. d. F.
Costa, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica-
tions 391, 1855 (2012).
[3] C. C. Yang and F. L. Wang, Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 59, 887
(2008).
[4] K. Patil and P. Brazdil, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inform. Syst
2, 18 (2007).
[5] D. Marcu, The theory and practice of discourse parsing
and summarization (MIT press, 2000).
[6] Y.-L. Chen, Y.-H. Liu, and W.-L. Ho, Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy 64, 280 (2013).
[7] A. Singhal, IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 24, 35 (2001).
[8] K. Krippendorff, Content analysis: An introduction to its
methodology (Sage, 2012).
[9] F. Sebastiani, ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 34, 1
(2002).
[10] Y. Aphinyanaphongs, L. D. Fu, Z. Li, E. R. Peskin, E. Ef-
stathiadis, C. F. Aliferis, and A. Statnikov, Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technology
65, 1964 (2014).
[11] D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa,
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
391, 4406 (2012).
[12] D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. da Fon-
toura Costa, New Journal of Physics 14, 043029 (2012).
10
[13] D. Fetterly, M. Manasse, and M. Najork, in Proceed-
ings of the 7th International Workshop on the Web and
Databases: colocated with ACM SIGMOD/PODS 2004
(ACM, 2004) pp. 1–6.
[14] T. A. Meyer and B. Whateley, in CEAS (Citeseer, 2004).
[15] R. Navigli, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 41, 10
(2009).
[16] D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa,
EPL (Europhysics Letters) 98, 18002 (2012).
[17] T. C. Silva and D. R. Amancio, EPL (Europhysics Let-
ters) 98, 58001 (2012).
[18] Q. Miao, Q. Li, and D. Zeng, Journal of the american
society for information science and technology 61, 2288
(2010).
[19] S. A. Golder and M. W. Macy, Science 333, 1878 (2011).
[20] L. d. F. Costa, O. N. Oliveira Jr, G. Travieso, F. A.
Rodrigues, P. R. Villas Boas, L. Antiqueira, M. P. Viana,
and L. E. Correa Rocha, Advances in Physics 60, 329
(2011).
[21] M. E. J. Newman, Networks: An Introduction (Oxford
University Press, New York, 2010).
[22] R. F. i Cancho and R. V. Solé, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 268, 2261
(2001).
[23] L. Antiqueira, M. d. G. V. Nunes, O. Oliveira Jr, and
L. d. F. Costa, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications 373, 811 (2007).
[24] D. R. Amancio, S. M. Aluisio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and
L. d. F. Costa, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 100, 58002
(2012).
[25] D. R. Amancio, E. G. Altmann, D. Rybski, O. N.
Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa, PloS one 8, e67310
(2013).
[26] R. F. i Cancho, R. V. Solé, and R. Köhler, Physical
Review E 69, 051915 (2004).
[27] E. Stamatatos, Journal of the American Society for in-
formation Science and Technology 60, 538 (2009).
[28] R. Mihalcea and D. Radev, Graph-based natural language
processing and information retrieval (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2011).
[29] G. A. Miller, Communications of the ACM 38, 39 (1995).
[30] L. d. F. Costa, International Journal of Modern Physics
C 15, 371 (2004).
[31] J. Cong and H. Liu, Physics of life reviews 11, 598 (2014).
[32] B. B. Greene and G. M. Rubin, Automatic grammati-
cal tagging of English (Department of Linguistics, Brown
University, 1971).
[33] L. d. F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R.
Villas Boas, Advances in Physics 56, 167 (2007).
[34] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and
D.-U. Hwang, Physics reports 424, 175 (2006).
[35] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[36] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, Social networks 31, 155
(2009).
[37] D. R. Amancio, E. G. Altmann, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and
L. da Fontoura Costa, New Journal of Physics 13, 123024
(2011).
[38] L. Freeman, Sociometry 40, 35 (1977).
[39] M. E. J. Newman, Social networks 27, 39 (2005).
[40] S. P. Borgatti, Social networks 27, 55 (2005).
[41] L. C. Freeman, S. P. Borgatti, and D. R. White, Social
networks 13, 141 (1991).
[42] A. E. Motter and Y.-C. Lai, Physical Review E (2002).
[43] B. Mirzasoleiman, M. Babaei, M. Jalili, and M. Safari,
Physical Review E 84, 046114 (2011).
[44] D. R. Amancio, Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
and Experiment 2015, P03005 (2015).
[45] M. Girvan and M. E. Newman, Proceedings of the na-
tional academy of sciences 99, 7821 (2002).
[46] L. C. Freeman, Social networks 1, 215 (1979).
[47] E. Estrada, The structure of complex networks: theory
and applications (Oxford University Press, 2011).
[48] P. Bonacich, American journal of sociology , 1170 (1987).
[49] A. N. Langville and C. D. Meyer, Google’s PageRank and
beyond: the science of search engine rankings (Princeton
University Press, 2011).
[50] R. Mihalcea, P. Tarau, and E. Figa, in Proceedings of the
20th international conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004) p.
1126.
[51] B. A. N. Travençolo and L. d. F. Costa, Physics Letters
A 373, 89 (2008).
[52] C. E. Shannon, ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing
and Communications Review 5, 3 (2001).
[53] G. F. de Arruda, A. L. Barbieri, P. M. Rodríguez, F. A.
Rodrigues, Y. Moreno, and L. d. F. Costa, Physical Re-
view E 90, 032812 (2014).
[54] J. R. Finnerty, International Journal of Developmental
Biology 47, 523 (2003).
[55] H. Longuet-Higgins, Molecular Physics 6, 445 (1963).
[56] P. Holme, Physical Review E 74, 036107 (2006).
[57] L. Rossi, A. Torsello, E. R. Hancock, and R. C. Wilson,
Physical Review E 88, 032806 (2013).
[58] F. N. Silva, C. H. Comin, T. K. Peron, F. A. Rodrigues,
C. Ye, R. C. Wilson, E. Hancock, and L. d. F. Costa,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.0224 (2014).
[59] D. R. Amancio, F. N. Silva, and L. d. F. Costa, EPL
(Europhysics Letters) 110, 68001 (2015).
[60] M. E. J. Newman, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 103, 8577 (2006).
[61] T. M. Mitchell, Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw Hill 45 (1997).
[62] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information
Theory (Wiley Series in Telecommunications and Signal
Processing) (Wiley-Interscience, 2006).
[63] J. C. Krzysztof, W. S. Roman, and L. Kurgan, “Data
mining: A knowledge discovery approach,” (2007).
[64] C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning
(springer, 2006).
[65] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, C. J. Stone, and R. A. Olshen,
Classification and regression trees (CRC press, 1984).
[66] R. J. Lewis, in Annual Meeting of the Society for Aca-
demic Emergency Medicine in San Francisco, California
(2000) pp. 1–14.
[67] L. Getoor and B. Taskar, Introduction to statistical rela-
tional learning (MIT press, 2007).
[68] C. D. Manning and H. Schütze, Foundations of statistical
natural language processing (MIT press, 1999).
[69] D. R. Amancio, C. H. Comin, D. Casanova, G. Travieso,
O. M. Bruno, F. A. Rodrigues, and L. d. F. Costa, PloS
one 9, e94137 (2014).
[70] I. Guyon, Feature extraction: foundations and appli-
cations, Vol. 207 (Springer Science & Business Media,
2006).
[71] H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney, The annals of mathe-
matical statistics , 50 (1947).
[72] W. N. Francis and H. Kucera, Brown University (1979).
11
[73] C. H. Comin, F. N. Silva, and L. d. F. Costa, EPL
(Europhysics Letters) 110, 68002 (2015).
[74] S. T. Dumais, Annual review of information science and
technology 38, 188 (2004).
