DECOUR: a corpus of DEceptive statements in Italian COURts
Tommaso Fornaciari2, Massimo Poesio1,2
1 University of Essex, Language and Computation Group
2 University of Trento, Center for Mind/Brain Sciences
tommaso.fornaciari@unitn.it, massimo.poesio@unitn.it
Abstract
In criminal proceedings, sometimes it is not easy to evaluate the sincerity of oral testimonies. DECOUR - DEception in COURt corpus -
has been built with the aim of training models suitable to discriminate, from a stylometric point of view, between sincere and deceptive
statements. DECOUR is a collection of hearings held in four Italian Courts, in which the speakers lie in front of the judge. These hearings
become the object of a specific criminal proceeding for calumny or false testimony, in which the deceptiveness of the statements of
the defendant is ascertained. Thanks to the final Court judgment, that points out which lies are told, each utterance of the corpus has
been annotated as true, uncertain or false, according to its degree of truthfulness. Since the judgment of deceptiveness follows a judicial
inquiry, the annotation has been realized with a greater degree of confidence than ever before. Moreover, in Italy this is the first corpus
of deceptive texts not relying on ‘mock’ lies created in laboratory conditions, but which has been collected in a natural environment.
Keywords: Detecting deception, forensic linguistics, stylometry.
1. Introduction
Being able to detect deception in human interaction would
be useful for a number of applications in which impor-
tant decisions depend on the truthfulness of communica-
tion. However, finding reliable clues of deceptiveness is
difficult. Experimental evidence suggests that human per-
formance in recognizing deception is not much better than
chance (Bond and De Paulo, 2006). Furthermore, in some
studies human skills seem not to be particularly improved
even after specific training (Levine et al., 2005).
Regarding deceptive communication there are many studies
in literature in which verbal and non-verbal cues are taken
into consideration. These studies can be divided into two
main families, depending on how they solve the dilemma
of data collection: in real life or in laboratory conditions.
Both families of study present advantages and disadvan-
tages. Laboratory studies allow control of experimental
variables but, from a psychological point of view, they fo-
cus on ‘mock lies’: therefore their findings may not be ex-
tended to deception produced in real life. Instead, in field
studies psychological conditions of subjects are genuine,
but serious problems have to be faced. For example, in
cases where linguistic clues are considered, it is often diffi-
cult - and sometimes impossible:
• to collect data in standardized conditions;
• to set up balanced data set;
• to verify sincerity of the statements.
For these reasons, linguists often studied deceptiveness in
laboratory conditions. This is the case of Newman et al.
(2003) and Strapparava and Mihalcea (2009), who col-
lected corpora of sincere and deceptive texts coming from
written and spoken language, and analyzed them with in-
teresting results. The same approach has been employed in
the context of Computer-Mediated Communication (Han-
cock et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2004).
This focus on data collected in the laboratory is what led
Lina Zhou to complain about ‘the lack of data sets for eval-
uating deception detection models’ (Zhou et al., 2008). In
fact, one of the few examples of corpus collected in a natu-
ral environment regarding English language is represented
by Fitzpatrick’s study (Bachenko et al., 2008; Fitzpatrick
and Bachenko, 2009). Our goal was to produce a resource
to study deceptive language (for Italian) overcoming the
limitations said above.
In this paper we present the DECOUR corpus of deception
in testimonies in Italian courts. In Section 2 we show how
data have been collected; in Section 3 we describe how DE-
COUR corpus has been annotated; in Section 4 we summa-
rize the characteristics of DECOUR corpus and in Section 5
the results of the preliminary analyses are discussed.
2. Data collection
In order to study deceptive language, we tried to build a
corpus of texts:
• coming from a real life scenario;
• characterized by a strong psychological involvement
of the speakers;
• collected in standard conditions;
• of which the truthfulness or truthlessness was known.
We found a way to fulfill these requirements in a legal con-
text.
It happens in criminal proceedings that investigators inter-
view, more or less formally, several subjects who conse-
quently have the possibility to issue true or false statements.
In most cases the reports in which the testimonies are col-
lected do not bring back the words exactly pronounced by
the subjects, but represent a synthesis of their declarations,
carried out by the police officer who hears and records
1585
them. These reports are not a faithful mirror of the linguis-
tic behavior of the subjects, therefore they are not useful
from the point of view of the present work.
In some particularly serious cases, it is also possible that the
interrogation in front of the public prosecutor is recorded
and transcribed word by word. These interrogations could
be useful, but they are relatively rare and also difficult to
find because in the proceedings where they could be car-
ried out, they are not always. Above all, even when theo-
retically possible, to find external and objective evidences
of the truthfulness or deceptiveness of statements would be
very difficult from a practical point of view. In fact, these
evidences are usually dispersed in a lot of different and var-
ious investigative data, often in a huge amount.
Therefore the point was to find testimonies not only
recorded word by word, but also of which the truthfulness
or deceptiveness was easily verifiable.
2.1. Hearings
In Italian criminal proceedings there is a specific moment
in which all the testimonies are imperatively recorded word
by word: that is, the hearings that take place during the
debate in front of the judge. Furthermore, in some proceed-
ings the truthfulness or deceptiveness of the testimonies is
easily verifiable. It is the case of criminal proceedings ex
art. 368 and 372 of the Italian Criminal Code, that concerns
the crimes of ‘calumny’ and ‘false testimony’1. While the
concept of false testimony is intuitive, in Italian Criminal
Code calumny is a particular kind of false testimony, con-
sisting of the attempt to charge on someone else the respon-
sibility of a crime that has been committed. The distinc-
tion makes sense because in the Italian legal system nobody
can be forced to say some truth unfavorable to oneself. It
means that to lie about a committed crime is not a crime,
but it is so if trying to charge the responsibility to some-
one else. In order to collect this kind of data, contacts have
been taken with Courts in four Italian towns, with the aim
to be allowed to examine their dossiers and extract infor-
mation with scientific purposes. Authorizations have been
received to collect data, with the only restriction of using
them in anonymous form, in respect to the privacy of the
involved subjects.
The inquiries for calumny and false testimony usually orig-
inate from another previous proceeding, in which the de-
fendant or a witness takes part in a hearing and issues state-
ments that are found not reliable. In these cases, a new
1The art. 368 reads: “Chiunque, con denunzia, querela, richi-
esta o istanza, anche se anonima o sotto falso nome, diretta
all’Autorità giudiziaria o ad altra Autorità che a quella abbia ob-
bligo di riferirne, incolpa di un reato taluno che egli sa innocente,
ovvero simula a carico di lui le tracce di un reato, è punito con la
reclusione da due a sei anni.” In brief, it punishes whoever tries to
charge the responsibility of a crime on someone who he knows is
innocent.
Art. 372 instead reads: “Chiunque, deponendo come testimone
innanzi all’Autorità giudiziaria, afferma il falso o nega il vero,
ovvero tace, in tutto o in parte ciò che sa intorno ai fatti sui quali
è interrogato, è punito con la reclusione da due a sei anni.” This
article punishes someone who, in front of the Judicial Authority,
says a falsehood or denies the truth, or does not reveal what he
knows about the investigated facts.
criminal proceeding arises, aimed to establish if the sub-
ject committed the crime of calumny or of false testimony.
More rarely, the proceeding concerns statements which are
not issued in a hearing, but in circumstances in which the
words of the subjects are not recorded verbatim: typically,
this is the case of the complaints lodged to the police. Nev-
ertheless, in some cases the subjects, after having issued
unreliable statements in front of police, come to the court-
room and confirm in a hearing the same testimony previ-
ously given. This is the less frequent situation because peo-
ple who have lied during a hearing or in some other mo-
ment, have often the good sense of not repeating the crime
twice and in front of the judge.
In fact, since these proceedings are aimed at verifying if the
subject lied or not, they imply the development of inves-
tigative activities which make highly improbable the pos-
sibility of errors or bias in the identification of deceptive
statements. Also because in the presence of any reasonable
doubt about guilt, the defendant is acquitted. Furthermore,
in the Italian Criminal Code an essential part of the crime is
the so called ‘subjective element’, which refers to the fact
that not only the not truthfulness of the statements has to
be ascertained, but also the precise intent of the subject of
deceiving the Judicial Authority. In the end, the outcome of
these proceedings is a judgment that summarizes the facts
and, when the defendant is found guilty, points out in a cer-
tain, organic and exhaustive way the lies which he told.
In this way it has been feasible to create DECOUR, a cor-
pus of transcripts that contain the exact words pronounced
by the subjects in the hearings, and about which it is pos-
sible to reliably know the truthfulness. In particular, in or-
der to allow the study of deceptive language, DECOUR is
made of hearings where the subjects have effectively been
found guilty. To be more precise, in few cases the defen-
dants have been acquitted, but merely for procedural and
legal reasons: in every hearing which constitutes the cor-
pus, there are lies told by the defendant, and these lies are
recognized and clearly pointed out in the judgment.
3. Annotation
3.1. Mark up format
Hearings in Court are events strongly ritualized, with rules
determined by the Code of Criminal Procedure. It means
that the development of every hearing is highly regular,
almost like in an experimental design, giving the oppor-
tunity of collecting data in relatively homogeneous condi-
tions, even when the actors differ. The protagonist of each
hearing is the subject who gives the testimony. He answers
the questions posed by three other figures, who cannot be
absent from any hearing: the judge, the public prosecu-
tor and the defendant’s lawyer. Therefore, the considered
testimonies have the form of a dialogue, in which at least
four actors are present. It is possible that other actors in-
tervene, for example more than one public prosecutor, or
more than one defendant lawyer, or a lawyer for the victim
of the crime, or a police officer: but these are less frequent
cases.
Each text file that contains a testimony is transformed into
XML format, with the aim of marking up actions and words
of each participant. First, each XML has an header that
1586
contains some meta-information about the testimony, such
as place and date of the event, and about the speaker, such
as his age, sex, place of birth and if known - unfortunately,
not often - his level of instruction. The hearing properly
said begins with an introduction: a formal part of the re-
port which gives act to the introduction of the subject in
front of the judge and, if needed, of his availability to an-
swer the questions (to issue statements is an option for the
defendant, but is a duty for the witnesses). Then, the real
dialogue begins and each intervention of the different ac-
tors, delimited by the interventions of others participants,
is marked as turn. Each turn can be constituted of one or
more utterances, which are delimited by terminal punctu-
ation marks: this is the atomic analysis unit of DECOUR.
Into each turn, besides, some action carried out by the
speaker can be inserted, according to what is minuted in the
report. In the end, a conclusion can be present or not, with
some last ordering of the judge or some ending formulas.
3.2. Coding scheme
Each utterance issued by the speaker receives a label, which
concerns his degree of truthfulness. This annotation is car-
ried out by hand, on the basis of the information found in
the Court’s final judgment. Obviously, between the white
of the truth and the black of the falsity, there are wide grada-
tions of gray, and the judgment, that describes the facts and
points out the lies of the defendant, cannot give reason for
each statement issued in the courtroom. This is the reason
why the process of labeling the utterances of DECOUR fol-
lowed a path which represented the research of a trade-off
between opposite demands: the analytical representation of
their degree of truthfulness and the achievement of a sat-
isfying degree of agreement between different annotators,
regarding this evaluation.
First step, DECOUR has been labeled according to the fol-
lowing annotation scheme.
False Utterance pointed out in the judgment as false, or of
which the falsity is a logic consequence of some ascer-
tained lie, are taken as false. For example, if the sub-
ject claims to have not been somewhere with someone,
but actually he was, he also has to lie when he denies
having known the same person.
Anyway, even though the judgment gives certain
guidelines, it is not always easy to decide whether to
assign to an utterance the label false or not. In fact,
sometimes the meaning of linguistic behavior forces
the focus on the function of the utterance, rather than
on its literal sense. For example, from a theoreti-
cal point of view, questions do not represent any fact,
therefore in strict sense they cannot be considered ei-
ther true or false. But if a subject, pretending to not
know a person, and asked “Do you know Mr. Rossi?”,
answers “Is Mr. Rossi the person in front of me?”, the
function of his answer/question is to generate in the
judge a false representation of the reality, according to
which he would not know Mr. Rossi. So, this utter-
ance is considered a lie and labeled as false.
On the other end, some utterances which seem false,
from a logical point of view are instead true. In one
proceeding, for example, a subject claimed to be an
electronic engineer, while he had had a simple high
school education. In front of the lawyer who was say-
ing “You said you are an engineer...”, the witness com-
pleted the sentence saying “electronic”2. Obviously,
the fact that he was an engineer was false; but it was
true that he had said that he was an engineer: then this
answer was true, regarding the question posed.
True Utterances which are found coherent with the recon-
struction of the facts contained in the judgment, are
considered as true. Also the utterances which con-
cern something not considered in the sentence, be-
cause they are uninfluential in respect to the investi-
gated facts, are generally considered true.
For example, if the public prosecutor asks “For how
long have you been married to Mrs. Bianchi?”, and
the subject answers “For eight years”, this answer is
considered true, even though the judgment says noth-
ing about that, because there are no logical reasons to
lie on this detail.
Not reliable Utterances which concern the investigated
facts, but of which the truthfulness or deceptiveness
is not established by the judgment, are considered not
reliable. These utterances are related to some point
about which the speaker could have some interest to
lie, but the judgment does not provide the necessary
information to evaluate them.
An interesting fact is that some judgments establish
that the defendant was lying, when he had been claim-
ing to not remember something. In these cases, the
statements in which the subject says to not remem-
ber some specific event, are considered false. On the
other hand, obviously, there are (many) proceedings
in which it is not considered (or, at least, proved) as
a lie the fact that the subject claims to not remember
something. Also in this case, if the lack of memory is
related to something that does not concern the topic of
investigation, the utterance is considered sincere and
labeled as true; otherwise, if it is related to the object
of investigation, and the subject lying could defend his
own interests, it is considered not reliable.
True or not reliable This class of utterances is similar to
the not reliable ones. They are also related to the topic
of investigation, and the judgment does not provide
information about their truthfulness. Nevertheless, ac-
cording to the event and/or on the basis of a weak con-
nection with the interests that the speaker tries to de-
fend, common sense induces one to believe that these
utterances could be truth. The boundaries of this class
of utterances resulted in being too subjective, and this
caused problems of agreement between annotators, as
will be discussed in the next subsection.
2In Italian, unlike the English language, often adjectives fol-
low the noun (for example, “electronic engineer” is “ingegnere
elettronico”). Therefore the lawyer was just waiting for the wit-
ness to complete his sentence.
1587
False or not reliable This is the specular situation in re-
spect to the previous point: the only difference is that
the utterances seem to be false, even though their de-
ceptiveness has not been clearly established by the in-
quiries.
Undecidable Utterances that, from a logical point of view,
cannot be either true or false, are considered undecid-
able. Belonging to this class are questions, such as
“Excuse me, can you repeat?”, but also of several ut-
terances stopped in mid-sentence. This is also the case
of utterances which have meta-communicative func-
tion, and regulate the relations between actors, such as
“Now I’ll explain.” or “I would like to see you, if you
were me...” and so on.
3.3. Agreement evaluation
The first studies carried out on DECOUR (Fornaciari and
Poesio, 2011a,b) concerned preliminary analyses carried
out on data collected in only three Courts, which repre-
sented the first nucleus of DECOUR. Since the study re-
garding the agreement between different annotators was not
completed, these studies relied only on utterances held as
surely true or false, having discarded the other ones.
The agreement study regarding the coding scheme de-
scribed above was carried out employing three coders, each
of whom marked 605 utterances, which meant about 20%
of the final size of DECOUR. Kappa has been used as met-
ric to evaluate their agreement (Artstein and Poesio, 2008),
and its value was calculated under four different conditions,
as follows:
6 classes The agreement was calculated on the previous
coding scheme as it has been described;
4 classes The utterances marked up as true or not reliable
were collapsed into the class true, while the false or
not reliable utterances, in turn, were joined to the false
ones. Then the four classes became true, false, not
reliable and undecidable.
3 classes In this condition true and true or not reliable ut-
terances, false and false or not reliable, and lastly not
reliable and undecidable were respectively collapsed
together into the classes true, false, uncertain.
2 classes In the last condition, the false or not reliable ut-
terances were joined to the class false, while all the
remaining utterances were collapsed into the generic
class not false.
The values of Kappa under the different conditions are
shown in Table 1. The values of K for two classes indicate
a moderate to substantial agreement depending on whether
we choose the interpretation of K values proposed by Car-
letta (1996) or that proposed by Landis and Koch (1977).
Given that the fine-grained original annotation scheme was
not suitable to reach a satisfying agreement between coders,
in the end the whole DECOUR was annotated according to
the only three collapsed classes: true, uncertain and false.
Figure 1 shows an example of an XML file of DECOUR.
Table 1: Kappa values of the agreement studies.
Classes evaluated Kappa values
6 classes .40
4 classes .56
3 classes .57
2 classes .64
Table 2: Turns and utterances in DECOUR.
Figure Turns Utterances
Speakers 2094 3015
Public prosecutors 1002 1323
Judges 921 1201
Defendant lawyers 388 527
Police officers 3 4
Tot. 4408 6070
Table 3: Labels of DECOUR’s utterances.
Label Nr.
True 1202
Undecidable 868
False 945
Total 3015
4. Corpus statistics
DECOUR has been collected in the Courts of four Italian
towns: Bologna, Bolzano, Prato and Trento. It is consti-
tuted of 35 hearings, issued by 31 subjects. They appear 19
times as witnesses, 14 times as defendants, one time as ex-
pert witness and one time as victim of another crime. Their
mean age at the time of the hearing is slightly higher than
36. 23 are men, 7 women and one transgender. The re-
gion of birth is northern Italy for 12 of them, center for 2,
south for 9, while 8 subjects were foreigner but good Ital-
ian speakers. Lastly, the education is known only for six
subjects: four of them having a high school education, one
middle school and the last one elementary school.
Table 2 shows the number of turn and utterances of the par-
ticipants in the hearings. While the utterances of other fig-
ures are not taken into consideration, the 3015 utterances
of the speakers have been labeled as shown in Table 3: that
is DECOUR contains 31.34% of false, 39.87% of true and
28.79% of uncertain utterances.
In terms of tokens, the size of DECOUR, with and without
punctuation, is shown in Table 4. Punctuation marks are
considered in blocks: this means, for example, that a single
dot and the three dots of the ellipsis are both considered as
a single token.
5. Conclusion
DECOUR is the first linguistic resource in Italian contain-
ing sincere and deceptive statements collected in a natu-
ral environment. Therefore, the only possible comparisons
concerned previous studies related to different language. In
1588
Figure 1: An example of XML file of DECOUR. Also lemmas and part-of-speech (POS) are embodied into the XML files.
Table 4: DECOUR’s size.
Utterances Tokens
With punct. Without punct.
Mean Tot. Mean Tot.
True 12.86 15456 10.67 12847
Uncertain 12.02 10439 9.99 8669
False 16.85 15924 14.15 13376
Total 41819 34892
fact, the first preliminary analyses (Fornaciari and Poesio,
2011a) were aimed at replicating a well known study of
Newman et al. (2003), in which lexical features were em-
ployed in order to classify texts as truthful or untruthful.
The results showed that it was possible to train models with
the ability to classify true and false utterances with a degree
of accuracy at 72/73%, from a baseline of 60%. A sec-
ond study, in which surface features were employed with
the same goal, analogous results were found (Fornaciari
and Poesio, 2011b). A third study (Fornaciari and Poesio,
2012) will show that removing outliers from the corpus im-
proves the models’ performance. This last paper, currently
in press, is the first in which the analyses are carried out
not on the subset of utterances held as true or false, but on
all the utterances of DECOUR, divided into the two classes
false and not false. So grouped, the data are evidently more
noisy, and the models’ performance suffers from this. Nev-
ertheless, the overall accuracy is 6% above the baseline.
Therefore the first results of the analyses on DECOUR sug-
gest that, even though the analysis units are extremely short
texts, stylometric techniques can be successfully applied in
order to train models aimed to distinguish deceptive from
truthful language.
1589
Acknowledgements
To create DECOUR has been very complex, and it would
not have been possible without the kind collaboration of a
lot of people. Many thanks to Dr. Francesco Scutellari,
President of the Court of Bologna, to Dr. Heinrich Zanon,
President of the Court of Bolzano, to Dr. Francesco An-
tonio Genovese, President of the Court of Prato and to Dr.
Sabino Giarrusso, President of the Court of Trento.
References
Artstein, R. and Poesio, M. (2008). Inter-coder agree-
ment for computational linguistics. Comput. Linguist.,
34(4):555–596.
Bachenko, J., Fitzpatrick, E., and Schonwetter, M. (2008).
Verification and implementation of language-based de-
ception indicators in civil and criminal narratives. In Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ‘08, pages
41–48, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Bond, C. F. and De Paulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of De-
ception Judgments. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 10(3):214–234.
Carletta, J. (1996). Assessing agreement on classification
tasks: the kappa statistic. Comput. Linguist., 22(2):249–
254.
Fitzpatrick, E. and Bachenko, J. (2009). Building a foren-
sic corpus to test language-based indicators of deception.
Language and Computers, 71(1):183–196.
Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2011a). Lexical vs. surface
features in deceptive language analysis. In Proceedings
of the ICAIL 2011 Workshop Applying Human Language
Technology to the Law, AHLTL 2011, pages 2–8, Pitts-
burgh, USA.
Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2011b). Sincere and de-
ceptive statements in italian criminal proceedings. In
Proceedings of the International Association of Foren-
sic Linguists Tenth Biennial Conference, IAFL 2011,
Cardiff, Wales, UK.
Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2012). On the use of ho-
mogenous sets of subjects in deceptive language analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Deception Detection, EACL
2012. In press.
Hancock, J. T., Curry, L. E., Goorha, S., and Woodworth,
M. (2008). On Lying and Being Lied To: A Linguistic
Analysis of Deception in Computer-Mediated Commu-
nication. Discourse Processes, 45(1):1–23.
Landis, R. J. and Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement
of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics,
33(1):159–174.
Levine, T. R., Feeley, T. H., McCornack, S. A., Hughes,
M., and Harms, C. M. (2005). Testing the Effects of
Nonverbal Behavior Training on Accuracy in Deception
Detection with the Inclusion of a Bogus Training Control
Group. Western Journal of Communication, 69(3):203–
217.
Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry, D. S., and
Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying Words: Predicting De-
ception From Linguistic Styles. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 29(5):665–675.
Strapparava, C. and Mihalcea, R. (2009). The Lie Detector:
Explorations in the Automatic Recognition of Deceptive
Language. In Proceeding ACLShort ’09 - Proceedings of
the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers.
Zhou, L., Burgoon, J. K., Nunamaker, J. F., and
Twitchell, D. (2004). Automating Linguistics-Based
Cues for Detecting Deception in Text-based Asyn-
chronous Computer-Mediated Communication. Group
Decision and Negotiation, 13(1):81–106.
Zhou, L., Shi, Y., and Zhang, D. (2008). A Statistical Lan-
guage Modeling Approach to Online Deception Detec-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering, 20(8):1077–1081.
1590
