  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
 
    
IJFEAT 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL FOR ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
Introduction to Forensic Email Miner Analyzer 
 
Ms. Devika Deshmukh
1
, Mr. Sandip Kamble
2
, Mr Jagdish Chakole
3
, Mrs. Pranali Dandekar
4 
 
1Department of Computer Technology, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering & Research, Nagpur RTMNU, Nagpur, devikabdeshmukh@gmail.com 
2DepartmentofComputer Technology, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering & Research, Nagpur RTMNU, Nagpur, sandippkamble129@gmail.com 
3Department of Computer Technology, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering & Research, Nagpur RTMNU, Nagpurjagdishchakole@gmail.com,  
4Department of MCA, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering & Research, Nagpur RTMNU, Nagpur,pranalimeshram@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract - 
E-mail now has become an essential part of communication in 
revolutionized business, academics and personal life. There are so many 
advantages of e-mail which includes delivery at faster rate, provides a 
easy way of communication, reduced cost increases   effectiveness, 
geographical independence, and the portability of mailboxes. The last 
two are the biggest advantages over snail mail. However, with e-mail 
comes the threat of a genuine user being compromised through key 
loggers,  social  engineering,  shoulder  surfing,  password  guessing  and 
other similar, though less technical, methods. This passive espionage can 
have  a  direct  impact  on  the  genuine  user  in  terms  of  denial  of 
information,  loss of money,  loss  of  time,  mental  harassment  and  an 
attack of personal privacy. Various methods and approaches were used 
by the scientists for classification of email messages in above categories. 
The general idea is to convert email into text file. We emphasize that the 
presented problem together with our proposed solution is different from 
the  traditional  email  mining  technique’s  Our  project  is  particularly 
useful in the initial stage of investigation, in which the investigator finds 
a person using specific writeprint. 
 
Index Terms - E-mail Request for Comment. MIME, Email 
Mining Set 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Standing out in the e-mail storming is a challenge. 
By 2013 approximately 507 billion e-mail messages will be 
sent each day, according to the Radicati Group Inc., a 
California-based tech research firm. Even now an e-mail is 
sent every 0.00000035 seconds. As the popularity of email 
increased, it becomes an important form of communication 
for   many   computer   users,   for   both   legitimate   and 
illegitimate activities.  Legitimate  activities  are  like 
messages and document exchanges which are also misused 
eg., distribution of junk mails, unauthorized conveyance of 
subtle information, mailing of offensive or threatening 
material. 
 
Email system is inherently vulnerable to misuse for three 
main reasons. First, an email can be took off and metadata 
contained in its header about the sender and the path along 
which the message has travelled can be forged or anonymzed. 
An email can be routed through anonymous e-mail servers to 
hide the information about its origin. Second, e-mail systems 
are capable for transportation of executables, hyperlinks, 
Trojan horses, and  scripts,  and  viruses. Third, the  internet 
including email services is accessible through public places, 
such as cyber cafe and libraries. Therefore there is a great 
need of forensic analysis of email [1]. 
  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
A.   Objective 
 
Email can be the powerful evidence of most of the 
crime and write print analysis so the aim of this project is to 
help in finding anonymous email sender for Cybercrime 
investigation and evidence collection. The main objective of 
this project is: 
    Study of email conversion software. 
    Conversion of email into text file. 
    Pre-processing of text file. 
    Finding a person using specific write print. 
 
 
B.   Motivation 
 
E-mail has revolutionized business, academic, and personal 
communication. The advantages of e-mail include speedy 
delivery, ease of communication, cost effectiveness, 
geographical independence, and the portability of mailboxes. 
The last two are the biggest advantages over snail mail. 
However, with e-mail comes the threat of a genuine user being 
compromised   through   key   loggers,   social   engineering, 
shoulder surfing, password guessing and other similar, though 
less technical, methods. This passive espionage can have a 
direct impact on the genuine user in terms of denial of 
information, loss of money, loss of time, mental harassment 
and an attack of personal privacy. To enable digital forensic 
analysis  of  e-mails,  we  propose  a  forensic  email  miner 
analyser which finds a person with specific writeprint. 
 
C.   Email 
 
Electronic mail, commonly known as email or e-mail, is 
a method of exchanging digital messages from an author to 
one or more recipients. Ray Tomlinson is generally credited 
as having sent the first email across a network, initiating the 
use of the "@" sign to separate the names of the user and the 
user's machine in 1971.Modern email operates across the 
internet or other computer networks. Today's email systems 
are based on a store-and-forward model. Email servers 
accept,  forward,  deliver  and  store  messages  [B1,  P1]. 
Emails have specific format which is defined in 
RFC(Request for Comment) 5322, with multi-media content 
attachments being defined in RFC 2045 through RFC 2049, 
  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
 
 
 
collectively called Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions or 
MIME. 
 
D.   Working of email 
 
Email relies on two basic communications protocols: 
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), which is used 
to  send  messages and  POP3  (Post  Office  Protocol), 
which is used to receive messages. A simplified version 
of the email life cycle can be seen in Fig. 1. The most 
important logical elements of the Internet Mail System 
are: 
 
   Mail User Agent (MUA): It is responsible for helping 
the user to read and write email messages. The MUA is 
usually implemented in software usually referred to as 
―email client‖. Popular email clients are Microsoft 
Outlook2 and Mozilla Thunderbird3, claws mail, Zimbra 
Collaboration Suite etc. These programs transform a text 
message into the appropriate internet format in order for 
the message to reach its destination. 
 
  Mail   Transfer   Agent   (MTA):   It   accepts   
a message passed to it by either an MUA or another MTA 
and then decides for the appropriate delivery method and 
the route that the mail should follow. It uses the SMTP 
protocol  to  send  the  message  to  another  MTA  or  an 
MDA. 
 
  Mail    Delivery    Agent    (MDA):    It    
receives messages from MTAs and  delivers them to  
the  user‘s mailbox in the user‘s mail server. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Life cycle of an Email [P1] 
 
 
   Mail Retrieval Agents (MRA): It fetches mail 
messages from the user‘s mail server to the user‘s local 
inbox. MRAs are often embedded in email clients [2]. 
 
 
E.   Preliminary Information 
Often, the investigator is provided with just a collection of 
anonymous suspicious e-mails and is asked to collect 
forensically  relevant  evidence  from  those  unknown 
messages. Our proposed method can be used to initiate the 
investigation process by identifying groups of stylistics. The 
hypothesis  is  that  every  author  has  a  unique  (or  nearly 
unique) writing style and clustering by stylo metric features 
can group together e-mails of the same author. 
 
 
 
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
A.   Automated forensic examination 
Many criminals exploit the convenience of 
anonymity in the cyber world to conduct illegal activities. 
E-mail is the most commonly used medium for such 
activities. Extracting knowledge and information from e- 
mail text has become an important step for cybercrime 
investigation and evidence collection. According to the 
survey of  Radicati  group  from  2013,  507  billion e-mail 
messages will be sent each day. As the popularity of email 
increased, it becomes an important form of communication 
for   many   computer   users,   for   both   legitimate   and 
illegitimate activities.  Legitimate  activities  are  like 
messages and document exchanges which are also misused 
eg. distribution of junk mails, unauthorized conveyance of 
sensitive information, mailing of offensive or threatening 
material. 
Email  system is  inherently vulnerable to  misuse  for 
three main reasons. First, an email can be spoofed and 
metadata contained in its header about the sender and the 
path along which the message has travelled can be forged or 
anonymzed. An email can be routed through anonymous 
e-mail servers to hide the information about its origin. 
Second, e-mail systems are capable of transporting 
executables, hyperlinks, Trojan horses, and scripts. Third, 
the internet including email services is accessible through 
public places, such as net cafe and libraries.  Hence there is 
a need of email mining. 
 
B.          Email Mining 
 
Email mining can be considered as mining of data 
embedded in header and or  body of the email message. 
Various text mining techniques which extract unknown and 
useful information from huge set of emails can be employed 
to achieve email mining. Email Mining can be considered as 
an  application  of  the  upcoming  research  area  of  Text 
Mining (TM or also known as Knowledge Discovery from 
Textual Data) on email data. However, there are some 
specific characteristics of email data that set a distinctive 
separating line between Email and Text Mining: 1. Email 
includes additional information in the headers of email that 
can be exploited for various email mining tasks. 2. Text in 
email is significantly shorter and, therefore, some Text 
Mining techniques might be inefficient in email data. 3. 
Email is often cursorily written and, thus, linguistic well- 
formedness is not guaranteed [P1]. Spelling and grammar 
mistakes as well as nonstandard user acronyms also appear 
frequently. 4. Email is personal and therefore generic 
techniques are  difficult to  be  effective to  individuals. 5. 
Email is a  data stream targeted to  a  particular user and 
  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Lexical: 
character-based 
1. Character count (N) 
2. Ratio of digits to N 
3. Ratio of letters to N 
4. Ratio of uppercase letters to N 
5. Ratio of spaces to N 
6. Ratio of tabs to N 
7.  Occurrences  of  alphabets  (A-Z) 
(26 features) 
8. Occurrences of special characters: 
< > % j { } 
[ ]/ \ @ # w þ _ * $ ^ & O (21 
features) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Lexical: 
word-based 
1. Token count(T) 
2.Average sentence length in terms 
of characters 
3.Average token length 
4.Ratio of characters in words to N 
5.Ratio    of    short    words    (1e3 
characters) to T 
6.  Ratio  of  word  length  frequency 
distribution to T (20 features) 
7.Ratio of types to T 
8.Vocabulary   richness   (Yule‘s   K 
measure) 
9.Hapax legomena 
10.Hapax dislegomena 
 
 
3 
 
Syntactic 
Features 
1. Occurrences of punctuations, . ? ! : 
; ‘ ‖ 
(8 features). 
2. Occurrences of function words 
(303 features) 
 
 
concepts or distributions of target classes of the messages 
may  change  over  time,  with  respect  to  the  messages 
received by that user.   6. Email will probably have noise. 
HTML tags and attachments must be removed in order to 
apply a text mining technique. In some other cases, noise is 
intensively inserted. In spam filtering for example, noisy 
words and phrases are inserted, in order to mislead machine 
learning algorithms. 7. It is rather difficult to have public 
email data for experiments, due to privacy issues. This is a 
drawback especially for research since comparative studies 
cannot be conducted without public available datasets. An 
exception to the above statement is the Enron Corpus (Klimt 
& Yang, 2004), which was made public after a legal 
investigation concerning the Enron Corporation [P1, W3]. 
 
 
III. RELATED WORK 
 
A.   Stylometric features 
 
Traditionally, fingerprints were used to  uniquely 
identify criminals. In the present era of computer and 
worldwideweb, the nature of most crimes as well as the 
tools used to commit crimes has changed. Traditional tools 
and techniques may no longer be applicable in prosecuting 
cyber criminals in a court of law. Stylistics or the study of 
stylometric features shows that individuals can be identified 
by  their  relatively consistent  writing  styles.  The  writing 
style of an individual is defined in terms of word usage, 
selection of special characters, composition of sentences and 
paragraphs and organization of sentences into paragraphs 
and paragraphs into documents. 
 
Though, there is no such features set that are optimized 
and is applicable equally to all people and in all domains. 
However, previous authorship studies (Baayen et al., 1996; 
Burrows, 1987; de Vel et al., 2001; Zheng et al., 2003b) 
contain lexical, syntactic, structural and content-specific 
features. A brief description and the relative discriminating 
capability of each type of these features are given below. 
Lexical features are used to learn about the preferred 
use of isolated characters and words of an individual. Some 
of the commonly used character-based features are indexed 
1e8 in Table 1. These include frequency of individual 
alphabets (26 letters of English), total number of upper case 
letters, capital letters used in the beginning of sentences, 
average number of characters per word, and average number 
of  characters  per  sentence.  The  use  of  such  features 
indicates the preference of an individual for certain special 
characters or symbols or the preferred choice of selecting 
certain units. For instance, some people prefer to use ‗$‘ 
symbol instead of word ‗dollar‘, ‗%‘ for ‗percent‘, and ‗#‘ 
instead of writing the word ‗number‘. 
 
 
TABLE I 
SOME LEXICAL & SYNTACTIC FEATURES 
Sr. 
No.          
Feature Types                                   Features
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Word-based features including word length distribution, 
words per sentence, and vocabulary richness were very 
effective in earlier authorship studies (Yule, 1938, 1944; 
Holmes, 1998). Recent studies on e-mail authorship analysis 
(de Vel et al., 2001; Zheng et al., 2006) indicate that word- 
based stylometry such as vocabulary richness is not very 
effective due to two reasons. First, e-mail messages and 
online documents are very short compared to literary and 
poetry works. 
Second, word-oriented features are mostly context 
dependent and  can  be  consciously controlled by people. 
Syntactic   features,   called   style   markers,   consist   of 
allpurpose function words such as ‗though‘, ‗where‘, ‗your‘, 
punctuation such as  ‗!‘ and ‗:‘, parts-of-speech tags and 
hyphenation (see Table 1). Mosteller and Wallace (1964) 
were the first who showed the effectiveness of the so-called 
function words in addressing the issue of Federalist Papers. 
Burrows (1987) used 30e50 typical function words for 
authorship attribution. Subsequent studies (Baayen et al., 
1996) validated the discriminating power of punctuation and 
function words. Zheng et al. (2006) have used more than 
300  function  words.  Stamatatos et  al.  (2000)  have  used 
frequencies  of  parts-of-speech tags,  passive  account  and 
nominalization count for authorship analysis and document 
genre identification. 
Structural features are helpful in learning about how an 
individual organizes the layout and structure of his/her 
documents.  For  instance,  how  are  sentences  organized 
within paragraphs and paragraphs within documents. 
Structural features were first  suggested by de  Vel  et  al. 
  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
 
 
 
(2001)   (Corney   et   al.,   2002)   for   e-mail   authorship 
attribution. In  addition to  the  general  structural features, 
they used features specific to e-mails such as the 
presence/absence  of  greetings  and  farewell  remarks  and 
their  position  within  the  e-mail  body.  Moreover,  some 
people use first/last name as a signature while others prefer 
to include their job title and mailing address as well within 
e-mails. Malicious e-mails contain no signature and in some 
cases may contain fake signatures. Content-specific features 
are used to characterize certain activities, discussion forums 
or interest groups by a few keywords or terms. For instance, 
people involving in cybercrimes (spamming, phishing, and 
intellectual  property  theft)  commonly  use  (street  words) 
‗snow‘,  ‗download‘,  ‗click  here‘  and  ‗safe‘  etc.  Usually 
term taxonomy built for one domain is not applicable in 
other domain and even vary from person to person in the 
same domain. Zheng et al. (2003b, 2006) used around 11 
keywords (such a ‗for sale‘, and ‗obo‘ etc.) from the 
cybercrime taxonomy in authorship analysis 
experimentations. A  more  comprehensive list  of  stylistic 
features including idiosyncratic features is used in Abbasi 
and Chen (2008). 
 
Idiosyncratic Features include common spelling mistakes 
such as transcribing ‗f‘ instead of ‗ph‘ say in phishing and 
grammatical mistakes such as sentences containing incorrect 
form of verbs. The list of such characteristics varies from 
person to person and is difficult to control. Gamon (2004) 
claims to have achieved high accuracy by combining certain 
features including parts-of-speech trigrams, function word 
frequencies and features derived from semantic graphs. 
B.   Email Attacks 
 
Historically, the spam conversion pipeline started with lists 
of email addresses used by associated bots to deliver 
messages (see Stage A in Figure 1). Upon receipt, anti-spam 
engines correctly identify and block the vast majority of 
threat messages (Stage B). The messages that make it past 
the spam filters end up in the user‘s mailbox as supposedly 
legitimate messages. Knowledgeable users often ignore the 
spam messages and open only a small percentage of them 
(Stage C). Of these, only a fraction of users will click 
through (Stage  D)  and  finally be  ―converted‖ (Stage  E) 
when   the   unsuspecting   user   purchases   products   or 
downloads malware. As cybercriminal activity continues to 
evolve, the specific    attacks and their impact to 
organizations also change. 
 
 
IV. PROPOSED METHOD 
 
This project will extract knowledge from email text, classify 
email messages in different categories and will give 
cybercrime investigation and evidence collection. Analysis 
of write prints mining to find person through their writing 
pattern. This will help us in analyzing gender, mentality, 
age, profession, nationality etc. of any person through their 
email. This paper briefs you with the   general idea of our 
proposed method, and can be summarized in five phases (1) 
Pretreatment: includes extracting e-mail body and applying 
standard preprocessing techniques of cleaning, tokenization, 
and stemming. At the end of first phase, a list of all the 
tokens  including  stemmed  words  is  obtained.  (2) 
Stylometric features extraction: is employed to identify the 
pertinent writing style features found in the anonymous e- 
mail dataset. Then each e-mail is converted into a vector of 
numbers. (3) Stylometry-based clustering: is applied to 
identify major groups of  stylistics belonging to  different 
authors. (4) Frequent patterns mining: is applied to unveil 
hidden association among different stylometric features. (5) 
Writeprint mining: provided that  each  cluster  of  e-mails 
obtained in phase three is written by the same 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 2: Mining Writeprints from anonymous Emails 
author, we can extract the writeprint from each cluster that 
represent the unique writing style of one author. 
 
V. Conclusion 
 
Many criminals exploit the convenience of anonymity 
in the cyber world to conduct serious offences activities. E- 
mail is such a kind of medium commonly used for such 
activities. Taking out knowledge and information from e- 
mail  text  has  become  an  important  step  for  cybercrime 
  NCRCCS-15                                                                                             ISSN: 2321-8134                                                          
http: // www.ijfeat.org(C) International Journal For Engineering Applications and Technology 
 
investigation and collection of evidences. Yet, it is one of 
the most challenging and time consuming tasks due to 
special characteristics of e-mail dataset. Some spam filters 
used contents of emails; some used link information, while 
others used behavioural information. Our notion of 
writeprint, presented in  the  form of  frequent patterns, is 
suitable for forensic purposes. Due to its intuitiveness, non- 
technical personnel including the judge and jury in a law 
court can understand it. Experimental results on real-life 
data suggest that our proposed approach, together with the 
concept of stylometric–feature-based writeprint, is effective
 
for identifying the author of online text messages and for 
characterizing an unknown author. Its key advantage is that 
it is economical and efficient security without costly 
hardware, which can be customized. Its passive in nature, 
requiring no special skills and offering forensic aspect 
implementation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Mrs.  Pranjal  S.  Bogawar1,  Dr.  Kishor.  K.  Bhoyar  Email 
Mining: A Review, 2IJCSI International Journal of Computer 
Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 1, No 1, January 2012 PP 429-434 
[2] Li H, Shen D, Zhang B, Chen Z, Yang Q, ―Adding semantics 
to   email   clustering‖   In:   Proc.   of   the   6th   international 
conference on data mining (ICDM), Washington, DC, USA: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2006a 
[3] Iqbal, Farkhund and Binsalleeh, Hamad and Fung, Benjamin 
C.M. and Debbabi, Mourad (2010) Mining writeprints from 
anonymous e-mails for forensic investigation. Digital 
Investigation, 7 (1-2). pp. 56-64. ISSN 17422876M. King and 
B. Zhu, ―Gaming strategies,‖ in Path Planning to the West, vol. 
II, S. Tang and M. King, Eds. Xian: Jiaoda Press, 1998, pp. 
158-176. 
[4]   Salvatore J. Stolfo, Sholomo Hershkop, Chia-Wei Hu, Wei- 
Jen Li, Olivier Nimeskern, and Ke Wang, ― Behavior Based 
Modeling and its Application to Email Analysis ‖,ACM 
transactions on Internet technology, May 2006. 
[5]   Yong  Hu,  Ce  Guo,  Xiangzhou  Zhang  Zhihui  Guo,  Jing 
Zhang, Xiaojuan He, ―An Intelligent Spam Filtering System 
Based on Fuzzy Clustering‖, Sixth International Conference 
on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, 2009. 
[6]   Chun Wei, Alan Spragur, Gary Warner, Anthony Skjellum, 
―Mining   spam  Email   to   identify  Common   Origins   for 
Forensic Applications‖, ACM, 2008. 
[7]   Salvatore  J.  Stolfo,  Sholomo  Hershkop,Ke  Wang,  Oliver 
NImeskern, Chia Wei Hu, ― Behavior Profiling of Email‖, ISI 
2003. 
[8]   Salvatore J. Stolfo, Shlomo Hershkop, ―Email Mining Toolkit 
Supporting Law enforcement Forensic Analyses‖, ACM 
international conference Proceeding series, 2005. 
[9]   Baayen RH, Van Halteren H, Tweedie FJ. Outside the cave of 
shadows: ―using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship 
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing‖, 1996. 
[10] Burrows JF., ― Word patterns and story shapes: the statistical 
analysis    of    narrative    style.‖    Literary    and    Linguistic 
Computing, 1987. 
[11] de Vel O, Anderson A, Corney M, Mohay G,‖ Mining e-mail 
content for author identification forensics‖, International 
Journal of Computer Applications, 2001. 
[12] Zheng R, Qin Y, Huang Z, Chen H. ―Authorship analysis in 
cybercrime investigation‖,   In: Proc. of the 1st International 
symposium on Intelligence and security informatics (ISI), 
Tucson, Arizona, 2003. 
[13] Yule GU, ―On sentence length as a statistical characteristic of 
style in prose‖ Biometrika, 1938. 
[14] Holmes  D,  ―The  evolution  of  stylometry  in  humanities. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing‖, 1998. 
[15] Zheng  R,  Li  J,  Chen  H,  Huang  Z,  ―  A  framework  for 
authorship identification of online messages: writing-style 
features   and   classification   technique‖,.   Journal   of   the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology 
Februar, 2006. 
[16] Mosteller F, Wallace DL, ―Inference and disputed authorship: 
the federalist. In: behavioral science:quantitative methods 
edition‖  Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley; 1964. 
[17] Stamatatos E, Kokkinakis G, Fakotakis N, ― Automatic text 
categorization in terms of genre and author‖,  Computational 
Linguistics, 2000. 
[18] Corney  M,  de  Vel  O,  Anderson  A,  Mohay  G,  ―Gender- 
preferential text mining of e-mail discourse‖,  In: Proc. of the 
18th Annual computer security applications conference, 2002. 
[19] Li H, Shen D, Zhang B, Chen Z, Yang Q, ―Adding semantics 
to   email   clustering‖  In:   Proc.  of  the  6th   international 
conference on data mining (ICDM), Washington, DC, USA: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2006a. 
[20] Stolfo  SJ,  Creamer  G,  Hershkop  S,  ―  A  temporal  based 
forensic analysis of electronic communication‖,. In: Proc. of 
the  international  conference  Digital  Government  Research, 
2006. 
[21] Aaronson S, ―Stylometric clustering, a comparative analysis 
of data-driven and syntactic feature‖, Technical report. 
Berkeley                                   UC,                                   1999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
