	

	
    	           
    ! ! " #  ! $ % !   $  &  ' ( ! ) 
 ! * * +  ! !  !  &  + ' " ' !  
 
Devshri Roy, Sudeshna Sarkar and Sujoy Ghose 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India 
droy@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in; sudeshna@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in; sujoy@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in 
 
The use of ICTs for education has expanded dramatically in all sectors of education. Traditional computer aided 
instruction systems are designed to provide students with instructions in a particular area. The lessons are fixed 
and not adapted to the student’s knowledge level or aptitude. Recognizing the deficiencies of traditional CAI 
systems, intelligent tutoring systems were subsequently developed which attempt to select the learning material 
for presentation on the basis of the knowledge level of a student. The objective of intelligent tutoring system is 
similar to a teacher’s objective. In case of tutoring systems, the students should be provided documents in a 
hierarchical order from lower to higher complexity, such that the student can gain more knowledge about a 
topic.  
 
To provide documents to the students, it should be classified into four types (explanation, application, 
experiment and exercise) based on Bloom’s taxonomy and stored in the repository of the tutoring system. 
Document classification can be done in two ways, manually or automatically. Manual document classification is 
a very time consuming and tedious job. It requires much effort. A tool for automatic classification which 
classifies documents automatically into different types was developed using neural network for automatic 
classification. The tool enabled classification of documents with the accuracy of 92%. 

	

 
The use of ICT for education has expanded dramatically in all sectors of education over last few 
years. Traditional computer aided instruction systems are designed to provide students with 
instructions in a particular area. The lessons are fixed and not adapted to the student’s knowledge 
level or aptitude. Recognizing the deficiencies of traditional CAI systems, intelligent tutoring systems 
were subsequently developed which attempt to select the learning material for presentation on the 
basis the knowledge level of a student. The objective of intelligent tutoring system is similar to a 
teacher’s objective. When a teacher teaches in a classroom, he/she delivers his lecture in increasing 
order of complexity. S/he first gives basic information, then explanation and analysis about any topic. 
Similarly, in case of tutoring systems, the students should be provided documents in a hierarchical 
order from lower to higher complex, such that the student can gain more intellectual knowledge about 
a topic.  
 
In 1956, educational psychologist Benjamin Bloom (1956) had developed a classification of 
educational goals and objectives. The major idea of Bloom’s taxonomy is to arrange the educational 
objective in a hierarchy from lesser complex to more complex. He identified six levels the in 
cognitive domain. The six levels are knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and 
evaluation. In our tutoring system, we have adapted some of the classes described in Bloom’s 
taxonomy and classified documents into four different types namely Explanation, application, 
experiment and exercise.  
 
For a given topic, the tutoring system provides documents of all above types, so that a student can 
gain total knowledge about that topic. In order to provide documents to the students, they should be 
classified into types and stored in the repository of the tutoring system. Document classification can 
be done in two ways, manually or automatically. Manual document classification is a very time 
consuming and tedious job. It requires much effort for the author. To overcome overloading of the 
author, we have implemented a tool for automatic classification, which classifies documents into 
different types automatically using a neural network. 
 
 
 
 2 

 
In our system for automatic document classification, different observable properties of text genre have 
been used as features. Some of the related work on text genre used for text summarization and 
classification are discussed here. According to Kessler (1997) , as the text databases available to users 
become larger and more heterogeneous, genre becomes increasingly important for computational 
linguistics as a complement to topical and structural principles of classification. He proposed a theory 
of genres as bundles of facets, which correlate with various surface cues and argue that genre 
detection based on surface cues as successful as detection based on deeper structural properties. 
 
The two main factors that characterize a text are its content and its style. E. Stamatatos (2001) 
presents experiments in text genre detection, author identification and verification task using content 
and its style. 
 
C. Grover (2003) proposes automatic summarization techniques to the legal domain. Their 
methodology is to take the sentences from the text and classify according to their rhetorical role to 
form a summary.  
 
A. Rauber (2001) presents an approach to automatically analyze the structure of documents and to 
integrate this information into an automatically created content based organization. 
 
J. Klavans (1998) presents techniques to characterize document type and event by using semantic 
classification of verbs. Verbs are an important factor in providing an event profile, which is used in 
categorizing articles into different genre. 

	


Objective of our tutoring system is similar to teacher’s objective i. e. to provide different types of 
documents as per the student’s requirements. A student should be given different categories of 
document for the same topic, so that he can understand the topic in a better manner. To achieve this 
first the document categories should be decided and then the documents should be classified into 
above categories so that the tutoring module of the tutoring system can choose documents to fulfill the 
student’s requirement. 
 
	
 
Documents are classified in to different categories. The categories are made keeping in view of 
different levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. The different categories of document types are as follows. 
 
Explanation type document 
 
Keeping in view of the category comprehension of Bloom’s taxonomy the first document type is 
Explanation type. Explanation type document gives detailed explanation about a topic so that a 
student can understand the meaning of the informational material or in other words fully understands 
the topic. It includes the definition and explanation of each concept, their derivation and relation. 
Explanation type document for Newton’s law explains and derives Newton’s law. To explain 
Newton’s law, it first defines the prerequisite concepts such as force, acceleration and then gives 
relation between them. 
 
Application type documents  
 
As per bloom’s classification application means student should be able to use the concepts, which he 
has learned in classroom into novel situations in workplace. In view of the above we have classified 
the documents into a category named Application, which contains the application of the theory, law, 
 3 
rules, methods and principles in real time and practical situations. For example, a document contain 
application of Newton’s first law in aircraft will come under this category. 
 
Lab experiment 
 
For better understanding of any theory, law or principle, students perform lab experiments. Lab 
experiment is a part of syllabus of a subject. Therefore, we are classifying these documents separately 
in type “lab experiment type”.   
 
Exercise   
 
In bloom’s classification the last category is evaluation. Evaluation is concerned with the ability to 
evaluate the value of material, which is learned in classroom. In view of the category evaluation, we 
classified documents in a category named “Exercise”, which include documents containing exercises, 
numerical problems, questions etc. 
 
Type of documents with its definition and example is shown in the Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Types of documents with definition and example 
 
Document type Definition example 
Explanation type Documents which contain 
explanation in greater detail 
A document explaining Newton’s 
law of motion 
Application Application of any concept or 
principle in real situations 
A document which gives application 
of Newton’s law in aircraft 
Experiment A document which gives lab 
experiment instruction .  
Document containing Lab 
experiments of Newton’s law of 
motion 
Exercise  Documents contain question, 
numerical problems, exercises. 
Exercises on Newton’s law of 
motion 
 
	

	

 
The objective of the document classification is that the tutoring module of the intelligent tutoring 
system can choose an appropriate document to meet the need of students. The documents can be 
classified in two ways manually or automatically. Manual classification is very time consuming and 
tedious job. To avoid this we classify documents automatically into different categories. For 
automatic classification we have used neural network. Neural networks learn by examples. For that 
we need to collect data features and then invokes the training algorithms to automatically learn the 
structure of the data. We have collected some of the observable properties and features of the text 
documents which are used for automatic classification using neural network.  
 
	
 
		

	


This section discusses the observable properties of the text of documents which is used for 
classification of document type. 
 
Verb  
 
We assume that the set of verbs in a document can be viewed as part of conceptual map of the events 
and action in a document. Verbs are an important factor in providing an event profile, which in turn 
might be used in categorizing the documents. Explanation type documents generally contain 
definition, statement of laws or general idea about any concept. Therefore the verbs like “define”, 
“known”, ”state”, “described”, ”explained”, ”discussed”, “illustrated”  etc are predominantly 
 4 
occurring in explanation type documents. While the lab experiment documents contain verbs like 
“study”, “observe”,”design”, “measure etc. The exercise type document usually contains “evaluate “, 
“find” etc. 
 
Phrase  
 
Apart from the verb, occurrences of phrases play an important role in describing documents. 
Documents belonging to the category “experiment” usually contain phrases like “introduction”, 
“objective”, “results”, “goal” etc. Exercise type documents usually contains phrase  “describe how”, 
“show that”, “why does”, ”how can” etc. Application type document contains “application of “, “used 
for”, “applied for “etc. 
 
Document types and sample verbs and phrases are shown in the Table 2. 
 
Table 2: Document types and sample verbs 
 
Document type Verb list 
Explanation type Describe, discuss, explain, define, known, derive,.. 
Application  Applied, used, … 
Experiment Study, observe, design,.. 
Exercise Evaluate, find, calculate, … 
 
Special character 
 
Special characters are mainly the punctuation marks and special symbols. In case of exercise type 
documents, the sentences are interrogative sentences ends with question mark. Explanation type 
documents contain many special symbols to derive or explain any topic. These character level cues 
are important and used for classification. 
 
Figures (diagrams) 
 
 
 

 Figure 1: Distribution of features  
 
 5 
   
Figure 2: Feedforward network structure 
 
 
Classification performance
75
80
85
90
95
100
1 3 5 7 9
input
ac
cu
ra
cy
 in
 
pe
rc
en
ta
ge
feed forward
grnn
 
 
Figure 3: comparison of classification performannace of feed forward and grnn 
 
To explain any topic in detail generally figures (diagrams) are included in the document. The count of 
diagrams occurring in a document is a distinguishing feature, because the explanation and lab 
experiments generally contains more number of diagrams as compared to exercise and application 
type documents. 
 
Distribution of features in documents  
 
 Distribution of above features in few sets of documents for four classes “explanation”, “application”, 
“lab experiment” and “exercise” are shown in figure 1.  
 In figure 1, x axis represents the feature set and y axis represents the frequency of occurrence 
of feature in a document. Since distribution of features is not linear, the linear discriminate analysis 
has failed.  
 We have used the feed forward back-propagation neural network to classify the documents. 
The same set of documents is also classified using generalized regression neural network. 
Performance result of both the classifiers is compared and shown in figure 3. 
 
Feedforward backpropogation neural network 
 
 The structure of the feed forward neural network is shown in Figure 2. The number of hidden neurons 
has been chosen by trial and error. Too many neurons lead to the problem of over-fitting and too less 
may not be able to generalize the classification. However in this problem the number of hidden 
Neurons has been fixed by trial and error over a number of training and test sets.  
 
Number of input nodes [same as number of features] = 60 
Number of hidden Neurons =6 with tan-hyperbolic activation function 
Number of output [same as number of classes] =  4 with tan-hyperbolic activation function 
 6 
 
The distribution of input features suggests pre-processing because of the range mismatch. We have 
used the following normalization procedure . 
 
 
Let x  be the input feature 
 
Then xj normalized =   
j
xjxj
σ
−
   
Where xj  is the mean of the jth component and   j is the standard deviation of jth component . xj  
and  j are kept constant for testing with new features. 
The output classes are rendered into vectors as: 
Class 1   + 0.5 ,- 0.5 , - 0.5, - 0.5 
Class 2   - 0.5 , + 0.5 ,- 0.5, - 0.5 
Class3   -0.5 ,- 0.5 , + 0.5,  - 0.5 
Class4   -0.5 , - 0.5 , - 0.5,  + 0.5 
This avoids the saturation of the output neurons as the maximum and minimum of the activation 
function is ±1.0. 
  
Generalised regression neural network  
 
Generalized regression neural networks (grnn) (1993) is a kind of radial basis network that is used for 
function approximation. NEWGRNN creates a two layer network. The first layer has RADBAS 
neurons, calculates weighted inputs with Euclidean distance weight function and net input with 
NETPROD.  The second layer has PURELIN neurons, calculates weighted input with normalized dot 
product weight function and net inputs with NETSUM.  
 

 
There are four classes of document types namely “explanation type”, “application type”, “lab 
experiment type” and “exercise type”. We have collected documents and manually categorized them 
into above classes. Total 240 documents were taken .Out of 240 documents,170 documents are 
randomly chosen and used to train the Feed forward back-propagation classifier and generalized 
regression neural networks classifier. Remaining 70 documents are tested with the train classifier. The 
above process is repeated 10 times with different sets of documents randomly chosen from the data 
set.  
 
The classification performances of the both the classifiers are compared and shown in figure 3. The 
average accuracy obtained for the feed forward back-propagation network is 90 %  and  for grnn is 
91.82 %.  
 
	

 
Keeping in view of Bloom’s taxonomy, documents are automatically classified into different 
categories, which are used by the tutoring system to meet the student’s requirement. Future work 
includes summarizing of the text in each document type. Summarization of text will help us to find 
the document in greater detail, which will help the tutoring module of the tutoring system in automatic 
sequencing and also providing documents considering the student’s current state of knowledge.  
 
	
 
Bloom, B.S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives, book 1 cognitive domain, London: 
 Longman 
 7 
 Grover, C., Hachey, B., Hughson, L., Korycinski, C. (2003). Automatic summarization of legal 
 documents, 2003, ACM 1-58113-747-8 
Rauber, A., A. Muller-Kogler (2001). Integrating automatic genre analysis into digital libraries,  
 ACM 1-58113-345-6/01/0006  
Wasserman, P.D. (1993). Advanced methods in neural computing, New York: Van Nostrand 
 Reinhold. 
 Kessler, B., Nunberg, G., Schutze, H. (1997). Automatic detection of text genre, 
 ftp://parcftp.xerox.com/pub/qca/papers/genre 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., Kokkinakis, G. (2001).  Automatic Text categoriazation in terms of 
 genre and author. Association for Computational Linguistics 
Klavans, J., Min-Yen Kan, (1998). Role of verbs in document analysis. Proceedings of the 17th 
International Conference on computational linguistics.  
 
 
Devshri Roy is currently a PhD candidate in Computer Science and Engineering department , Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kharagpur. Her research interest includes informational retrieval and E_learning . 
 
Sudeshna Sarkar is an associate professor at CSE dept. in IIT, Kharagpur. Her research interests are in the area 
of machine learning, E_learning and NLP. 
 
Sujoy Ghose is a professor at  CSE Dept. in IIT, Kharagpur. His research interests are in the area of Artificial 
Engineering, NLP and Networking. 
 
Address: Computer Science and Engineering Department, Indian Institute of technology, Khargapur, W.B., 
721302. Email:  droy@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in , sudeshna@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in , sujoy@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
