 
 
Deterrence 2.0:   
Deterring Violent Non-State Actors 
 in Cyberspace 
 
 
Workshop held  
9-10 January 2008 
in Arlington, VA 
 
 
Prepared for  
US Strategic Command Global Innovation and Strategy Center 
(USSTRATCOM/GISC) 
 
 
Prepared by 
Strategic Multi-Layer Analysis Team 
Edited by Carl Hunt 
chunt@ida.org 
and Nancy Chesser 
Nancy.Chesser@js.pentagon.mil 
 
The views expressed in this report are those of the authors and not 
necessarily those of the Department of Defense or US Government. 
 
UNCLASSIFIED
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Foreword — James Fallows........................................................................................................1 
Preface — CAPT Todd Veazie ...................................................................................................3 
Executive Summary — Carl Hunt...............................................................................................5 
1  Promoting and Protecting US Interests in the Cyber World:  Violent (and non-Violent) Non-
state Actors - Workshop Summary — Carl Hunt...................................................................6 
2  Life in the Interconnected World:  Globalizing Effects of the Cyber Domain and a Typology 
to Accommodate the Effects  — Lawrence Kuznar & Carl Hunt ......................................... 12 
2.A  Deterrence in the 21st Century  — Thomas Barnett ...................................................... 25 
2.B  Life in the Interconnected World:  Globalizing Effects of the Cyber Domain — Rob 
Axtell ......................................................................................................................... 32 
2.C  Innovations in ‘Cyberism:’ An examination of the changes to Cyberspace in the coming 
decade — Ken Steinberg ............................................................................................ 38 
3  Reevaluating Deterrence Theory & Concepts for Use in Cyberspace  — Allison Astorino-
Courtois & Matthew Borda ................................................................................................. 46 
4  The Cyber-Physical Nexus:  Movement between the Worlds:  Non-State Actor’s Use of the 
Internet  — S. K. Numrich .................................................................................................. 54 
5  Models of Emergent Behavior of Violent Non-State Actors in Cyberspace  — Bob Popp et al
........................................................................................................................................... 62 
References ................................................................................................................................ 92 
Appendix A:  Workshop Participants and Contributors ............................................................. 99 
Appendix B:  Workshop Notes — Alan Shaw......................................................................... 100 
Appendix C:  Acronyms ......................................................................................................... 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
NSIDE
 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
1 
Foreword  
By James Fallows, Atlantic Monthly Magazine1 
The simplest point to make about the essays that follow is the most important: they are worth 
reading.  
The papers collected here offer a wide variety of perspectives, from different professional 
backgrounds, disciplines, and points of view.  They complement each other – agreeing on some 
points, usefully disagreeing on others.  They combine history, theory, sociology, and well-
informed technical discussion – plus in some cases pure and lively opinion.  Together they do a 
good job of answering the question originally posed: about the effects of new technology and 
new dispersions of destructive power on the theory and practice of deterrence. 
I could end my comments there and simply say, Read on.  But let me make one other point about 
the value of the exercise that led to this volume. (For the record, I took no part in the conference 
that led to these papers and am reacting, on a volunteer basis, to what I have read here.) 
The details of conflict and combat are always changing: new adversaries, new technologies, new 
spheres of contention, new vulnerabilities, new avenues of defense and attack.  But the 
fundamentals of conflict and combat are always the same.  They involve recognizing and 
responding to the changed reality faster than an adversary can; using the new opportunities for 
attack and response; creating the bonds of trust, understanding, and shared values that let one’s 
own forces and allies cooperate spontaneously, while eroding those bonds on the other side. 
At any given moment, strategic advantage will go to the side that best understands how the 
possibilities of the moment match the longer-term interests it wants to defend – that is, the side 
that can best match what is changing to what is constant.  The conference that led to these papers 
should be understood as an attempt to work out that match.  
A number the papers emphasize what of today’s new tools of communication have changed from 
the last time we defined deterrence—the Cold War.  There are new means of recruitment, of 
propaganda and motivation, of exploiting vulnerabilities, yet also of providing resilience.  But 
while the technology and business worlds have often assumed that “everything” has changed 
because of computers, Moore’s Law, and the Internet, and that we are in a one-way shift from 
past to future, many of the papers here emphasize what has not changed. 
The process of deterrence is different from what it was during the Cold War, but some of its 
underlying principles still apply.  Idealism, openness, and other elements of “soft power” have 
always been part of America’s strategy for undermining adversaries and preventing attacks.  
They remain part of that strategy – and have taken on new importance and must be exercised 
through new technological means.  Resilience, in the sense of preparing to rebound from attacks 
                                                
1 Editors Note: The Foreword to this report was provided by Mr. James Fallows, National Correspondent for The 
Atlantic Monthly Magazine. Mr. Fallows was unable to attend the workshop and provided this Foreword based on a 
review of the report and personal interaction with some of the writers.  He was not compensated for this work in any 
way.  
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
2 
that cannot be deterred, is also a long-standing part of national doctrine.  (The Internet itself, 
after all, grew out of an effort to design a network that could withstand even nuclear attack.)  But 
as some authors emphasize, resilience may be relatively more important now, when the nation 
cannot assume that it will be able to deter or prevent every conceivable terrorist attack. 
For several years after the 9/11 attacks, many press and political commentators spoke as if the 
new diffusion of destructive power around the world, and the communications technologies that 
had been part of that diffusion, had placed the United States in a permanently more vulnerable 
and even fearful mode. The papers in this volume show that there is serious reason for concern, 
re-thinking, and vigorous new strategies – but not for defeatism or fear. 
 
Dateline: March, 2008 
James Fallows 
Beijing, PRC 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
3 
Preface  
By Captain Todd Veazie USN 
 
The chapters before you were born from the examination of two fundamental questions 
regarding the nature and theory of deterrence in the 21st century.  First we had to consider what 
had changed since our victory in the Cold War (the experience from which most of our current 
doctrine is derived); and, armed with that understanding, consider how the United States might 
execute deterrence strategy in this new era.  Our study revealed elemental shifts in the state of 
play that required more than “tweaking” on the margins of our thinking.  Our observations 
compelled us to challenge the epistemological underpinnings of traditional nation-state 
deterrence models.  What can be held at risk as we seek to deter the violent metastasis of ideas 
propagated over the Internet?  How can we prevail in a global marketplace of ideas without 
compromising our own sacred values?  The enclosed pages contain comments, insights and 
recommendations that transcend any thinking about deterrence that has ever gone before those of 
us in uniform.  As evidenced by the sage words of James Fallows in the Foreword to this report, 
the ideas contained within are “worth reading.”  The Deterrence of Violent Non-State Actor 
Workshop during the period of 9-10 January 2008 was a special event that was both compelling 
and timely. 
So what has changed?  Of course, the answer is rather obvious yet curiously underrepresented in 
the recent deterrence scholarship.  Humanity is undergoing a transformation from the Industrial 
Age characterized by machinery, factories, urbanization and measured change where resources, 
production and optimization were the source of wealth and power, to an Information Age, 
defined by knowledge and networks, interconnectedness, globalization, adaptability, agility, 
innovation and rapid change.  New rules sets are emerging that cannot be predicted and with 
them come opportunities, creativity and societal dislocations that often breed violence and 
instability. 
Like Damocles’ sword, this global interconnectivity both strengthens us and moderates us at the 
same time.  We are strengthened because we are better connected to others than ever before and 
thus capable of spreading the seeds of liberty and opportunity to populations that yearn for it and 
where the lack of it is still being justified.  We are moderated by this interconnectivity because 
others can more easily exploit the seams and turn our freedoms against us to infect with vitriolic 
propaganda that violently radicalizes populations across this interconnected web. 
It is the matter of moderation of our strength that brought together the remarkable group of 
thinkers whose words are reflected within this report.  We are concerned here with the problem 
of deterring violent non-state actors from doing harm to our nation and to our allies.  The 
questions of extending freedom through access while mitigating the misuse of that freedom to 
harm us were the dominant questions we took up in this workshop.  This report captures the 
intellectual power and dynamic interactions that took place during these two days and must be 
read by today’s and tomorrow’s decision-makers.  These thoughts will inform the planning and 
execution of deterrence principles for years to come. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
4 
During the workshop, our intrepid editor and valued contributor coined the phrase Deterrence 
2.0 to reflect upon the way science of interconnectivity is changing our world.  I believe this 
connotation was right on the money.  The world has changed around us through globalization 
and the interconnected collectives we have empowered through our nation’s greatness in 
innovation and economic prosperity.  Not only must we foster this empowerment, but we must 
also protect it.  The thoughts captured within this report demonstrate this need and offer ideas 
about how to do it.  
The world has changed and both the process and effects of deterrence are changing.  This report 
is a magnificent beginning to a necessary discourse about Deterrence 2.0 and even Diplomacy 
2.0.  This conversation must include all of the United States and its Allies.  I am delighted to 
forward this report to you, the reader.  May we understand and learn to exploit the insights and 
recommendations of the authors as we better understand the principles of deterring violent non-
state actors in cyberspace.  This report initiates that conversation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
e  by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
5 
Executive Summary  
by Carl W. Hunt, Institute for Defense Analyses 
 
This report captures the essence of a two-day workshop on Deterring Violent Non-State Actors 
in Cyberspace, held on 9-10 January in Arlington, VA. The workshop was undertaken in 
response to a request from USAF Lt Gen Robert Elder to address deterrence of violent non-state 
actors (VNSA) in cyberspace, as a follow-on to the recently completed Strategic Deterrence 
Strategic Multilayer Assessment (SMA) report.2  Participants in this workshop ranged from 
active military to civilian, including contractors and academics with backgrounds in physics, 
political science, social science (including anthropology) and technology fields. The purpose of 
the workshop was to engage experts in a strategic multilayer assessment of deterrence options in 
the 21st century that recognized an interconnected global threat environment for dealing with 
VNSA.  
It was a remarkable two days of spirited interaction among the participants, enhanced by a topic 
that was timely and challenging. The insights and conclusions put forth by the participants, while 
hardly unanimous in detail, were not divergent either. As the remainder of this report shows, the 
United States faces a much more level global playing field as it seeks to shape deterrence options 
today than it did in the Cold War and before. Deterrence 2.0, as it became known in the 
workshop, is not always about holding at risk what the adversary values, particularly when these 
values might be manifested in far less tangible media than nation-states, their populations and 
their societies. 
The participants, particularly the non-military practitioners, advised that the US consider 
traditional deterrence only as a baseline from which planners and policy-makers diverge to build 
adaptive (and more cooperative) forms of relationships with potential adversaries. While Cold 
War deterrence is still viable, the participants concluded, it will likely be less effective in the 
Cyber Age. Resiliency of US Infrastructure will be of great importance however, a hold-over 
from the Cold War forms of deterrence—forcing an adversary to conclude that there is no 
meaningful return on investment in attacking the US still works. 
This report contains both a breadth and a depth of insights about the Cyber Age and what this 
country will face as it seeks new forms of deterrence policy and ways to implement the DIME 
power construct. We encourage the reader to take advantage of this report and study the insights 
of political scientists, economists, social scientists and even natural philosophers to better 
understand how the future of the Cyber Age may unfold and how the US will likely fit into this 
new Age.  Deterrence 2.0 joins Web 2.0, Science 2.0 and other new forms of connected 
discourse for raising the curtain on the next stages of human history.  This report gives a front-
row seat for the stage the US will occupy. 
                                                
2 See Chesser (2007) for a detailed description of the strategic multilayer assessment (SMA) program, and for 
background on the initial Strategic Deterrence report done as an SMA project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
6 
1 Promoting and Protecting US Interests in the Cyber World:  Violent (and 
non-Violent) Non-state Actors - Workshop Summary   
by Carl W. Hunt, Institute for Defense Analyses 
 
The World of Deterrence 2.0 
Like Web 2.0 and Science 2.0, “Deterrence 2.0,” or deterrence in the Cyber Age, is as much an 
emerging phenomenon as it is a sought-after method for dealing with both state and non-state 
actors in an increasingly interconnected world.3  All three next generation environments suggest 
worlds of interaction and dynamism that have never before been possible.  Near-infinite 
interactions taking place over near-infinite connections leave those who seek to practice the 
deterrence of the Cold War world in a true quandary.   
This new world of deterrence poised over globally interactive interconnectedness was the 
primary challenge faced by a remarkable group of experts from a variety of disciplines during a 
two-day workshop, held in Arlington, VA, 9-10 January 2008.  The following report attempts to 
capture and synthesize the analyses and findings from the workshop.  Their thoughts are 
synergized along with the thoughts of specially invited authors with varying backgrounds who 
contributed to both divergent but cogent perspectives. 
The participants’ initial conclusions, while not unanimous, were often piquant but rooted in 
common sense and grounded in the new disciplines of network and connection theory.  In short, 
their insights were ultimately sensible and intuitive for those who have grown up within the 
networked world.4  These insights should encourage and empower the United States “to combine 
the tools of intimidation with the tools of inspiration,” as former Deputy Secretary of Defense John 
Hamre once put it. (Gates, 2008) 
Workshop Overview 
This two-day workshop, undertaken in response to a request from USAF Lt Gen Robert Elder, 
addressed deterrence of violent non-state actors (VNSA) in cyberspace.  Participants ranged 
from active military to civilian, including contractors and academics with backgrounds in 
physics, political science, social science (including anthropology) and technology fields. The 
purpose of the workshop was to engage experts in a strategic multilayer assessment5 of 
                                                
3 The connotations of Web 2.0 and Science 2.0 follow the popular press ideas about the imminent next generations 
of interconnected and collaborative World Wide Webs and “networked Science” (as science author Mitch Waldrop 
labels it).  The idea behind a concept of “Deterrence 2.0,” explained in detail throughout the report, also suggests 
that interaction, interconnectedness and collaboration may also apply to national policy concepts previously thought 
of as coercive, one-way, bilateral relationships.  Such thinking may no longer be possible in the cyber world. 
4 In fact, several of the participants felt that the Workshop should have also had a contingent of 15-19 year olds who 
have been practicing virtual deterrence (and collaboration) techniques in online games for much of their young adult 
lives! 
5 See Chesser (2007) for a detailed description of the strategic multilayer assessment (SMA) program, and for 
background on the initial Strategic Deterrence report done as an SMA project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
7 
deterrence options in the 21st century that recognized an interconnected global threat 
environment for dealing with VNSA.   
After an initial deliberation about the main purpose of the workshop, the attendees began to 
debate their diverse positions on the two main questions of the workshop:   
1) Is the US seeking to deter violent non-state actors from using the cyber world to recruit and 
plan attacks against the US and allies (including the ability to counter VNSA through 
offensive means)?  Such an effort would seek to inhibit the formation of what Sageman calls 
a “Leaderless Jihad,” (2008) or… 
2) Is the US at least as interested in maintaining a maximally open cyber environment and using 
freedom of access as a novel form of deterrence-producing capability (perhaps an equally 
relevant way to counter the “Leaderless Jihad”)?   
While both thrusts may in the end be complementary, the answers to those questions shape the 
cyber environment as a deterrence medium, as they in fact shaped the debate throughout the 
workshop.  Each approach requires a different starting point, and thus different strategies and 
resources, but potentially converges in ways only the cyber world can accommodate.  As 
contributor James Fallows commented, “Any discussion of state- or non-state deterrence that 
doesn’t dwell on the potential of eliminating threats through co-opting them, or winning 
supporters, is missing a huge opportunity” (Fallows, 2008).  Mr. Fallows also wrote the 
Foreword to this report. 
Essential Participant Findings 
In considering the two main questions initially generated by the attendees, the workshop 
discussions centered around four closely linked findings:   
1) Deterrence of VNSA in the cyber context involves a broad range of actions, including 
dissuasion, exerting influence, co-opting, and establishing positive relations.  Deterrence can 
be both direct and indirect.  Indirect, such as exerting influence, is a viable means of more 
effective deterrence in the cyber age; leveraging connectivity in ways never before 
considered empowers dynamic flows of information and virtual relationship-building. 
Sustainability, also an essential characteristic of deterrence, means that deterrence efforts 
may have lasting effects but yet require constant monitoring and adaptation.  The networked 
world enhances these opportunities, often in what have been considered undirected, auto-
catalytic ways. 
2) If someone is violently bent or fundamentally fixated, they may not be deterrable.  However, 
exerting influence, especially indirectly on their support population or the populations to 
which they appeal, may still be possible.  Fault lines exist on the radical side that a new 
generation of “network warriors” can explore and exploit.  As an example, 
“embourgeoisement” of the Middle East, as workshop attendee Mike Vlahos labeled it, is an 
important development; the middle class traditionally seeks stability.  Instead of solely 
focusing on deterring enemies in conventional cold-way methodologies, more enlightened 
approaches might look for allies among prominent academics, NGOs, media personalities, 
and cultural/tribal brokers (those that typically compose the middle class of any nation). 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
8 
Understanding the history, culture and perspectives of a potential ally or adversary takes 
time, but it makes influence feasible. 
 
Network-savvy warriors and statesmen must also leverage and assist existing aid 
organizations. Providing NGOs with a communications infrastructure to better facilitate their 
efforts empowers them to be more connected to the people the US and our allies seek to 
influence (even through the most coercive forms of deterrence, when required).  The 
promotion of an open cyber-based world is in fact a very meaningful deterrence strategy, 
according to several of the workshop members. While this may have originally seemed 
counter-intuitive to a large degree, free flow of information of all types helps people from 
diverse parts of the world discover for themselves the fruits of open and free exchange of 
knowledge.  They must personally experience the freedom unrestricted flows of information 
provide to their families and societies and thus inculcate this process into their own way of 
life in ways that make the most sense for them.  The US and West cannot force this discovery 
process, but can encourage and protect the ways in which it might happen. 
3) The existing and emerging cyber-based world has created profound changes in 
communicating ideas and information. Wireless technology is being brought into remote 
areas, enabling telephone and Internet access, speeding up formation of relatively dispersed 
communities, and allowing airing of new ideas.  In many parts of the world, this is happening 
even faster than it did in the West.  Workshop attendee Thomas Barnett pointed out several 
times the impact of highly accelerated information within an increasingly interconnected 
world and the consequences that has for the emergence of new business, government and 
personal lifestyles.  The interconnected life brought on by the Internet and World Wide Web 
makes it easier to create content, and to have that content accepted by a significant part of 
their community.  Perhaps one of the most meaningful forms of deterrence at the US’s 
disposal is to foster the growth and security of access to the interconnected world that Web 
2.0 promises, a substantiation of point 2, above.  In fact, another workshop participant, Tim 
Wu, Columbia Law School, discussed the US’s obligations to maintain a “balanced 
approach” to cyber-based deterrence, similar to the US policy of “encouraging an open media 
and free press around the world.”  Dr. Wu summed up his thoughts as follows:  “…it will be 
difficult for the United States to simultaneously criticize the Chinese regime’s restrictive 
Internet practices if we begin to adopt many of them, even if the ends pursued are much 
different.”  These thoughts considered the role of China but could extend to any other entity, 
he said. 
4) Finally, the roots of conventional, “Cold War” deterrence still apply.  Several of the 
workshop attendees spoke about significantly hardening a manageable part of US 
infrastructure in ways that simply make it too costly for an adversary to attack.  Resiliency is 
at the heart of this strategy (Barnett, Sub-Chapter 2.A, this report).  If the US is able to 
recover more quickly than the adversary can mount the next attack or follow up from an 
initial success, the traditional notions of deterrence are likely to be most successful.  In other 
words, the US, through its globally admired resiliency, obscures itself as a target simply 
because it makes no sense to obligate resources to attack if those resources offer such poor 
return on investment.  The US must maintain its strength in the area of critical infrastructure 
and economic underpinnings and reduce the adversary’s value proposition such that it costs 
too much for an adversary to attack.  In this sense, the old forms of deterrence calculus, 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
9 
assured return destruction (or equally effective, poor return on investment), probably still 
apply. 
Preview of Subsequent Chapters and Authors’ Contributions 
Chapter 2, authored by Dr. Larry Kuznar, National Security Innovations, and Dr. Carl Hunt, 
Institute for Defense Analyses, examines the virtual global perspective of “Life in the 
Interconnected World.”  This chapter reviews some of the initial findings of the Strategic 
Deterrence SMA of 2007, and points towards the development of a meaningful typology that 
will inform all future efforts dedicated to better understanding of the threats the US will face in 
the coming years of the Cyber Age.  It also attempts to explain globalization as it applies to the 
new forms of threats and opportunities the United States faces in the next few years and beyond.   
Chapter 2 also manifests as sub-chapters original insights from three outstanding thinkers:  Dr. 
Thomas P. M. Barnett, Enterra Solutions; Dr. Robert Axtell, George Mason University’s Center 
for Social Complexity; and Mr. Ken Steinberg, Savant Protection.  Dr. Barnett, a political 
scientist, provided several pages of interesting insights about resiliency and the role the US must 
play in the future of trade and connectivity; he concludes that the US must be humble in its 
approach to deterrence in the Cyber Age.  Dr. Axtell, an economist and social science modeler, 
contributed to the workshop with unique insights on the responsibility of the country to shape the 
impact of deterrence in more modern and meaningful ways such that the entire world benefits, if 
possible.  Finally, Mr. Steinberg offered a technical though accessible forecast of “Cyberism” 
and Innovation in the 21st Century, commenting on the role that technological innovation will 
have in deterring violent behavior in the Cyber Age. 
Chapter 3, authored by Dr Allison Astorino-Courtois, National Security Innovations, and 
Matthew Borda, Creighton University, compares and contrasts deterrence at the conceptual level 
over the last century or so.  This chapter goes to some length in defining deterrence terms and 
concepts that apply to both ages (the Cold War and the Cyber Age), but leans towards refining 
the concept of deterrence as it applies to the modern warrior.  The chapter challenges traditional 
notions such as “rational actors” and seeks to define various types of conceptual “space” relative 
to the Cyber Age.  The chapter seeks to clarify these terms  and concepts in light of global 
connectivity and Deterrence 2.0. 
Chapter 4, authored by Dr. Susan Numrich, Institute for Defense Analyses, looks at the apparent 
transcendent movement between the “real” and the cyber world.  This chapter reveals significant 
insights on the consequences of global interconnectivity from a behavioral standpoint and the 
role that traditional and new forms of media have played in shaping these behaviors.  
Understanding the role of social networks is important, but this chapter explains how these 
networks form and how they influence new forms of organization and action.  Chapter 4 explores 
and exposes the nexus between the world we thought we lived in and the cyber world that 
increasingly manifests the universe that actually transpires.  
Chapter 5, authored by Dr. Robert Popp, National Security Innovations and several colleagues, 
offers a detailed and sometimes technical perspective of the social science modeling tools that 
hold promise for better understanding and predicting VNSA behavior – this chapter is the longest 
and most technical component of this report.  Chapter 5 also examines at a top level the impact 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
10 
of some 500 million web pages from what is known as the Dark Web, an area of the World Wide 
Web in which extremist/terrorist data is often posted and consumed.  The authors conclude that 
there is very little difference in the level of sophistication of use of the Web when comparing the 
US and West and potential terrorist usages of the Web – it appears that the playing field is quite 
level.  This chapter also reviews major features that social science tools offer for both 
comprehension of past and present events and the potential for predicting behaviors that might 
allow the US to “get left of boom.”  When understood in the context of the insights of writers 
such as Fallows, Barnett and Axtell, this final chapter offers new opportunities to understand the 
right mix of traditional deterrence and Deterrence 2.0 techniques that might better operationalize 
the sources of national power of the US and its allies, the world of the “CyberDIME.” 
References cited in all of these chapters are aggregated at the end of the report.  A list of 
acronyms used is also provided. 
The Challenge of Moving Ahead 
Workshop participants raised a number of unresolved issues affecting future efforts in this area at 
the conclusion of the workshop, as well as in exchanges in the days following.  Most of the key 
discussion questions and points raised during the workshop consisted of some form of the 
following five points.  These questions and issues form the nucleus for the remainder of the 
report.  Questions and Issues included:   
1) How is the Internet used by all (US/Allied, Adversary, Others)?  How do we influence 
(counter when necessary) adversary use of the Internet? 
2) Given the variety and complexity of new threats, there is a lack of guidance as to what we 
must deter. More guidance regarding deterrence objectives is required from policy makers in 
the US Government if effective deterrence concepts and courses of action (COAs) are to be 
developed. 
3) How do we practice deterrence in this new, interconnected world so that it remains a useful 
concept even if demonstrably different from Cold War deterrence? 
4) What other concepts, in addition to deterrence, do we synergize to ensure that the US can 
sustain maximum global access to the Internet?  
5) The process of globalization and development of the cyber domain are both complex and 
emergent.  It is likely that anyone or any state that attempts to control or even to shape the 
interconnected domain globally will be frustrated.  
Initial Conclusions:   
This summary recaps two days of highly interactive dialogue and many pages of written material 
offered by the workshop participants (included where appropriate).  Many of these comments 
and writings shape the following report and offer novel ideas about deterrence of non-state actors 
in the cyber age, as well as validating conventional notions about deterrence in any age. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
O  
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
11 
Deterrence 2.0 is likely not something the US does by itself – globalization as part of the cyber 
age seems to change much of the unilateralism and bilateralism of the past.  Deterrence 2.0 may 
not even be recognizable by practitioners of conventional deterrence and may be difficult to 
implement (or worse, to recognize when our adversaries use these techniques against the US or 
its allies).  These new components of the Deterrence 2.0 arsenal are still worthy of consideration 
nonetheless.   
The strongest recommendation of many of the Workshop panelists is to consider deterrence from 
at least an evolutionary standpoint where new political, cultural and societal landscape features 
have recently surfaced that may be more relevant (and noticeable) than they would have been in 
the past.  Barnett’s caution seems prudent that the US proceed humbly in crafting and executing 
new forms of deterrence policy and capability.  Only in this way might the US “combine the 
tools of intimidation with the tools of inspiration,” as former Deputy Secretary of Defense 
Hamre is quoted in Secretary Gates’ speech. 
The Strategic Multilayer Assessment team gratefully acknowledges the contributions of all of the 
workshop participants – their names are listed throughout this report.  The challenge of shaping 
deterrence or any strategic DIME tool for use in the Cyber Age will continue to be subject to the 
same interactions described in this report.  Such is the dilemma of deterrence of non-state actors 
in the dynamic, interconnected world that arrays itself before the United States.  Welcome to the 
world of Deterrence 2.0! 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
12 
2 Life in the Interconnected World:  Globalizing Effects of the Cyber 
Domain and a Typology to Accommodate the Effects   
by Lawrence A. Kuznar, National Security Innovations and Carl Hunt, Institute for Defense 
Analyses 
 
This chapter provides an overview of globalization and its interlocking role with cyber 
technology.  It also extends from the original SMA Strategic Deterrence report the important 
discussion of a much needed typology that accommodates globalized behavior in the cyber 
domain (Chesser, 2007).  This chapter is based on discussions as part of the SMA workshop as 
well as other research on globalization and the emergence of a cyber domain.  
The chapter begins with a brief characterization of the cyber domain. We then discuss the 
relevance of complexity and complex systems theory to these phenomena. Next, we address the 
challenges of deterrence in complex, globalizing cyber environments and consider thoughts 
proffered by Workshop attendees.  The spread of the Internet and World Wide Web in the Arab 
world is reviewed as an example.  Finally, we consider the beginnings of a taxonomy that 
enables us to understand VNSAs in a globally interconnected environment. 
Key points include: 
 Globalization is a historic process that will continue to connect all the world’s people 
 Traditional forms of deterrence may inform US interactions with other states and non-
state actors, but these forms of deterrence will no longer be a dominant method for 
interacting with others 
 The cyber domain includes a broad range of technologies that are spreading very rapidly, 
giving people unprecedented networking and communication abilities 
 Globalization and the cyber domain are interconnected, dynamic, changing and genuinely 
complex 
 Deterrence options in the 21st century require a broad range of approaches, including 
strategic communication and other forms of “upstream” activities for shaping the 
operational environment 
 Complexity obviates control of the emerging cyber domain 
 Deterrence activities should be aimed at monitoring and deflecting threats through 
indirect means 
 Deterrence capabilities must be adaptive and flexible, since new and unforeseen threats 
are certain to emerge 
 Third party and surrogate forms of deterrence may be more appropriate and effective, 
particularly in dealing with non-state actors 
 Practitioners require clearer guidance from policy makers concerning what threats require 
attention 
The Cyber Domain 
The cyber domain includes much more than the Internet or the World Wide Web. It also 
encompasses satellite communications, audio and video broadcast, cellular communications, and 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
13 
other new technologies people increasingly use to communicate.  The US Air Force even 
considers certain weapons such as Directed Energy weapons to be part of the cyber domain.  
These technologies, particularly the high-speed interconnecting technologies, are not only new, 
but they are proliferating rapidly, spreading throughout the world even to replace more 
traditional means of communication (such as land-line telephones that are becoming less relevant 
in a wirelessly connected world).  These new technologies provide people with unprecedented 
capabilities for social networking and communication. The growth in these new technologies has 
been mathematically exponential and is continually increasing, as any review of the history of 
the Internet demonstrates. 
The initial Global Deterrence SMA and final report began to consider the consequences of 
massive interconnection, particularly as it applied to the sources of national power:  the DIME.6  
To provide for an enhanced understanding of national power amplified (and diminished) in the 
cyber age, the authors of the Strategic Deterrence SMA report (Chesser, 2007) proposed a 
concept called the CyberDIME.  The CyberDIME considered the sources of national power 
through the lens of a globally interconnected system of people, culture and commerce.  The 
CyberDIME and the related discussions of DIME actions as part of deterrence was one of the 
first and most cohesive reports on deterrence in the cyber domain.  This report ultimately 
informed the development of the Deterrence 2.0 workshop and discussions upon which this 
current report is based. 
Globalization 
Globalization is a complex process by which the world’s people are increasingly connected to 
one another through economic transactions, communications and media. This process has many 
ramifications, including the rapid spread of ideas and technologies, challenges to traditional and 
local ways of life, and shifts in political power. Some of the more obvious effects of 
globalization have included the rise of service (as opposed to manufacturing) industries in the 
West, the growth of multi-national corporations, the exportation of manufacturing to Third world 
countries, the spread of Western culture to all reaches of the globe, and the exposure of the 
world’s peoples to many different cultures and ways of life. These shifts from the atomic world 
to the digital world, as many contemporary authors claim, are all empowered by an 
interconnected globe, linking small groups and individuals to large international businesses and 
governments to enhance commerce and communications (Anderson 2003a). 
Workshop panelist Thomas P.M. Barnett suggested one stage-setter for this report in his sub-
chapter addendum to this chapter:  Because of the rising complexity of SOA7-enabled global 
business platforms that bind our economy with those of states featuring less robust legal and 
security rule sets, we are necessarily made more vulnerable to the nefarious ambitions of violent 
non-state actors.  Barnett’s characterization of global business processes as SOA (Service 
                                                
6 The DIME is an acronym for Diplomacy, Information, Military and Economic forms of national power.  This has 
been lately augmented by a new model known as DIMEFIL, in which Financial, Intelligence and Law Enforcement 
forms of power are also now considered.  See Chesser, 2007 for further discussion. 
7 SOA:  Service Oriented Architectures, as currently being deployed in the DoD Global Information Grid by the 
Defense Information Systems Agency. 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSI
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
14 
Oriented Architectures) was an interesting way to define the nature of the increasingly strong 
interrelationships forming among state, non-state and even individual actors.8 
Barnett also cautioned against placing too much emphasis on non-state actor roles in disrupting 
US-global relationships, a caution not universally accepted among all participants.  As such, to 
the extent that violent non-state actors succeed in their efforts, they provide a clarifying function 
that focuses public and private sector attention to existing vulnerabilities.  However, if we 
unreasonably elevate the importance of such violent non-state actors, we’re likely to damage our 
own capacity for day-to-day resilience rather than expand it—the iatrogenic effect. The notion of 
a clarifying function, post-VNSA “success” prompted a good deal of discussion on the 
importance of preparation and preemption versus resilience to attack, and how global institutions 
were important in absorbing the effects of VNSA attacks. 
The Challenges of VNSA and Cyberspace:  Complexity 
Complex systems are systems with many parts that interact in nonlinear ways to produce higher 
order phenomena that have properties of their own. Complex systems often exhibit bottom-up 
unintended development, which may be created by the interactions of their many constituent 
elements. These systems exhibit emergence, an often unexpected generation of higher-order 
phenomena in which the whole is greater than the sum of its parts (Holland 1998:225).  
Interactions are often nonlinear, which means that a given input can have disproportionate effects 
on the system’s behavior depending on feedbacks that amplify or decrease the input’s influence 
(Epstein and Axtell 1996:154).  
Globalization as Complex 
Globalization takes place on so many fronts and in so many ways and involves so many people 
that understanding its causes and tracking its directions has proven challenging. It is best, as 
Robert Axtell noted in this workshop, to regard it as a genuinely complex phenomenon that will 
defy traditional methods of analysis and prediction.  
Cyber Domain as Complex 
The growth of the Cyber domain in the context of globalization likewise has been rapid, 
unpredictable and emergent, giving new cyber technologies an awe-inspiring if not frightening 
quality.  Recursive processes (e.g. population growth rates under carrying capacity) can cross 
thresholds over which they fluctuate wildly (Gleick 1987). Traditional communication was face-
to-face (typically, one-to-one). In the past century, broadcast (one-to-many) developed. Cyber 
                                                
8 In terms of defining deterrence of VNSA in cyberspace, Barnett offered the following:  My definition of deterrence 
in the 21st century has little to do with moving as far to the left of “boom” as possible.  As globalization reformats 
traditional societies, the root causes of violent non-state actors will be exacerbated in the short and medium run but 
ultimately mitigated over the long haul by the extension of rule sets accompanying those expanding networks.  
Confusing friction (the social anger caused by the reformatting process) with the force (globalization’s penetration 
of traditional societies) is deeply unhelpful, because conflating the two dynamics muddies causality:  the more 
successful globalization is, the sharper the local resistance to its advance.  Barnett makes a case for looking at the 
current world of threats offered by VNSA as “frontier integration,” a time we must live through as the Internet and 
globalization manifest their collective role in shaping history.  See Barnett’s sub-chapter which follows. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
15 
technologies allow for massive many-to-many forms of communications that occur near 
instantaneously across the globe.  It is likely that some of the complexities of the emergent cyber 
domain are due to these new capacities.  A recurrent theme in the workshop was that 
unpredictability in the cyber domain is neither bad nor mystical.  It is a process that is ongoing 
and that can potentially be understood.  
Complexity theory as a branch of mathematics provides the means for analyzing and 
understanding the cyber domain.  The elements of complex systems can be understood through 
engineering analysis of its infrastructure and social analysis of people’s behavior with cyber 
technology; these observable elements can be modeled in agent-based simulations to gain insight 
into how and why cyber technologies spread and what their likely effects on other social 
phenomena may be.  Simple explanations and clear predictions about the cyber domain will not 
likely be forthcoming, but understanding the range of possible effects is.  Another issue 
identified in the course of the workshop is that the cyber domain is both a manifestation of 
globalization (it would not be possible without globalization) and a facilitator (cyber 
connectedness clearly contributed to the globalization process).  The cyber domain provides a 
self-reinforcing feedback loop that amplifies interconnectivity.  
Deterrence in a Complex Environment 
The complexity of the cyber domain presents several challenges to deterrence, including 
identifying threats, the scope of deterrence and feasible effects. 
The cyber domain is vast and multi-faceted.  Consequently, potential threats one may wish to 
deter are many and to some extent unknown. This presents an unprecedented challenge to 
deterrence, especially when contrasted with Cold War objectives of deterring Soviet nuclear 
aggression. The next section, on possible cyber-based typologies, coupled with Chapters 3 and 5, 
outline the range of potential threats.  These threats can be divided into two categories:  threats in 
and to the cyber domain, and use of the cyber domain in a threatening manner.   
Consequently, deterrence objectives can range from deterring certain uses of the cyber domain 
(e.g. for recruiting, passing information, attacking the cyber domain) to deterring attacks outside 
of the cyber domain, which may involve use of the cyber domain (surveillance, strategic 
communication, etc.).  An important theme that emerged from the workshop was the need for 
policy makers to provide better guidance to operators in terms of what activities require 
deterrence. The knowledge of academic and government experts is vast and the talents of 
operators are formidable, but they require focus on the behaviors the USG wishes to deter. 
Deterrence in the cold war was not only focused on a particular threat (nuclear war) from a 
particular enemy (the Soviet Union), but it was also based on a decision calculus that involved 
identifying what an adversary valued and holding it at risk so that an adversary would find 
greater value in avoiding actions we wished to deter (Zagare 2004).  Given the range of 
adversaries and their differences in strategic calculus, such a straightforward approach to 
deterrence is no longer feasible (Bodnar 2003).   
Deterrence now appears to lie on a continuum from traditional threats on an adversary’s values 
to influence operations aimed at denying adversaries support to shaping the battlespace so that 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
16 
potential adversaries do not become threatening (Chesser 2007; USSTRATCOM 2006).  This 
follows the idea of a Deterrence 2.0 presented in the opening summary of the report.  Not only 
does such a range of possible activities present challenges for operations, but organizational 
coordination across military specialties (deterrence, information operations, PSYOPS, civil 
affairs) and agencies (DoD, Dept. State, others) will be necessary.   
However, if the desire is to avoid reactive responses to crises, then it will be necessary to work 
proactively upstream of problems before they materialize.  The concept of deterrence will have 
to be broadened and new working relationships will have to be forged to accomplish these new 
missions.  We see this as consistent with former doctrinal approaches to preparing the battle-
space (Joint Chiefs of Staff 2000) and newer concepts of preparing the operational environment 
(for example, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment, JIPOE).  
Given that the cyber domain is a complex phenomenon in the context of a complex globalization 
process, and given that potential threats are ill-defined and to some degree unanticipated, it is fair 
to ask, “What feasible deterrence effects can one expect?”  Globalization as a process and the 
spread of the cyber domain are complex, bottom-up processes.  Therefore, they are probably 
largely out of any direct control (see Sub-Chapter 2B, by Robert Axtell).  In fact, Axtell noted 
that VNSA as they are currently defined in this study “represent simply the latest stage in the 
development of a long line of technologically-enabled combatants with interests opposed to the 
system of states in which the actors find themselves.”9   
Axtell also noted that “as global-reach of low-cost production brings high performance 
computing and fast Internet connections to great numbers of households around the world there 
is increasing confrontation of globalization’s urgencies with traditional cultural systems.”  Such 
a clash aggravates both complexity and the likelihood of continued use of the Internet by VNSA 
to further their causes. 
However, to the extent that their complexity is realized and appropriate analyses are employed, 
more effective means of dealing with specific problems can be designed.  A useful analogy 
would be trans-oceanic sailing – success is defined not by controlling the ocean but by its 
successful navigation.  We anticipate that successful deterrence in the cyber domain will involve 
strategic communication focused on specific, timely issues designed to influence audiences and 
potential adversaries; all of these elements, the issues, audiences and actors are likely to change.  
As such, deterrence in the cyber domain will have to be sustainable (maintained through time) 
and adaptive (ready to change focus to address a new threat and prepared to employ new 
methods). 
It is even possible that the US will expand the Deterrence 2.0 continuum to include building out 
and protecting cyberspace as part of its goal of staying “to the left of boom!”  The United States 
is uniquely qualified in history to accomplish such an effect.  Contributor James Fallows 
recounted from interviews of French, German, British and Danish officials in recent years when 
he asked them why America had less to worry about the dangers of home-grown terrorism. 
                                                
9 Axtell further notes that the “cyber-domain and global economic integration lead to status disparities, and 
knowledge of such disparities, and this fuels anti-global movements.”  This potentially fuels the fight of both 
disruptive forces and the use of the Internet and globalization to further the causes of VNSA.   
 
 
 
 
 
Obt in
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
17 
“America has absorbed most of its Muslim immigrants.  It had been open to them.  It had 
assimilated them.  They didn’t feel estranged from American opportunity and the whole of the 
American idea.  We could not possibly pay enough to provide the deterrence that the openness of 
our society does.” (Fallows, 2008) 
Despite the multiplicity of threats, expansion of the deterrence concept and varieties of effects, 
workshop panelists and participants did focus on several issues and guidelines for cyber 
deterrence in the 21st Century.  
Guidelines 
Panelists discussed several substantive issues likely to be timely and useful for informing current 
cyber deterrence. These issues concern the transference of traditional communication to the 
cyber world, the juxtaposition of local and global issues, constraints on individual information 
processing, and future forces and untapped resources for cyber deterrence.  
Panelists noted that in many ways, people use cyber technology to continue and even extend 
traditional means of communication; this is apparent as families use email and singles use online 
dating services to conduct the age-old business of respectively taking care of family and finding 
mates.  Related to this continuity with traditional life is the fact that themes in cyberspace often 
are decidedly local – people discuss personal and political issues of the day that concern them in 
their corner of the world.  For this reason, demography (e.g., young males with frustrated 
ambitions often flock to the Web to find direction and like-minded friends) and economics 
continue to be root drivers of Internet use and themes (Atran 2006; Conway 2007; Gruen 2007).  
However, the anonymity and globalism of the cyber domain also provides unprecedented contact 
with people from around the world.  This has led to the proliferation of universalist themes, such 
as global jihad or White supremacy, on the Internet (or even globalization in a more positive 
vein).   
With so much information available in the cyber domain, issues of bounded rationality are more 
relevant than ever in analyzing how information is perceived and processed by users. Given the 
constraints on cognition, people will be forced to filter much information and decide and act 
upon only a small portion of it.  Furthermore, with attention divided between traditional 
communication (which always goes on), cell phones, pod casts, and multiple email accounts, the 
time people have to deliberate on options is likewise more constrained than ever.  Therefore 
analyses of decision making behavior in the cyber domain need to move away from traditional 
rational choice paradigms and their assumptions of complete information.  In the highly 
interconnected cyber world we face, complexity almost guarantees that decisions will be made 
under conditions of incomplete information. 
Finally, new forces are likely to play a profound role in shaping the future cyber domain, and 
new sources of expertise will be necessary for dealing with it.  China contains a quarter of the 
world’s population and is rapidly modernizing.  Concomitant with their development is 
increasing integration with the cyber domain by Chinese citizens, despite Chinese governmental 
efforts to control access.  Future interests, trends and economic developments in China and 
elsewhere (e.g., India) are therefore likely to have a profound influence on the future of the cyber 
domain.  
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
18 
Attendees to the workshop noted that middle-aged analysts and operators are unlikely to possess 
the cutting edge expertise on what is happening in the cyber domain or more important, what 
approaches may be useful for deterrence in this emerging world.  However, our military (and 
even the US State and Justice Departments) already has many “Generation Y” young adults who 
were socialized with cyber domain savvy, and they and their civilian counterparts need to be 
more a part of discussions of deterrence in the cyber domain.   
Example:  The Cyber domain in the Arab World 
The adoption of the Internet in the Muslim world has occurred in three phases:  Phase 1, 1980s – 
Initial use by “technological adepts”, which included computer engineers, technicians, students 
and other professionals of the Muslim Diaspora in Western societies; Phase 2, 1990s – Activists 
engage the Internet for debate on religious texts, both fundamentalist and moderate; and Phase 3, 
Late 1990s – Engagement of both official religious spokespersons and audiences through blogs, 
etc., (Anderson 1997a, 2003a, 2007).  Conway (2007) adds to this a fourth, post-911 Phase 
spearheaded by radical Islamic fundamentalists.   
Anderson’s work is important because he identifies who the majority of Muslim users of the 
Internet are and what issues bring them to the net.  In short, most users of the Internet are middle 
class professionals and students who seek the Internet for advice on being Muslim in a modern 
world.  This includes many Muslims living in Western societies where they do not have a local 
Islamic community with which to interface, and what he terms the “internal diaspora” of Muslim 
professionals within Muslim societies who have few peers with which to interface (Anderson 
2007).  Anderson (2007) also stresses the complex alliances and networks that have been forged 
as Muslims have adopted and supported the Internet in uniquely non-Western ways.  These 
alliances include governments (which are becoming less important), business and religious 
entrepreneurs, and a class of mobile elites with a global perspective.  
As participants in the workshop noted, the primary users of the Internet continue to be middle-
class folk with middle-class concerns that tend not to be radical, although they may be 
conservative. On the whole they will be receptive to messages that reinforce their conservative 
goals of maintaining the well-being of their lives and families in a manner consistent with the 
values they hold. This is an opportunity for positive strategic communications, provided that they 
are sensitive to the culture-specific and non-violent goals of much of the Muslim world.  
This brief history of the Internet in the Arab world illustrates the complex nature of cyber 
domain adoption and the dynamic relations between key players.  Consequently, the cyber 
domain in the Arab Muslim world, threats that may emerge from it, and deterrence measures will 
necessarily be fluid and changing.  
Extending the Typology of Deterrence with Cyber Actors and Cyber Threats 
Identifying who may use the cyber domain, what drives their motives, and how they go about 
using it requires collecting the right kind of information.  This task is challenging for the cyber 
domain for several reasons.  First, the military and intelligence communities do not typically 
collect information relevant to the broad range of technological, social and cultural variables 
related to non-state actors.  Second, the complexity of the cyber domain, those that use it and 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
19 
why, challenges any straightforward attempt to “get one’s arms” around the problem.  Third, the 
cyber domain has emerged so recently that there is no canon of literature that adequately defines 
it.  As part of this and other SMA efforts, we have developed a general social typology that at 
least guides analysts toward asking the right questions.  A few examples of the diverse 
approaches to understanding cyber terrorism will illustrate how multifaceted this problem is.  
The typology below illustrates how key variables identified by cyber terrorism researchers can 
be identified. 
Non-state political activists have learned to use the Internet adroitly for a variety of purposes 
(Arquilla, et al. 1999; Lesser 1999).  Conway characterizes terrorist use of the Internet in the 
following 4 ways (Conway 2004:276):   
• Use – simple use of communication and recruitment 
• Misuse – use of Internet to disrupt websites or infrastructure 
• Offensive Use – use of Internet to cause damage or theft 
• Cyberterrorism – actual assault on the Internet that results in violence or severe economic 
damage.10  
Maura Conway and Madeleine Gruen provide analyses of Internet use by terrorist organizations 
(see also CTC 2006 for a catalogue of images and their meanings used by terrorist 
organizations).  Conway (2007b) describes bin Laden’s use of websites like Al-Neda and Al-
Ansar to disseminate speeches by bin Laden, analyses of conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
Islamic scholar’s commentaries, and assessments of how al Qaeda’s goals would benefit the 
community of Muslims.  She also notes al-Zarqawi’s (al Qaeda Iraq) effective use of the Internet 
to advertise his deeds and spread fear, actually enabling him to reduce the size of his attacks and 
drive away foreign contractors necessary for the rebuilding of Iraq. Conway (2004; 2007b) also 
notes Hezbollah’s use of a website associated with al Manar TV in Lebanon for propaganda and 
strategic communication during the Israeli invasion of 2006.  Conway also provides thoughtful 
discussions of the challenges of regulating the Internet (Conway 2007a) and cautions against 
blowing the threat of cyberterrorism out of proportion (Conway 2008).  
Madeleine Gruen (2004; 2006) provides detailed descriptions of how Islamist organizations 
(Hezbollah, Hizb ut-Tahrir) adroitly use popular music, online games and blogs to attract bored 
or disaffected young Muslim males.  Hizb ut-Tahrir has actually subtly infiltrated blogs of 
hip/hop Muslim groups to shift the discussion toward radical Islamist themes. Hezbollah 
launched an online computer game, “Special Force,” which depicts operations against Israeli 
troops and target practice on Ariel Sharon.  
This next leads us to ask:  Who is attracted to radical Internet sites?  Scott Atran and Jessica 
Stern provide insights from their investigations of terrorist Internet use and found that disaffected 
and culturally disoriented young males in diaspora communities gravitated toward the Internet 
where they could be radicalized (Atran 2006; Atran and Stern 2005). This profile fits within the 
broad patterns Anderson describes.  
                                                
10 NOTES:  In Chapter 3, author Allison Astorino-Courtious also discusses a different way of looking at the problem 
that includes classification by Actors and classification by threats. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
20 
Probably the most detailed description of terrorist recruitment and use of the Internet is from the 
New York Police Department study of 11 terrorist plots (Silber and Bhatt 2007). The Internet 
was especially important in the Toronto 18 Case (2006) and the London bombers (2005), where 
members variously discovered radical Salafist Jihadism, met future collaborators, and reinforced 
their radical views.  The most vulnerable individuals were young Muslim males or recent 
converts who were disaffected, had experienced a life crisis and were searching for meaning in 
their lives. In line with other studies, young males in diaspora communities were especially 
vulnerable.  The report concludes that the Internet can be a driver of radicalization by providing 
young, disaffected males with access to radical ideologies, by facilitating the meeting and 
networking with like-minded individuals, as a means for studying and immersing oneself in 
radical views, and finally as a source of information for planning attacks (Silber and Bhatt 2007:  
p8-9). 
Svetlana Peshkova (2002) studied the role of Hib ut-Tahrir’org in Uzbekistan.  Like Conway and 
Gruen, she provides a description of how the organization uses the Internet to spread its religious 
and political message.  She also provides a characterization of the recipients, noting that 
recipients of Hizb ut-Tahrir’s messages are likely to be better off economically, and have high 
linguistic and technical competence thereby biasing the audience and the nature of discussions 
that take place (Peshkova 2002:19). This leads to sometimes surprising debates in e-Forums that 
argue the relationship of Sunni Islam to other religions, engage debates internal to Islam, and 
sometimes even question the political agenda of Hizb ut-Tahrir (Peshkova 2002:21-22).  She 
closes by noting that much more study of actual use of radical sites on the Internet is necessary to 
elucidate who uses, why, and what connections emerge between them.  
The broad variety of radical Internet users, issues, demographics, and forms of Internet 
interaction make the typological characterization of the complexity of non-state actors (violent or 
not) within cyberspace is critical.  It is vitally important that relevant information on  a broad 
range of issues is appropriately considered, and a typological approach can facilitate this end. 
The below diagram depicts a basic socio-cultural typology that was first introduced in an earlier 
discussion of typologies as they referred to deterrence (Chesser, 2007). 
 
In the main, the purpose of a typology in the current work is to provide a generalizable 
organization structure for military and intelligence analysts and planners to characterize socio-
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
21 
cultural systems.  These systems could include a military organization, a terrorist organization, a 
tribal society or a nation state.11 
The following brief descriptions of the typological factors apply to the model above.  The first 
broad category above addresses Interests.   
 Motivating Factors – Ideological:  One source of motivation for VNSAs is the realm of 
their ideals, some of which may be very abstract (e.g. a Manichean belief in a struggle 
between good and evil), and others may be more concrete (e.g. the moral superiority of 
Sharia, or democracy). Ideological motivating factors can include principles of 
leadership, political values (democracy, autocracy, communism), legal principles, 
military doctrine, religious dogma. These factors also include basic existential and moral 
beliefs, such as good versus evil, the afterlife, moral principles such as honesty (also the 
“Golden Rule”), beliefs about proper place in the social or natural world, cosmology.  
This is the symbolic realm of an actor’s cognitive environment that provides aspirations – 
how they look at the world.  It is useful to separate it into codified (i.e. military doctrine, 
church dogma, charters, legal codes) and uncodified (social norms, senses of right vs. 
wrong, morality) norms. Codified motivating factors also include rituals and other 
scripted performances used to express motivating factors.  
 Social Identity:  This includes the constellation of factors brought together for self-
identification or labeling by outsiders; these factors may include history, appearance, 
language, political objectives/ideology, geographic location, and any other element of the 
typology.  The key here is that self-described identity may provide objectives and/or 
constrain actors to behave in certain ways.  Identities in the cyber domain can be 
especially fluid and overlapping as actors can take on multiple, and at times radically 
different, identities.  
 Objectives:  This includes concrete goals that actors wish to achieve; often motivated by 
or justified by motivating factors (establish a Caliphate to establish Sharia law), identity 
(extract revenge for historical slights against one’s group), or even organizational 
structure (think of bureaucratic decision making and organizational culture). 
People’s motives do not exist in a vacuum and understanding motives, behaviors, and even 
capabilities requires understanding the world from which these emerge. Therefore, the second 
broad category includes Context: 
 Environmental and Historical Context + Other Actors:  These categories may be thought 
of as external factors that influence a system under study.  Environmental factors include 
                                                
11 By definition, “typologies are a product of deductive research. The researcher conceptualizes the types that are 
relevant to the research. These types form the cells of the classification scheme and each cell is labeled (named).  
The researcher then identifies cases that possess the characteristics deemed essential to fit the cells.  The great 
advantage of typologies is their ability to simplify complex concepts by classifying objects according to a few, often 
two, criteria at a time.” (Lambert, 2006)  Typologies often specify artificial or contrived classifications whereas a 
taxonomy, often confused with a typology, looks to generate natural classifications.  In the case of a VNSA in 
cyberspace, typologies are likely the best we can do at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
22 
climate, terrain, natural resources, arable land/pastures, water, security situation, or 
political/economic position in world.  Also, people’s views of the world and especially 
political motives have a history that should not be ignored.  This historical context 
conditions who an actor is likely to perceive as friend or foe, the key events used by 
actors to evoke emotional responses, and the actor’s justification for grievance.  The US 
Military Academy Combating Terrorism Center’s 2006 publication on Jihadist imagery is 
an excellent example of how historical themes are woven throughout the symbols used by 
Islamist terrorists.  And equally importantly, all actors, whether individuals or groups, 
behave in relation to others.  Other Actors:  e.g., “No society is an Island” describe 
relations with and influences from other societies that are key factors influencing 
variables within a society. Influences range from political interference (Iran in Lebanon) 
to refugee populations (Darfur refugees in Chad, Iraqis in Jordan), to immigrants (Turks 
in Germany), to economic (Western capital intrusion into Third world societies, 
globalization), to cultural (spread of Western values and behaviors through globalization, 
spread of global Salafist Jihadism).   
 Demographics:  “How people reproduce.” These factors include age/sex structure, age at 
marriage, availability of mates, marriage types (monogamy, polygamy); sexual behaviors 
and mate choice were added since these vary by culture; all of these are very important, 
and have an impact on demographic trends. As noted in the examples of terrorist use of 
the cyber domain, young unmarried males tend to be the prime targets for recruitment for 
Salafists, including through the Internet. Understanding the demographic characteristics 
of these populations can lead to insights as to why they are attracted to such movements, 
and possibly ways to deflect their interest in violence.  
 Roles/Life Cycle:  “Functions and positions people play in groups.”  Social context 
(includes other categories) influences roles. Since a person’s social roles typically change 
throughout life, they are included here. Effective operation in a culture requires knowing 
how roles change throughout the life cycle. As well documented in the NYPD study of 
radicalization, violent Jihadist movements require individuals to fulfill certain key roles, 
such as organizational leader, religious sanctioner, and of course various forms of foot 
soldiers.  Understanding the functioning of a VNSA requires an understanding of the 
roles necessary in such groups. 
 Organizational Structure/Social Organization:  “How are people in a society organized?”  
This is a large category that contains many variables not normally considered by 
intelligence analysts. Understanding the different social organizations that influence an 
individual or group is the key for identifying decision units and constituencies, and for 
identifying enabling or constraining factors.  For instance, harm done to one’s family in a 
society organized by kin groups both motivates an individual in that group to take 
revenge, and provides clan or tribal resources for mobilizing that individual.  One 
workshop participant made the point that much of what occurs in the cyber domain is a 
transference of traditional social relations to a new medium. Because so many 
organizations impact actors’ lives in so many ways, it is important to include norms of 
behavior, habits, traditions, doctrines, rituals, practices, and it includes:  kinship 
(bilateral, patrilineal, matrilineal descent, kinship terminology; this influences how 
families are organized - often key primary alliances); sodalities:  non-kin based social 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
23 
organization, county clubs, Rotary, etc.; political parties, religious organizations and 
military organizations. 
People exist in meaningful social structures and draw motives from a variety of sources, 
including history, demography, identity, and values. However, assessing whether or not an actor 
is able to realize objectives requires assessment of Capabilities.  
 Production/Technology:  “What people do for a living” jobs, productive activities 
(farming, horticulture, herding) plus technologies that people use (tools, weapons, 
implements) are indicators of capability. Anderson’s (2007) research is an excellent 
example of how technical skills of engineers, and their Western incomes were 
fundamental in initiating and spreading cyber technology throughout the Muslim world. 
 Settlement/transportation/communications:  “Where people live and how they get 
around/communicate,” types and availability of housing, rural vs. urban settlement, road 
systems, communications are also indicators of capability.  Clearly, the infrastructure 
required for cyber communications, electronic grids, cell towers, satellite systems, and 
cable systems is key to understanding an actor’s capability for using the cyber world.  
 Economic System:  “How production/exchange is organized at the social level.”  Such a 
breakout includes markets, barter systems, social division of labor, industrial sectors, 
distribution of wealth and inequality.  Once again, Anderson’s research on the spread of 
the Internet in the Muslim world illustrates how the global market for engineering skills 
caused migration of Muslims to developed countries where they acquired technical skills 
necessary to spread the Internet in their home countries.  Afterward, complex alliances 
formed between governments, financial institutions and industries to finance the creation 
of a cyber infrastructure for the Muslim world.  
A fourth broad category above addresses Psychology. 
 Decision Making:  This sub-category of psychology is particularly important when 
considering the cyber domain, and includes risk sensitivity, emotion, cognitive style, 
decision modes (typology), and neuroscience. Its influences range from neurological 
functioning to more social influences (emotional attachment to symbols).  As we noted 
earlier, the immense amount of information available in the cyber world requires 
filtering; the manner in which people attend to messages in the cyber world and the ways 
they process those messages will require attention if appropriate models of how a 
motivated and capable actor decides to act.  
Also included in the model above is a broad category called Language.  Symbolic 
communication is fundamental to nearly every aspect of human life and permeates all elements 
of the typology.  Language includes not only traditional linguistic concepts such as knowledge of 
particular language/dialect used, grammar, lexicon, and phonetics, but also the socially 
appropriate use of language/dialect(s) in different social contexts. 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
24 
Chapter Summary 
This chapter seeks to lay the social and top-level technical considerations for life in the global, 
interconnected world.  The two sub-chapters that follow this one (Barnett and Axtell) represent 
divergent but no less reasonable perspectives on the potential successes of the US government in 
dealing with VNSA use of cyberspace.  Barnett advises that the US work hard to foster the 
development of the Internet for all, be resilient in the face of attacks and not try to own the 
problem cautioning that it may take a non-state actor to deal with a non-state actor.  In support of 
this final point, workshop panelist John Robb cautioned that, “deterrence within the small group 
context is best accomplished by working like a participant in the system and not an owner.” 
(Robb, 2008)  Axtell describes the co-evolutionary effects that seem to be taking place among all 
of the players in the Age of Cyberspace, also cautioning against the US taking too much 
ownership and thus control of the potential solution space.   
It should also be clear that a meaningful typology to help the US and its allies understand the 
complex environment is more critically needed than ever thought possible when the Strategic 
Deterrence SMA began almost a year ago. The broad typology under development is an attempt 
to expand approaches to understanding and deterring VNSA.  The thoughts captured in this 
chapter and sub-chapters, as well as succeeding chapters all seem to point to the need to 
understand Deterrence 2.0 as having only a few parallels to Cold War deterrence.  The parallels 
(and convergences) that do exist, however, seem to show that when it is possible to find 
something of the adversary’s to place at risk, old fashioned deterrence might still work (if that’s 
the way the US wishes to play the game in the Information Age). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
25 
2.A Deterrence in the 21st Century   
by Thomas P. M. Barnett, Enterra Solutions 
 
The definition of deterrence in the 21st century 
I like to leave Cold War analogies back in the 20th century, because they all tend to speak toward 
the preservation of the international status quo instead of managing a dynamic process such as 
we face today with globalization.  Our problem with globalization isn’t that it’s geographically 
stuck and needs defending, but rather that it’s spreading at a rate that we can’t easily manage in 
terms of handling all of the new threats suddenly inside the “tent” that—until recently—included 
a mere one-tenth or so of the global population—namely, the West. 
Because threats can come from all angles in a service-oriented architecture (SOA) world, and 
because our definitions of crisis/war today are much “lower” than in previous ages (e.g., 
anything with a loss of life, anything that triggers business or network discontinuity, anything 
with significant environmental impact, anything with significant property loss), trying to define 
universes of non-state actors with nefarious ambitions becomes a hugely ambitious affair.  
Likewise, limiting your perspective to just non-state actors with violent intentions misses too 
much of these actors’ ambitions to steer the course of human events by creating unacceptably 
high returns on investment (i.e., their attempted or successful one-time action triggering an 
exponentially more expensive lasting response from us). 
Or as I like to joke, be grateful Richard Reid didn’t shove that bomb up his rear-end instead of 
just sticking it in his shoe . . .. 
Because of the rising complexity of SOA-enabled global business platforms that bind our 
economy with those of states featuring less robust legal and security rule sets, we are necessarily 
made more vulnerable to the nefarious ambitions of violent non-state actors.  However, as a 
practical reality, those ambitions, to the rather limited extent they are realized on a daily basis, 
rarely rise above the “white noise” of snafus and discontinuities created unintentionally or 
intentionally by nonviolent non-state actors throughout these ever-expanding global networks 
(a.k.a., “stupid” people operating what David Isenberg calls “stupid networks”). 
As such, to the extent that violent non-state actors succeed in their efforts, they provide a 
clarifying function that focuses public and private sector attention to existing vulnerabilities.  
However, if we unreasonably elevate the importance of such violent non-state actors, we’re 
likely to damage our own capacity for day-to-day resilience rather than expand it—the iatrogenic 
effect. 
My definition of deterrence in the 21st century has little to do with moving as far to the left of 
“boom” as possible.  As globalization reformats traditional societies, the root causes of violent 
non-state actors will be exacerbated in the short and medium run but ultimately mitigated over 
the long haul by the extension of rule sets accompanying those expanding networks.  Confusing 
friction (the social anger caused by the reformatting process) with the force (globalization’s 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
26 
penetration of traditional societies) is deeply unhelpful, because conflating the two dynamics 
muddies causality:  the more successful globalization is, the sharper the local resistance to its 
advance. 
As such, I believe it is necessary to accept the notion that the threats from violent and non-
violent non-state actors (both intentional and unintentional) will rise in coming years, and rather 
than attempt to go significantly “left of boom” to deal with root causes (a task better left to 
friendly non-state actors), I think the national security community should focus on protecting its 
own networks and working hand-in-glove with the private sector to do the same, with its 
definition of deterrence being, Anything you (the enemy) can throw at me, I can counter faster 
and better.   
In short, rather than threatening reciprocal and proportional punishment (amazingly hard to 
achieve), it’s better to dramatically reduce the attacking actor’s perceived benefits—to wit, 
proving them illusory and meaningless.  So as much as the media derides President Bush’s 
“shopping mall” strategy, living well is the best revenge and the best deterrent display. 
I argue, as does my company (Enterra Solutions), that the dynamic management of rule sets (e.g., 
compliance, security, performance metrics, systems integration) is the best path forward for 
creating resiliency in the face of an unlimited pool of potential threats, not going upstream to 
deal with motivations per se, a job better left to friendly non-state actors in the private sector. 
Recognizing the national security community’s biases on this subject 
There are a number of unfortunately pervasive biases inside the national security community that 
fuel unrealistic ambition for “left of boom” solutions to violent non-state actors. 
First, there is the assumption that new technologies are persistently transcendent:  wiping out the 
previous paradigm and “changing everything.”  Americans love to make a fetish out of 
technology, especially within our military.  Instead of seeing them as tools and recognizing 
we’ve gone through similar mechanism breakthroughs in the past (e.g., it’s still called “wire 
fraud,” so phishing isn’t exactly new), we tend to be the ones who ascribe almost magical 
capacities to new technologies, whereas it’s our less advanced brethren around the planet who 
more readily focus in on the most practical applications--despite our usual condescension on the 
subject. 
Second, there is the totally unsupported assumption that all new technologies favor our enemies 
overwhelmingly in comparison to ourselves, leaving them to serve as the fountainhead of real 
innovation while we’re allegedly always in a defensive, reactive crouch (I know, it sounds 
almost too stupid to write).   
While it is true that criminals and other informal economy types tend to exploit new 
communications technologies faster than business or the general population (i.e., the first 
anything usually involves pornography), there is no lasting or pervasive advantage that accrues 
to nefarious non-state actors over time, as history demonstrates decade after decade.  The “Wild 
West” only stays wild for so long. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
27 
Third, all new technology creates “chaos” and thus is uncontrollable, in turn establishing the 
long-term permanent advantage of nefarious non-state actors, who—again--become the main 
source of innovation within these domains over time (the super-populated world of Dr. Evils).   
In obvious contrast to this notion is a fourth bias that says all new technologies favor those 
seeking systematic control over others—the Orwellian perspective.  Oddly enough, it’s the 
merging of these two diametrically-opposed ideas within the national security community that 
fuels the most ambition to go as far “left of boom” as possible:  if we don’t control the non-state 
actors as soon as possible, all will be reduced to complete chaos, or—worse—the terrorists will 
soon be controlling our brains with the same evil technologies. 
The reality, of course, is that each new wave of technological advance creates more freedom for 
individuals, not less, and more systematic capacity for self-governance and resilience, not less.  
Still, these worst-case biases within the national security community are quite pervasive, 
speaking to that cohort’s innate tendency to focus on dangers instead of opportunities. 
Thank God for the private sector. 
Finally, there is the sad tendency among Americans to view all global history and global 
grievances as stemming from past and present American action (“We alone created this monster 
that never would have arisen without our complicity!”).  We believe we run the world and cause 
all relevant world history.  We believe Washington runs America and the Defense Department is 
the only truly capable change agent inside the USG, ergo, the Defense Department can be used to 
change the world, using the Trojan horse of “interagency.” 
If that sounds like the neocon worldview that served us so badly in postwar Iraq, then you’re 
paying attention. 
Again, the argument I offer through Enterra Solutions is that the national security community 
should view the spread of networks through globalization’s advance as an opportunity--not a 
danger.  The more our networks extend, the greater the transparency for our intelligence 
community, the more the private sector becomes the pervasive and less resisted agent of rule-set 
enforcement, and the more resilient communities can become—both in the advanced and less-
advanced portions of the global economy. 
Competition is nothing.  Co-optation and co-evolution are everything.  In the private sector IT 
industry, everyone is simultaneously a client, a distributor, a supplier, a competitor, and an ally. 
The need to view the current phase of globalization as a period of frontier integration 
Understanding that we’re in a period of vast frontier integration ensures that we’ll pursue more 
suitable responses to violent non-state actors and to non-state actors in general. 
The relatively rapid extension of globalization from its narrow, Western-based roots (North 
America, Western Europe, industrialized Asia) to its current, near-global embrace is the most 
important historical fact of our age.  Jump back to the early 1980s and you’ll find a mere tenth of 
the human population connected deeply by markets and security regimes that had moved past 
zero-sum definitions of defense.  But race ahead to 2008, only a quarter-century later, and we 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
28 
now face a global economy that deeply connects as much as three-quarters of the global 
population. 
Depending on how you count, this is roughly a five to ten-fold increase in the absolute number of 
people reasonably considered to be relatively deeply embedded in the globalization process, with 
all the mass violence in the system being ghettoized—to no one’s surprise—in those regions of 
the world that are poorly or only thinly connected (such as through the export of commodities 
alone) to the global economy—or what I call the “Non-integrating Gap” that extends from the 
Caribbean Rim of Latin America through much of Africa to southwest, central and southeast 
Asia. 
The challenge we face now is how to rapidly extend the West’s long-established security rule 
sets across this far more expansive geographic swath of the world—i.e., the emerging markets of 
Asia and Latin America and the former Soviet Union.   
A good historical comparison here is the challenge faced by the United States in the period 
immediately preceding and following the Civil War.  Having watched it’s territory roughly 
quadruple in the first half of the 19th century, America was forced to engage in massive frontier 
integration and infrastructural build-out.  Not surprisingly, this was a seemingly chaotic affair 
dominated by all sorts of “uncontrollable” non-state actors, both good and bad.   
In this process of frontier integration, we faced a choice:  focus on preventing bad things from 
happening, or accept that a certain amount of bad things were going to happen and focus instead 
on spreading the networks of security, transportation, and legal rules.  America chose to focus on 
the latter, accepting a certain level of risk, and mitigating that risk with a security approach that 
was selectively agile (various campaigns against various local bad actors) but systematically 
ponderous (the slow but steady extension of forts and then settlements and then towns and then 
admitted states, plus the progressive elimination of off-grid areas).  Our greatest asset in this 
process was the individual resilience of the friendly non-state actors involved—the pioneers and 
settlers and early-adopting companies that drove economic activity.  As they carved out nodes 
and eventually networks of control, their efforts were legally recognized through property rights 
(e.g., the Homestead Act promulgated by Lincoln).  Until then, it really was Deadwood-like. 
And if you want to see the modern version of that show, go visit China today. 
I bring up this historical example because of the ethos and perspective it presents.  Yes, we want 
to make all necessary efforts to hunt down the bad guys and prevent their nefarious acts, but 
overall our focus remains on the extension of governance—rules.  So we should be generous to 
any and all “homesteaders” in this process, recognizing that their positive example is more likely 
to “drain the swamp” or reduce the pool of potentially negative non-state actors than edicts from 
above, or a posse that swoops in from outside, or fantastic attempts to apply motivational therapy 
to those who’ve already gone over to the dark side (No, Osama, I am your father!). 
Understanding globalization’s division of labor in settling frontiers both real and virtual 
You need to visualize globalization’s historic advance as a series of successful replications.  
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
29 
The original globalization structures of the modern world began in Europe with the rise of nation 
states in the 17th century, followed by an unprecedented infrastructural build-out that linked 
those states and economies in profoundly synergistic ways, facilitating the original Industrial 
Revolution there.  That globalization structure was then replicated via Europe’s colonial 
extensions:  somewhat successfully to south Asia, less so to Africa, “thinly” to South America, 
late and with deliberate shallowness to the Middle East.   
The only place where the globalization model truly flourished was in North America and 
especially in the United States, which subsequently emerged, thanks more to the second 
Industrial Revolution, as an alternative source code for globalization—different from Europe’s 
colonial brand. 
Following the self-destruction of Europe’s empires in the two World Wars spanning the first half 
of the 20th century, American-style globalization found successful replication—along with 
adaptation to local values—in East Asia (e.g., Japan, South Korea, the other “tigers,” then China, 
India and increasingly Pakistan—despite its political unrest). 
As we look to the future of globalization’s successful penetration into, and integration of, the 
remaining off-grid locations (e.g., the Middle East, Africa, Central Asia—all sources of violent 
non-state actors galore) will be driven largely through the efforts of Asians—not Westerners.   
The logic here is relatively simple:  those “last in” the global economy serve as its most natural 
near-term purveyors.  India and China, for example, are the countries driving the current 
commodity boom, given their relatively recent income elevation and productive growth.  Their 
models of development are likewise far more appropriate to the regions in question, far more so 
than the more resource-intensive models pursued previously by Europe and North America. 
So when we approximate the cyber sphere with the globalization process, and speak about each 
in the vein of frontiers to be integrated through the progressive extension of rules and 
governance structures (to include resistance to that rule-set spread—both violent and nonviolent), 
it should come as no surprise that the rising, “invasive species” in both realms are those cultures 
who’ve most recently and aggressively embraced globalization.  They have the surfeit of bodies 
and ambition and needs and necessitated creativity. 
For an America considering the cumulative challenges of postwar and post-conflict and post-
disaster responses in these less integrated, “gapped” regions, it’s only natural that it eventually 
come to the conclusion that it’s future best allies in this frontier-integrating process are those 
cultures currently engaged in such activity at home, where domestic frontiers consist primarily of 
a vast sea of rural poor (a rough equivalent of my Gap strategic construct), for these countries are 
closest, in historical terms, to this challenge. 
In contrast, Europe and Japan are far beyond their colonizing periods, and America’s days of 
frontier integration are—by some measures—anywhere from 70 to over 100 years past (our last 
big internal nation-building efforts involved the taming of the West and the “New Deal” 
response to the Great Depression).  In our scaling of the industrial production ladder, we’ve 
largely priced ourselves out of this activity, both economically and demographically speaking. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
30 
So when we speak of trying to tame or marginalize violent non-state actors, whether it’s in 
worlds virtual or real, it’s important that we remember that the cultures likely to lead this process 
will not be Western, but Eastern, and that Asian values will likely flavor this advance of rule sets 
more than Western values will. 
How does this play out in the cyberspace?  The West favors both unlimited connectivity and 
unlimited content flows.  The East does not, favoring the former but not the latter, hence the 
extensive use of censoring and firewall technologies in many of the states there.  When we 
consider the fears of Westoxification (read, pornography) that drive many violent non-state 
actors in Gap regions, this compromise seems inevitable in the cyber world—at least for some 
period of time. 
Accepting the reality that as connectivity spreads, so too will “irrationality” 
There is the general assumption that familiarity breeds trust and that connectivity—especially 
trade connectivity--breeds peace. Over the long haul, this is clearly the case in international 
affairs.  But in the short-term, especially under conditions of rapid ramping up of said 
connectivity, the usual reaction from all sides is heightened nationalism.  Moreover, when there 
is heightened connectivity between societies of different levels of modernity, we tend to see a 
rise in religious sentiment in the less advanced society as individuals there reach for religion as a 
way to maintain collective cultural identities that are perceived as being put at risk through the 
exposure to outside, foreign influences (the essence of the globalization process). 
The only advanced society given to increased bouts of religiosity when opening up to the outside 
world is the United States, belying its status as cultural source code for today’s globalization. 
Having said that, globalization’s rapid advance around the planet, when combined with the 
individual-empowering communication technologies of the Information Revolution, means that 
the early 21st century is likely to be far more religious than the latter half of the 20th century.  It 
will also feature more “clashes” of civilizations and more youthful rebellion (the Gap regions are 
naturally skewed toward the youth), along with more nationalism.  All these coping skills will be 
applied to the universal task of retaining identity in a seemingly homogenizing world, the end 
result being that localization barely beats out globalization in most matters of cultural content. 
In the cyber world, this dynamic speaks to the Balkanization scenario, which, to some, signals a 
“chaotic fragmentation” that subverts the Internet’s promise of creating a global culture or 
village.  But to others, this dynamic merely signals that the Internet will largely conform to real 
world cultural contours—at least in the foreseeable future.  It also signals that the resulting cyber 
sphere will more likely resemble the sloppy, cultural mash-up that is the United States than any 
clearly demarcated civilizations—again recognizing the rising Asian quotient to that global mix. 
So think more “Blade Runner” than “Mayberry RFD,” but keep in mind the globalization of Hip 
Hop. 
Dealing with non-state actors isn’t about diminishing demand but meeting it 
Part of the unreasonable ambition of the national security community with regard to moving as 
far “left of boom” as possible on violent non-state actors stems from the belief that, even if root 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
31 
causes cannot be addressed through the cyber realm, effective therapy can somehow be 
administered through “strategic communications” and information operations in general.  Two 
varieties are found:  1) the Oprah-like, “if they only knew us better they’d like us more” 
approach; and 2) we’ll-disinformation-them-to-death approach.  Neither is very realistic given 
the tendency of believers of all stripes to self-select their cyber sources of news and information.  
In other words, pissed-off individuals look for rationalizations on the web, not conversions. 
Underlying these approaches is the notion that if demand can be turned off, then the pool of 
potential violent non-state actors can be reduced to those already lost to an aggressive stance—in 
effect, the at-risk population is depopulated. 
The problem with this mindset, besides the aforementioned self-selection tendency, is that it 
seeks to reduce the demands of targeted individuals instead of simply meeting them—e.g., 
promoting secularism over religiosity when the former denies the search for reinforcing cultural 
identity and the latter enables it.  Until, for example, it becomes clear to an individual that their 
religious identity can be maintained under the new conditions of heightened connectivity with 
the outside world, any communications pushing the desirability of religious freedom comes off 
as a non-too-subtle assault on existing local tradition—as in, “let my version of non-/religion 
enter into your culture and compete with yours--or else!” 
To truly reduce the pool of potentially violent non-state actors is to meet their demands for 
identity protecting cultural “tariffs,” not reducing them.  If we expect these traditional cultures to 
let globalization in, then such generational trade-offs are inevitable.  In the end, only the locals 
can ostracize violent non-state actors. 
Only non-state actors can tame non-state actors 
Let me end with two pleas. 
First, let me argue that whatever you write should assume a relatively humble tone regarding the 
utility of driving too far “left of boom.”  Now, when it comes to the question of trying to find 
bombers before they are armed with bombs, I’m not saying you don’t use the cyber sphere for all 
it’s worth.  I’m just saying that the national security community shouldn’t entertain fantastic 
ambitions to win “hearts and minds” through the cyber realm.  Simply put, Americans don’t trust 
our own government, so I really don’t see why we’d expect foreigners to, especially those 
already given to disliking us. 
Second, realize that the best change agents when it comes to flipping non-state actors (potential 
or realized) are other non-state actors, especially when it comes to young people and even more 
so for this current generation raised under conditions of hyper- and/or radically ramping 
connectivity.  In general, young people respond to peer pressure better than authority figures, and 
authenticity here cannot be spoofed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
e by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
32 
2.B Life in the Interconnected World:  Globalizing Effects of the Cyber 
Domain  
by Rob Axtell, George Mason and the Santa Fe Institute 
 
I have been asked to provide a short ‘think piece’ on this topic, so I shall attempt to take your 
thinking in some new directions while, due to space constraints, avoiding any pretense of 
comprehensively treating all facets of the problem. 
Let me start by saying that I do not like the sub-title of this workshop—“Promoting and 
Protecting US Interests in the Cyber World.” I would be happier if it were less ‘normative’ and 
more ‘positive,’ in the conventional sense of these terms in the social sciences—‘normative’ 
meaning ‘what should be done’ while ‘positive’ asks ‘how does it work.’ Too often policy is put 
in place to solve real problems before the actual connections between the policy levers and the 
problem space are sufficiently well understood to promise success. I fear this may be the case for 
our subject, for the ‘cyber domain’ is sufficiently powerful and ‘plastic’ that its most pernicious 
use by actors antithetical to the West are surely yet to come, and it is almost certainly true that 
policy prescriptions we might author today will primarily treat symptoms instead of the problems 
themselves. 
Violent non-state actors are certainly not a new phenomenon. Violence against the state by 
loosely organized antagonists has roiled every empire since the dawn of history. The boundary of 
the Roman Empire, for instance, was essentially determined as the distance at which the 
Empire’s reach was matched by one or another ‘barbarian’ group, of which there were probably 
thousands over the better part of a millennium, all engaged in more or less violent action against 
the Romans and their minions. These groups varied greatly in their organizational forms, some 
being proto-states whose names we know from history, while surely the vast majority were more 
loosely knit, temporary coalitions of tribes, many of which, when not fighting the Romans, 
would have been competitors for resources, land and so on. In the same vein, consider pirates in 
the 17th and 18th Centuries. Operating on the fringes of competing European empires, these 
(largely European) non-state actors were incredibly violent, plundering and pillaging all manner 
of treasure being expropriated to old Europe, often with shocking violence (Pennell, 2001). 
These actors were eventually neutralized by the 19th Century, but not until states grew in size to 
effectively rule all the seas with large navies (although some pirate activity of this type remains 
in the least developed parts of the world even today). In the American Civil War, it is well-
known that groups with only loose connections to either the Union or Confederacy fought very 
violent, irregular campaigns, often against civilians. Much like current non-state actors, it was 
often difficult to distinguish those pursuing the pro- or anti-slavery cause from those who were 
simply common criminals and outlaws. William Quantrill was one such leader, whose violence 
is legendary (e.g., Lawrence Kansas massacre of women and children) and whose connections to 
the Confederacy were at least tenuous. Several members of his band went on to infamous bandit 
careers (e.g., the James-Younger gang). 
Most violent non-state actors have appeared on the fringes of civilization, often taking advantage 
of the technologies that had been harnessed by the state to extend its control. In the case of 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed y 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
33 
Rome, the great Roman technologies of road and bridge building, aqueduct and sewer 
construction, and armor and weaponry, were largely assimilated by their opponents on the 
fringes of the Empire, and eventually brought to bear against Rome. Similarly with the pirates, 
who availed themselves of the latest ship-building technology to outfit their vessels to match 
their guerilla needs. 
Until the late 19th Century, such non-state groups had essentially local structures, dictated by the 
necessity of proximity for communication and coordination of activities. Until then, such actors 
were essentially local ‘bands’ of like-minded individuals. It is only with the invention of the 
telegraph and telephone, the first speed-of-light ‘network’ technologies, that such actors could 
organize their activities while physically remote from one another. As such, the violent non-state 
actors of the late 19th Century to the present, many of whom were either nationalist or 
communist/anti-communist in character (or some combination of these), achieved a larger scale, 
a more elaborate division of labor (e.g., military and political ‘wings’), and an overall structure 
that was not limited by physical boundaries, but by ideological ones. For example, Chinese 
communist guerillas were able to extend their organization to much of their country, eventually, 
but were not simply clients of Soviet Russia, with Maoism being programmatically distinct from 
Leninism. The critical role of technology also explains why such combatants, once they have 
achieved some success against the state, target with high priority the control of television and 
radio broadcasting stations, both for propaganda purposes but also for the enhanced command-
and-control possibilities they make possible, especially as the guerillas find it necessary to morph 
themselves into a state-like apparatus upon achieving victory (e.g., Castro and Guevara). 
These historical remarks have been made as evidence for the first point I wish to make, that the 
current crop of violent non-state actors, in making use of the Internet specifically and 
computational technologies generally—in a phrase, the cyber domain—represent simply the 
latest stage in the development of a long line of technologically-enabled combatants with 
interests opposed to the system of states in which the actors find themselves. Further, in the same 
way that the telegraph, telephone and television provided the first ‘speed of light’ technologies 
toward globalization, as sailing ships had provided the first ‘speed of wind’ technologies of 
globalization before, and Roman roads had provided the first ‘speed of walking’ globalization 
even earlier, the current cyber domain provides greatly enhanced connectivity and bandwidth, 
greatly facilitating communication and trade, the hallmarks of globalization. 
Every successful new technology produces competing effects, as Schumpeter’s term for 
innovation, ‘creative destruction,’ suggests (Schumpeter, 1942). On the one hand, new 
technologies introduce new capabilities that can be harnessed to simplify production, reduce 
costs, improve productivity, and enhance profits, while providing greater goods and services to 
end users. On the other hand, they devalue existing investment in older, substitute technologies, 
upset existing work rules and regimes, challenge cultural practices, and put pressure on extant 
social conventions. Truly disruptive innovations can spark potentially radical evolution in 
political, economic, and/or social institutions. 
The Internet is, in many respects, a disruptive innovation. It has changed many things:  how 
retailing is practiced, how news is disseminated, how intra-firm communications are managed, 
even how taxes are filed. How to make money from the Internet—finding the right ‘business 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
34 
model’—remains more art than science, with many traditional businesses yet finding it difficult 
to profit online but forced to be online because competitors are a presence there. 
The cyber domain is a force in globalization, a key player in the progressive development and 
articulation of worldwide trade and economic integration, but it is not the main driver of 
globalization. International free trade agreements, minimal controls on capital migration across 
borders, near open access to very large-scale low-cost labor pools, widespread political stability, 
relatively smooth fluctuations in currency values, and increasingly ubiquitous communication 
technologies have all facilitated globalization. It is easy to see that each one of these factors is 
closer to necessary than sufficient for the process of globalization, for without any of them the 
pace of the process would be much reduced, while no one factor by itself could have led to the 
level of global integration we have today. 
The present pace of globalization will likely continue for some time, influenced in a limited way 
by the ebb-and-flow of the various factors mentioned above. For example, political uncertainty 
due to the Iraq War and currency instability due to US trade deficits and devaluation of the dollar 
will each contribute to diminishing the amount of globalization that would otherwise have been 
realized, but the off-shoring of jobs to low labor cost countries will continue, alongside the 
repatriation of profits to foreign owners. There will continue to be some rearguard actions 
against globalization, as disenfranchised labor in the developed world seeks compensation for 
lost jobs and reduced standards of living, but such efforts will be marginal and will have little 
effect on the overall character of the emerging globally-integrated economy. 
The continued process of globalization will produce a great variety of global-scale social 
phenomena, from the rise of middle classes (and billionaires) in developing countries to 
environmental progress (e.g., the end of the printed newspaper) to the formation of mega-cities 
of one hundred million inhabitants. But of these many effects, I would like to focus on the three 
that I think are the most significant for our purposes. 
First, globalization is currently causing a shake-out in all production technologies that feature 
economies of scale. That is, for industries where the unit cost of making the (n+1)st unit is less 
than for the nth—typically heavy industry—there is enormous economic incentive to move 
production to a single regional location where the benefits of increasing returns can be fully 
extracted. Consider automobiles, where there is tremendous pressure on Detroit at the moment 
and for the foreseeable future, to become a ‘world class’ producer or go out of business. In 
essence, a fierce worldwide competition has been ignited between a few automotive 
manufacturers—Toyota, General Motors, Daimler—to see who will dominate 21st Century 
vehicle production. This process of global-scale competition is happening in many industries, 
and will produce, over the next few decades, a few global winners, with world-scale production 
concentrated in a few hands, a few centers of power. This process is quite different from what T. 
Friedman argues is happening in The World is Flat. We are seeing the centralization of power 
and resources as a result of globalization, which is a ‘flattening’ only in the sense that those not 
in the centers will see their income and power considerably homogenized. Just try to buy a 
locally designed, engineered, or manufactured vehicle in 2050! This global shake-out will 
produce winners and losers and for many it will not be a pretty picture. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
35 
This leads to the second great effect of globalization, the spontaneous generation of great 
disparities of income, wealth, living standards, and quality-of-life. While such disparities have 
long (always) existed (Smart, 1912), are present today, and would occur in the future with or 
without globalization, the size of the gaps in the globalized world will lead to strife and unrest. 
While the poor of the future will no doubt have a better life than the present day poor, and future 
middle classes are likely to be better off than their analogs today, there will be more super-rich to 
envy, especially at the global ‘centers’ that win the world class manufacturing crowns in autos, 
steel, ship-building, semiconductors, software, and so on. The discrepancies between economic 
classes will play out in myriad ways, and little can probably be predicted in advance for the kinds 
of conflict that may arise in any particular region. But suffice it to say that inequitable divisions 
of the products of human labor and ingenuity have been the source of much conflict throughout 
recorded history. In under-developed and developing regions, such disparities may serve as the 
‘root cause’ of movements that will limit globalization’s ultimate reach, whether because 
political forces antithetical to globalization gain power, or because such movements simply 
wreak such havoc that they effectively cut-off the local march toward global integration. Such 
movements may not be peaceful and therefore the formation of violent, non-state actors may be 
viewed as a direct consequence of globalization. The cyber-domain and global economic 
integration lead to status disparities, and knowledge of such disparities, and this fuels anti-global 
movements. 
The third way that global integration is most likely to powerfully manifest itself in the future is 
through severe financial disruption. If we look at financial history, the first great wave of 
industrialization in the US—gilded age railroad, steel and other heavy industry, mostly in the 
Northeast—was an early example of deep economic integration, ‘globalization’ on a regional 
scale. It largely ended in the ‘Panic of 1893,’ in which the US stock market fell markedly, 
precipitating four years of recession/depression, then the birth of the Progressive Era followed by 
the break-up of the large trusts. A generation later the Roaring Twenties in the US was another 
era of economic integration, this time fueled by technological developments like the automobile, 
airplanes, radio and motion pictures. This era too ended with financial disruption, as the US 
stock market ‘Crash of 1929’ brought twenty-five percent unemployment rates to the US by the 
early 1930s, and propagated around the world hitting essentially all developed countries. It took 
over a decade for the world to rise from that economic and financial catastrophe, and led to a 
truly global war. 
In summary terms, a main reason for these financial collapses in the wake of economic 
integration is that the new institutions that grow up in the context of economic growth are not 
designed to handle large-scale downturns, and so when crisis happens new institutions must be 
brought into existence to manage the myriad problems that result. Building new institutions 
sufficient to the job may take years, especially in the context of trying to manage the human 
tragedies produced by such events (e.g., the New Deal). In somewhat more biological terms, 
populations are vulnerable to severe fluctuations (and possibly extinction) when they are 
insufficiently diverse. As economic integration proceeds, firms and industries and regions 
become more alike—they share the same risks, use the same accounting practices, hire from the 
same executive pools, etc.—so when exogenous shocks arrive (e.g., bad harvests, technological 
innovations) the response of the many actors is highly correlated, leading to amplification of the 
shock. It is only through the diversification of actors or the establishment of organizations to 
attenuate the shocks that the effect of such events can be limited. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
36 
Today, it is being overly generous to call the worldwide financial ‘system’ a system at all. 
Rather, it is a hodgepodge of loosely connected electronic markets and regulatory structures, 
with trading firms providing most of the connectivity between markets, while central (national) 
banks intervene at the margins. There are important international institutions in place, like the 
IMF, but the focus of these entities is to provide credit primarily to developing nations and not 
the overt management of international financial markets. Therefore, given this landscape, as the 
current wave of globalization proceeds, and economic actors push the existing apparatus to its 
feasible limits, there will arrive one or more events that trip this system into crisis. When this 
happens, because the world is largely integrated, it will cause an economic downturn on a global 
scale. As to the severity of the downturn, if new institutions for managing the crisis 
internationally can be quickly legislated into existence, and if these function effectively, then 
perhaps a global recession will be the only result. However, if the situation deteriorates before 
such institutions are brought to life then a global depression could result. If this were to happen, 
surely there would be huge demand by affected citizens to form global financial institutions, and 
incentives for politicians to do so, but in the quagmire of such a global downturn, it might take 
decades to create truly global institutions with enough power to make a difference on a 
worldwide scale. 
At the moment we do not know if such a global financial meltdown is highly likely, merely 
possible, or unlikely, but it is surely possible. Prudence demands that we make some plans in 
advance for how to survive such an event, and survival may be at issue for some, since 
increasing fractions of people live in urban centers and rely on industrial production for their 
daily consumption, production that could be interrupted if systematic economic disruption were 
to occur. 
So far my remarks have been more about globalization than the cyber-domain. Indeed, the way I 
see it, it is not so much that the cyber-domain affects globalization as it is the other way around, 
that more or less exogenous processes of globalization have great effect on the cyber-domain. 
That is, as global-reach of low-cost production brings high performance computing and fast 
Internet connections to great numbers of households around the world there is increasing 
confrontation of globalization’s urgencies with traditional cultural systems. From such 
confrontations there can arise conflict or cooperation, depending on the context. Surely in some 
environments people will view the intrinsic value system of globalized production as sufficiently 
opposed to their traditional values that they will form organizations actively opposed to the 
further encroachment of the global economy on their lives. Such organizations could work 
peacefully or use violent means, and today we do not have a deep understanding of the 
determinants of one strategy over the other. However, we do not even have a good behavioral 
understanding of the previous effect, that is, the kinds of contexts out of which active opposition 
emerges. Surely simple behaviorist theories that one often finds in the press, say, are too 
simplistic, that mere contact with Western standards and beliefs breeds disdain. For it is a basic 
research question as to the exact way people sort information containing confirmatory evidence 
of their world view versus how they assimilate disconfirming evidence. 
Ultimately, there is a kind of dialectical connection between processes of globalization and the 
cyber-world:  one begets the other and has a tendency to turn it into its opposite. More 
accurately, there is a kind of co-evolution afoot of the cyber domain and globalization processes, 
and it is difficult to see just exactly where it will end up. Anyone willing to offer hard forecasts is 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
37 
probably guessing, at best, or trying to sell something in the typical case. In order to properly 
understand the connection between the two processes we need to do basic research on the inter-
relation between information technology, on the one hand, and global business practices on the 
other. Such a research program is eminently do-able with available knowledge and research 
methodologies today, but it is not clear who would be the primary consumer of such research, 
and therefore who should fund it. We would all profit from having a stream of basic research 
bearing fruit concerning how the developing world is using their access to the cyber world, 
whether it is shaping their views of Western values (or lack thereof), and how this depends on 
educational background, religious affiliation, income level, and so on. Short of having such a 
research program, we are left to guess about how all this will turn out, and what it means for US 
interests, in the small, and for future generations of humans, in the large. 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
46 
3 Reevaluating Deterrence Theory & Concepts for Use in Cyberspace   
by Allison Astorino-Courtois, National Security Innovations, & Matthew Borda, Creighton 
University 
 
 Introduction 
Twentieth century US deterrence thinking was founded in the logic of the Roman adage “si vis 
pacem, para bellum” (if you want peace, prepare for war).  That is, the overwhelming threat of 
severe physical punishment or war will bring about the absence of war.  Indeed, until September 
11, 2001 a general policy consensus maintained that the overwhelming superiority of US forces, 
both conventional and nuclear, served as an effective deterrent against major attacks against the 
US or its interests and allies. After the terror attacks of that day however, the para bellum and 
state-centric underpinnings of deterrence policy appeared to many to have been violated, and in 
fact were pronounced dead by President Bush a few months later: 
  “… new threats also require new thinking. Deterrence -- the promise of massive 
retaliation against nations -- means nothing against shadowy terrorist networks with 
no nation or citizens to defend.  Containment is not possible when unbalanced 
dictators with weapons of mass destruction can deliver those weapons on missiles or 
secretly provide them to terrorist allies.”12 
The concept of deterrence – preventing someone by threat of severe retaliation from doing 
something he would otherwise do – is as old as man.  In the area of global affairs the notion of 
deterring one’s adversaries from acting also predates the nation-state centric models of mutual 
deterrence that evolved in the context of the Cold War, and with limited exception continues to 
inform deterrence thinking today.  This section explores the conceptual bases of deterrence 
thinking with reference to two characteristics that genuinely distinguish the late 20th from the 21st 
century:  the expanded abilities of non-state actors of all sizes to pose serious national security 
threats, and the expansion of cyberspace.  Our main question is this:  Do current models of 
deterrence apply to non-state actor cyber threats and cyber aggression?  
Deterrence:  Model & Concept 
There exists an uncharacteristic degree of agreement in the voluminous literature on deterrence 
on a number of aspects of the basic concept.  First, there is little debate that deterrence is “the use 
of threats of harm to prevent someone from doing something you don’t want them to do,” 
(Morgan, 1983:  17).  Second, most agree that effective deterrence is a function of both good 
defenses and retaliatory capabilities, and that the two most critical components of any effective 
deterrent are the credibility and the potency of the threatened retaliation.  In other words, Can the 
threatener actually do what he threatens? Will he do so? And, Will I be worse off if he actually 
acts on his threat?  The point is not that these questions be answered with certainty by a deteree, 
                                                
12  2002 graduation speech at the United States Military Academy, West Point 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
47 
but that a successful deterrent must meet some threshold of sufficient credibility and potency in 
order to inhibit actions the adversary would otherwise have taken (George and Smoke, 1989).  
Beyond this agreement there are various schools of thought regarding how the deterrence 
concept should be operationalized, studied and tested.  The perspective that has dominated the 
US policy arena however, champions cost-benefit analysis-based “rational” deterrence models 
typically founded in expected utility and/or game theoretic methodologies.13  Without going into 
a discussion of math modeling and mechanics, it serves our purpose to note that as a category 
these models presume that an opponent will be deterred if, using backward induction, he 
calculates that the retaliation threatened by a defender is both credible and more costly than his 
failing to attack. That is, the net value of the losses he expects to suffer as a result of a threatened 
retaliatory action exceeds the total gain he expects from taking the action he is considering.  
Supporting this model of deterrence is a set of six basic assumptions about the decision maker to 
be deterred, his environment and information flows:  he/it is conceived as an identifiable, 
security-focused rational actor with a set of known and consistent preferences who operates in an 
environment of complete information about the probabilities of future events and the values of 
both sides.  Broken down, these are:   
• Known adversary. The adversary is a readily identified nation-state, unitary actor (i.e., with 
physical assets, a population, etc. that can be held at risk). In fact, it is implicit in most 
rational models that retaliatory (deterrent) threats are directed at a specified enemy; 
deterrence is by definition narrow in scope.   
• Rational actor.  The adversary is a “rational calculator” in the sense that his choices and 
actions are not random, but relative to a set of interests and objectives.  He seeks to avoid 
loss or pain across a number of interests and a limited set of available courses of action and 
will never do something that he believes will result in a net loss for him.   
• Identified Preferences.  The adversary knows his own preferences over all possible 
outcomes of a situation in advance of circumstances.  These preference ranks are not only 
known but are consistent and transitive (i.e., if A>B>C, C<A). 
• Probability Estimation.  Both sides in a conflict can and do estimate nearly perfectly the 
probabilities of the expected outcomes of their decisions. 
• Perfect Communication.  There is communication between the sides such that the adversary 
hears, understands and believes threats as the communicator intends them and, that the 
communicator can detect that this is the case.  There is also the presumption that each side 
understands the adversary’s own values and cost-benefit calculations as well as his 
willingness to take risks.  
• Security Focus.  Adversaries are singularly security focused.  There is limited linkage 
between military and other domains, and the adversary is more concerned with security than 
other issues. 
Again, in its most basic form, a rational deterrence model represents a strategic interaction 
“game” between two players:  an opponent and a defender.  Both players have complete 
                                                
13 An alternative set of deterrence models, neither as elegant nor as well-defined as rational models are those that 
incorporate cognitive limitations and incomplete information to explain deterrence effect (and failures.)  In these 
models, Achen and Snidal (1989:  148) note, “deterrence is seen as a fundamentally psychological process, in which 
cognition failures, fear, or simple time pressures disrupt the rational calculations assumed by deterrence theory.” 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
48 
knowledge of the choices available to the other as well as the other’s preferences over them.  The 
defender prefers to avoid attack (or some other threatening behavior) by the opponent who 
begins the game either by attacking, for example, or not.  The defender can choose to fight or to 
capitulate.  The commodity that generates the defender’s ability to deter an attack in the first 
place is the opponent’s uncertainty about the defender’s ability and commitment to retaliate.  
That is, successful deterrence depends on two things:  the defender's credibility, and that the net 
utility the initiator expects to derive from attacking (benefit) is less than that of not attacking.   
This sort of rational deterrence formulation has been a useful (and fruitful) basis for both 
theorizing and deterrence policy development.  However, in reassessing “deterrence” for use in 
cyberspace it is important to recognize that much of our formal understanding of deterrence and 
deterrence policy is based on this relatively strict and simplifying set of assumptions.14  Put 
another way, these assumptions likely were and are sufficient to offer insight into strategic 
deterrence of physical invasion, land capture, or direct attack on US or allied territories by the 
former-Soviet Union and Peoples’ Republic of China:  two large, extremely security-concerned, 
non-democratic nuclear nation-states.  The question remains however as to whether they are too 
severely violated to be of use in designing means of deterring non-state actors operating in or 
through cyberspace.  Before considering the implications of these assumptions and the 
deterrence policies that we have derived from them, we first should characterize the 
environment, threats and actors of concern. 
Cyberspaces & Cyber Actors 
The Washington Post recently identified the official, extremely broad designation of cyberspace 
as contained in the January 2008 National Security Presidential Directive 54/Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 23 (NSPD 54/HSPD 23): 
"Cyberspace means the interdependent network of information technology infrastructures, and 
includes the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded 
processors and controllers in critical industries". 
Perhaps more useful for our purpose however, is Mitra’s (2002) unpacking of the “cyberspace” 
concept – what Whittaker (2004) points out is actually “a myriad of rapidly expanding 
cyberspaces” – into cyber “building blocks.”  These building blocks are physical cyberspace, 
dataspace, and conceptual and social cyberspace as depicted below. 
• Physical Cyberspace.  Although cyberspace is most generally, “a metaphor for describing the 
non-physical terrain created by computer systems,” (Der Derian, 2000:  773), physical 
cyberspace refers to those physical components like computers, routers, hardware, power 
supplied and even in many cases, electricity necessary for use. 
• Dataspace.  Dataspace is the non-physical information and data storage sector where our 
websites, on-line newspapers, e-zines and other sources of information and education reside.   
                                                
14  Note that the counter-intuitive implications of these models include the rationality of convincing your opponent 
that you are a bit crazy (e.g., Nixon’s efforts in the bombing of Laos and Cambodia at the end of the Vietnam War), 
why complete nuclear disarmament anti-first strike measures like ABM systems may have negative impacts on 
security, and the advantages of strategic parity with the Soviet Union. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
49 
• Social Cyberspace.  It is most commonly “social cyberspace” that people mean when 
referring to their interactions with the cyber world.  This is the virtual space in which people 
communicate, play and interact via e-mail, blogs, and discovering virtual communities, etc. 
• Conceptual Cyberspace.  Conceptual cyberspace refers to one’s perception of the cyber 
realm as a “space”, a place to “go”.  It is another complete, real but non-physical world with 
its own culture, rules and norms of behavior; that space that computer game designers work 
so hard to achieve.   
 
Distinguishing among these four cyberspaces helps to us explore a vast array of potentially 
threatening cyber activities.  Beginning with physical cyberspace, a first category of threats can 
be defined in terms of adversarial efforts to compromise, degrade or destroy US physical cyber 
assets.  Kinetic attacks, including theft, on these assets and systems often can be mitigated by 
defensive measures such as hardening. They also are not conceptually distinct from other sorts of 
kinetic attack on physical assets that are more commonly the subject of deterrence thinking.  
The second category of potential cyber threats are non-physical (e.g., virtual) efforts to 
compromise, degrade or destroy dataspace.  These can range from relatively small-impact 
identity theft to compromise or manipulation of for example, military targeting packages or air 
traffic control systems.   
A third class of threats relates to social cyberspace and the rapid, expansion of perspectives, 
communities and movements antithetical to US national interests.  This is the part of the cyber 
world where we have seen the indoctrinating power of militant, radical Islamist ideas, and the 
sense of common purpose that  lone or small groups of individuals can find with geographically 
distant groups.  It is in social cyberspace where new cyber communities and cultures form, and it 
is a key arena in the so-called battle to “win” hearts and minds.   
The fourth and perhaps most insidious class of cyber threat, are efforts to compromise, degrade 
or destroy others’ perceptions of reality by manipulating signals, sensors, communications and 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
50 
other information that, for example, serve to guide US net-centric military operations, or the 
presence of incoming missiles. 
Of course, equal to identifying of the types of cyber threats is the increasingly complex task of 
recognizing and distinguishing among the types of actors who may pose these threats.  However, 
because the impact of cyberspace is a relatively new development and technology and innovation 
occur so rapidly, a thorough appreciation of all current and potential cyber adversaries is difficult 
to ascertain.  One way to attempt to differentiate the various types of cyber actors -- and the 
magnitude of the threats they pose is in terms of three major characteristics:  the type and size of 
the organization, its motives, and general or known level of violence.  Crossing just these three 
characteristics produces sixty-eight relevant actor types.  Even limiting our sample to those most 
likely to pose serious national security threats, namely, hyper-violent organizations motivated by 
ideological struggle, profit and a desire to injure or disrupt, produces twenty cyber adversary 
profiles.  Do we seek to deter each type?  Are we interested in all of them?  
 
Reevaluating Rational Deterrence 
During the Cold War period and since, deterrence policy has been indelibly linked to military 
force.15  Indeed, the idea of deterring aggressive activities simply by possessing a punitive 
retaliation capability is a parsimonious and very attractive proposition.  It is also an area where 
the US has tended to hold the advantage.  However, in the context of a greatly expanded number 
and variety of mobile, fleeting and/or unknown adversaries operating within a variety of 
cyberspaces, much of the assumptive foundation of that deterrence construct may become too 
restrictive to serve as the basis of policy.   
Assuming the continued emergence of adaptive adversaries, one of the key deficiencies of 
current thinking is its implicit state-centrism.  The implication is a tendency to discount domestic 
or internal determinants and causes of behavior by assuming that actors are more significantly 
                                                
15  There certainly have been numerous attempts to influence, assure and persuade outside the military realm, but 
these have typically been identified as “diplomatic” rather than part of a deterrence policy.   
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
51 
influenced by external factors like a deterrer’s threat (Morgan, 1983).  Even retaining the rational 
actor assumption, albeit relaxed to allow for goal-directed gain “maximizers” with broader 
ranges of interests and goals, the luxury of this degree of analytic simplification may be too 
costly.  We do not mean to suggest that cost imposition – if no longer mainly kinetic – and 
provision of benefits are no longer valid modes of influencing the behaviors of would-be cyber 
aggressors.  Rather that, no longer assuming an adversary with a set of essentially static basic 
objectives (e.g., economic prosperity, territorial sovereignty and security, etc. derived from its 
identity as a nation-state) means more work and a radically increased demand for information 
about the opponent within his own (subjective) context. 
Likewise, the presumption of complete or nearly complete information about the adversary’s 
core values, cost-benefit calculations and risk propensities – as we believed we possessed about 
the Soviet Union – may be a significant miscalculation.  A cyber deterrence concept that required 
this quantity of context- and actor-specific information over a range of potential adversaries – to 
the extent that they are knowable – would be an enormous burden on national capabilities. 
The bottom line is this:  There appears to be level of generality problem in using our current 
rational deterrence thinking as the primary bases of security policy.  That approach is a largely 
simplified model for assessing the strategic interactions between actors assumed to be singularly-
focused and with relatively few and simple options available to them.  Security policy is 
generally most effective when it is tailored to address specific actors and actions in context; 
actors that typically have a range of incremental options available to them spanning the space 
between conflict and cooperation.  When the focus is shifted from identifiable state actors to 
possibly unknown adversaries in unknown locations both in cyber and physical space, this 
deficiency becomes more apparent. 
 It is clear that today’s policy planners and practitioners must confront a series of concepts most 
likely unconsidered by their mid- 20th century counterparts:  cyberspace, cyber defense, cyber 
attack and cyber terrorism, and thus cyber deterrence.  At the end of the day, the purpose of a 
cyber deterrence policy is to influence a range of moderate to extreme individuals, and influence 
a range of actions from tacit support of anti-Western activities to acts of enormous violence.  US 
actions will need to be at times tailorable to target populations and specific undesirable 
behaviors.  At other times, action will be necessary under extreme uncertainty regarding the 
exact adversary and his specific plans.  A number of issues deserve careful consideration as US 
deterrence thinking is reshaped to serve as a policy guide for protecting US interests in the cyber-
networked world. 
• Defining Concepts.  One approach to assessing the nature of cyberspace has been presented 
here, but there are certainly other ways to take a comprehensive and insight-generating look 
at the cyber realm.  It is such a rapidly developing, and in many ways still untapped 
communication and interaction arena that overlooking its fundamental aspects risks forming 
an inaccurate understanding of its importance and influence as well as its limitations.  
Similarly, a broader, less restrictive understanding of deterrence than currently is suggested 
in official publications is likely warranted.  Does refining our deterrence concept as 
encompassing a range of actions including the ability to shape a potential adversary’s choice 
environment before negative intent is generated help reduce the problem of multiple potential 
threats in multiple cyberspaces?  Is influencing opponents through international and cyber 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
52 
community norms a valid approach to deterring the unknown threat?  Does expanding the 
“deterrence” concept to include providing benefits as well as imposing costs help policy 
makers address the multiplicity of cyber threats? 
• Defining Thresholds.  There is the critical issue of communicating to the adversary what 
exactly is considered to be an “attack” as well as the thresholds between nuisance, disruption, 
serious security breach and acts of war.  Does hacking into a system to make preparations for 
a future attack, for example, constitute an attack?  Are all breaches to be treated the same 
way? Do those causing disruption but no damage or loss of life receive attention at all? 
Setting these thresholds and the response principles (e.g., response in kind, proportional 
response, massive retaliation, flexible response, etc.) that will accompany them in the cyber 
realm should be the first order of business. 
• Attribution Capabilities.  Precise and timely attribution of cyber activities is of critical 
importance for a number of reasons.  First, the more precisely we can identify the adversary 
the more information we can collect about his interests, goals and what he sees as the 
benefits of the actions we would seek to prevent.  The more we understand these factors, the 
more closely US deterrent threats and actions can be tailored to that adversary.  Second, a 
precise attribution capability will be required to demonstrate and maintain the credibility 
especially of cost imposition deterrent threats.  The threat of retaliation can be perceived as 
inherently weak when an opponent lacks a fixed location and critical infrastructure to target.  
If the adversary does not believe he can be seen, discovered or located he is not likely to fear 
threatened retaliation.  Third, the ability to precisely attribute cyber aggressions is extremely 
important in avoiding the kinds of spoofing and deception in our conceptual cyberspace that 
could make us believe an attack was coming from somewhere other than where it is.  This is 
the problem at the base of the threat of “catalytic warfare” where an actor successfully 
misrepresents its actions in order to prompt conflict between others.  How precise do our 
attribution capabilities need to be?, and critically, how do we convince a potential adversary 
of a cyber capability without inviting counter-measures? 
• Second-order Effects.  In the introduction to Beyond Nuclear Deterrence, Arbatov and 
Dyorkin (2006) provide a cautionary tale of the effects on Russia security thinking of a US 
effort to deter terrorists and other adversaries.  They cite Russian decision makers’ reactions 
to a US plan to build nuclear ‘bunker-buster’ warheads able to penetrate underground 
facilities in terrorist-held areas and rogue states. In fact, many Russians believed this effort 
was actually aimed at Russia’s own deeply-buried and hardened sites. They conclude with a 
quote from Defense Minister, Sergei Ivanov, who explained that,  
“Moscow is attentively tracking the developments in the US strategic 
nuclear force. In particular, we are not indifferent to the US programs of 
developing mini-nuclear weapons, for each new type of weapon adds up 
new elements to the general picture of global stability. We are to take it into 
account in our military planning.”  
In light of such thinking, how should deterrence policy be reconceived in order to capture 
and control this type of signaling – both material and communicated – or secondary effect?  
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
53 
Are efforts to shape international cyber standards and ethics the issue here?  How do we 
gauge the deterrent effects of US actions in cyber- and non-cyber spaces? 
These are weighty and difficult questions and unfortunately we offer no simple solutions within 
this report,  just a reference to Der Derian’s (2000) riff on Von Clausewitz where he asks 
whether “virtualization is the continuation of war (and politics) by other means?”  Perhaps.  It is 
certainly something to consider. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
54 
4 The Cyber-Physical Nexus:  Movement between the Worlds:  Non-State 
Actor’s Use of the Internet   
by Dr. S. K. Numrich, Institute for Defense Analyses 
 
Mazer then grew serious and said, “Ender Wiggin for the last months you 
have been the commander of our fleets.  There were not games.  The battles 
were real.  Your only enemy was the enemy.  You won every battle.  And 
finally today you fought them at their home world, and you destroyed their 
world, their fleet, you destroyed them completely, and they’ll never come 
against us again.  You did it.  You.”(Carr, 1977) 
On that fateful day, Ender Wiggin, student in the flight academy, found himself quite unwittingly 
in the cyber-physical Nexus – the place where simulator space had become physical space.  
Without his consent, Wiggin’s teachers, people we would probably call manipulators, enabled 
the student’s actions in cyber media to destroy people and places in his and their real world.  The 
alternate reality and the physical reality met and physical reality was conquered. 
The Nexus:  A Vital Intersection 
In the world of synthetic training, “Ender’s Game” has been the tacit ideal for developing 
synthetic worlds, worlds in cyberspace – worlds so real to the student that tactics, command and 
control and overall skills learned and practiced in the cyber world could translate immediately to 
the physical world.  The cyber world today, like the simulator in Wiggin’s world, is becoming a 
critical tool in the hands of modern manipulators, terrorist organizations among others, and the 
most frightening consequences of cyber use emerge in the Nexus, where the cyber world 
intersects with the geophysical world in which we live. 
The world of the Internet, developed in science and engineering laboratories to facilitate 
collaboration across facilities and delivered to the public by the Department of Defense through 
the ARPANET project, has subtly revolutionized today’s world as did prior technological 
developments of the printing press and industrial machines changed the world in their eras.  The 
information highway that has given us direct communication capability through electronic mail 
and chat, online conferencing, a huge distributed library of data and information (everything 
from trash to the highest quality technical references) and virtually immediate global access has 
grown beyond the computer-based Internet to hand-held devices linked to the Internet via 
cellular communications.  As the capability has grown, the cost of entry into cyberspace has 
decreased -- from the availability of low cost cellular devices to development of software that 
makes publishing simple for the novice.  Once the domain of the technocrats, cyberspace is a 
domain where anyone can find a place, given access.   
Our dependence on the cyber world for daily life has increased dramatically.  As individuals we 
shop, bank, maintain records and contacts online.  We depend upon cyber resources to control 
our air traffic, our “fast pass” toll capabilities on highways, our banking and other financial 
networks, our power grids, our dams, our traffic lights and trains.  We depend on credit cards and 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
I SID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
55 
cash from automated teller machines to enable both our life at home and our travels abroad.  Our 
understanding of the world around us comes through cyber media, not just the online press, but 
the images captured by the individual and posted to the Internet through which we feel we have 
both global presence and immediacy with events anywhere in the world. 
The specter of cyber crime weighs heavily upon us simply because activity in cyberspace can 
and does impact the way we live our daily lives.   
Terrorist Uses of Cyber Media – It’s More than the Internet 
On the international scene, the Internet was championed as a way of enabling the free exchange 
of ideas, as a means for organizations and individuals to communicate with each other, as a way 
of breaking down barriers and creating the opportunity to form the “global village”.  But with the 
good has come the bad.  The Internet has also enabled the spread of pornographic and violent 
content and the same facilities that fostered international business led to the use of the Internet by 
criminals of every sort, including terrorists.  The attributes of the Internet – its decentralized 
structure, anonymity and ease of communication – align readily with the loosely networked 
structures and anonymity desired by criminal and terrorist groups.  In examining the use of 
cyberspace by terrorists, Maura Conway (Conway, 2005) summarized current literature on the 
topic in the following table. 
Table I Terrorist Uses of the Net  
Author(s)  Furnell & 
Warren (1999)  
Cohen (2002)  Thomas (2003)  Weimann (2004a)  
Uses  -Propaganda & 
Publicity  
- Fundraising  
- Information 
Dissemination  
- Secure 
Communications  
- Planning  
- Finance  
- Coordination & 
Operations  
- Political Action  
- Propaganda  
- Profiling  
- Propaganda  
- Anonymous/Covert Communication  
- Generating “Cyberfear”  
- Finance  
- Command &  Control  
- Mobilisation & Recruitment  
- Information Gathering  
- Mitigation of Risk  
- Theft/Manipulation of Data  
- Offensive Use  
- Misinformation  
- Psychological 
Warfare  
- Publicity & 
Propaganda  
- Data Mining  
- Fundraising  
- Recruitment & 
Mobilization  
- Networking  
- Sharing Information  
- Planning & 
Coordination  
Conway chooses to categorize the use of cyberspace by terrorists as information provision, 
financing, networking, recruitment and information gathering, subsuming under these four all 
those listed in Table I.  Weimann’s list, reiterated in his more recent book Terror on the Internet 
(Weimann, 2006), provides a somewhat more fruitful ground for examining the intersection of 
the cyber and physical worlds. The categories he uses in his book differ somewhat from those 
listed above. 
The War of Minds and Hearts – Psychological Warfare 
We often think of the war against terrorists and insurgents as a war to win the minds and hearts 
of the people.  However in this context, it is relatively easy for the terrorist to gain the upper 
hand.  Terrorists often engage in psychological warfare by using one or more incidents of 
physical damage to create a sense of fear and uncertainty that extends far beyond the original 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DE E
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
56 
physical act.  The cyberspace is a wonderful medium for extending an incident in time and space.  
Images of children killed and maimed by explosives, captives with eyes blindfolded beheaded by 
captors, and videos of people jumping from the collapsing World Trade Center broadcast and 
rebroadcast across the world with an immediacy hitherto unavailable brings acts of terror into the 
living room.  By using and reusing such footage, the terrorist seeks to provoke a reaction 
disproportionate to the original act.   
With the memory of the collapse of the World Trade Center in mind, the mere threat of a 
repeated act of violence can cause the population to react out of fear.  The reaction can produce 
very real consequences in physical space.  While we can argue the relative benefits of security 
measures at airports, stadiums and large public gatherings, the long term consequences of anti-
Islamic sentiment on both the Islamic and non-Islamic communities has yet to be calculated.  
Anne Speckhard (Speckhard, 2007), based on interviews with radicalized individuals in France, 
Belgium, the Netherlands and United Kingdom, has determined that personal issues of social 
alienation, marginalization, and instances of acting out strong feelings of secondary 
traumatization (for example, experiencing vicariously the suffering of another through violent 
videos) are strong motivations for involvement in terrorist groups. 
Publicity and Propaganda:  Websites, Blogs, Listmail 
Terrorists seek to publicize singular events for political gain.  Prior to the availability of cyber 
media, gaining publicity involved securing the attention of television, radio or print media.  
These traditional media are well governed and subject to editorial processes that take the event 
out of the control of the terrorist.  The “wild west” of cyberspace has no such controls and 
terrorists are free to shape their messages to manipulate their own images and those of their 
enemies.  Well-designed sites give a message a sense of legitimacy independent of the author, 
thus allowing minority opinion to be perceived as orthodox belief.  Perhaps more significant that 
the website and its message is the link to active blog spaces that permit “free” exchange of ideas.  
The freedom and openness of blogs or email lists is also open to manipulation by those with an 
interest in outcomes.  Blogs permit the like-minded to share thoughts and build relationships, 
relationships that can be steered toward violence.  In her study of Islamic websites and blogs, 
Cheryl Benard (Bernard, 2005) found that many websites exploit the ordinary tribulations of 
adolescents of the Muslim diaspora with advice likely to make the youth’s life more difficult and 
increase the alienation that predisposes him to terrorist recruitment.  She summarized primary 
and secondary effects in the following table. 
Table II.  Effects of Internet manipulation on Muslim Youths 
Primary Effects Secondary Effects 
Build “walls of resentment Foster non-rational, non-critical thinking 
Prevent (social) integration Discourage problem-solving approach 
Make social and economic failure more likely Encourage obedience to clerical authority 
Create psychic preconditions for violence  
Deliberate effort to heighten alienation Unintentional consequence of the mental and 
geographic location of the authoring clerics 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
57 
Data Mining 
The web is a vast distributed library with a wide variety of information and information sources 
available to those who care to search.  Search engines abound and through their use we access 
information that makes our daily lives easier.  Google Earth gives us not only maps, but visual 
images of streets, neighborhoods, shopping and business centers, ports, airports and railway 
stations.  The same site that lets us check on the availability of flights, gives terrorists access to 
international flight schedules for purpose of targeting.  Our laws are publicly available on the 
web, as are our transportation schedules, school curricula and the capabilities of our 
communication systems.  Use of the Internet by terrorists places us in a difficult balancing act 
between giving away targeting information to our adversaries and being able to manage our daily 
lives in the information age. 
Networking:  It’s Not What You Know But Who You Know 
Jon Anderson (Anderson, 2003b) describes the Internet as being built by scientists and engineers 
as a collaboration tool and as such was founded on principles of open access, flattened 
hierarchies, freedom of information and notions of transient, purposeful connections among 
people and pieces of information.  The flat nature of the Internet allowed terrorist organizations 
to depart from their prior hierarchical structure and capitalize on the loosely connected cellular 
structure provided by the Internet.  Using the Internet, groups can self-organize, announce their 
intent, be connected with a desired capability, be passed instructions across the media either 
openly or in encrypted fashion, and disorganize rapidly in the aftermath of the desired activity.  
This decentralized activity affords a large degree of protection of the organization while enabling 
local groups.  Rather than becoming an easily targeted hierarchy, the terrorist organization can 
operate much as a venture capitalist, enabling worthy entrepreneurs whenever and wherever they 
arise.  Motivation and strategic direction may still come from the highest leadership, but the 
action is decentralized.  Terrorists have rapidly learned to use what our businesses have desired 
to adopt and an efficient management structure:  centralized direction and largely independent, 
self-organized local execution. 
Recruitment and Mobilization 
The availability of cyber media has dramatically increased the role of social networking in the 
recruitment of terrorists.  Recruiting is a mix of cyber and social contact, particularly among the 
Muslims in non-Muslim environments.  Marc Sageman in his book, Understanding Terror 
Networks (Sageman, 2004), stresses the importance of social networks as a means of providing 
social and psychological security.  Terrorists use the full panoply of web technology to attract, 
study and recruit those who visit their sites.  According to Zanni and Edwards,  
The information age is affecting not only the types of targets and weapons 
terrorists choose, but also the ways in which such groups operate and 
structure their organizations.  Several of the most dangerous terrorist 
organizations are using information technology (IT) – such as computers, 
software, telecommunication devices and the Internet – to better organize 
and coordinate dispersed activities…just as companies in the private sector 
are forming alliance networks to provide complex services to customers, so 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed y 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
58 
too are terrorist groups “disaggregating” from hierarchical bureaucracies 
and moving to flatter, more decentralized, and often changing webs of 
groups united by a common goal.  (Zanni and Edwards, 2001) 
In his discussion of recruitment, Gabriel Weimann cites numerous case studies of network-based 
recruitment including recruitment of US citizens to the work of al Qaeda (Weimann, 2006, pp 
117-123). The New York City Police Department, in trying to understand the spread of radical 
Islamic ideology in the United States found that the Internet was a “driver and enabler for the 
process of radicalization.” (Silber and Bhatt, 2007, p. 8-9). 
• In the Self-Identification phase, the Internet provides the wandering mind of the conflicted 
young Muslim or potential convert with direct access to unfiltered radical and extremist 
ideology.  It also serves as an anonymous virtual meeting place—a place where virtual 
groups of like-minded and conflicted individuals can meet, form virtual relationships and 
discuss and share the jihadi-Salafi message they have encountered. 
• During the Indoctrination phase, when individuals adopt this virulent ideology, they begin 
interpreting the world from this newly-formed context. Cloaked with a veil of objectivity, the 
Internet allows the aspiring jihadist to view the world and global conflicts through this 
extremist lens, further reinforcing the objectives and political arguments of the jihadi-Salafi 
agenda. 
• In the jihadization phase, when an individual commits to jihad, the Internet serves as an 
enabler—providing broad access to an array of information on targets, their vulnerabilities 
and the design of weapons. 
Instructions and Online Manuals 
The Internet not only enables recruitment and mobilization, but it serves a the source of training 
and instructions for developing specific skills and weapons required for terrorist activity.  
Information provided over the Internet includes maps, photographs, directions, codes and 
instructions on using a variety of weapons.  Among the sources readily available are The 
Terrorist’s Handbook, The Anarchist’s Cookbook, and the Mujahadeen Poisons Handbook.  
According to Weimann (Weimann, 2006, p. 125), in 2004 al Qaeda started publishing the online 
version of its training manual, al Battar. Based on these references alone, the role of the Internet 
is to provide the local cell with the material needed to act in his own geophysical space. 
Planning and Coordination 
Effective command and control has always been a hallmark of successful military and 
paramilitary activity.  The same technology used by commercial concerns to manage large, 
multi-national conglomerates enables command and control of dispersed units in terrorist 
organizations.  Modern technology has reduced the cost and time to communicate across 
disparate groups.  Dialog among dispersed members enhances flexibility by allowing members 
to adjust tactics rapidly based on local conditions.  Groups brought together by common goals 
and agendas can terminate their relationships and re-disperse readily.  Satellite phone terminals 
can be used to coordinate activities and countermeasures can be employed to protect such assets 
during their use.  Terrorists can also use readily available commercial technology including 
encryption programs to protect their information in transit on cyber media.  By use of these 
modern technologies, terrorists are able to operate in and across any country as long as they have 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
59 
access to the necessary IT infrastructure.  Captured terrorist computers and mass storage devices 
have revealed this type of activity on the part of numerous terrorist organizations. 
Fund Raising 
All political organizations require funding to support their activities.  Terrorists use a wide range 
of network-based sources to acquire resources, including charitable organizations, non-
governmental organizations, financial organizations and criminal networks.  Al Qaeda, Hammas, 
Chechen rebels and Lashkar e-Tayba have all been known to use the Internet as a vehicle for 
raising funds.  Websites sympathetic to the terrorist cause will often have links to organizations 
willing to take charitable contributions.  It is difficult for the unwitting user to determine that the 
charitable organization to which he has contributed is a direct path to a terrorist bank account. 
In Person or in Cyberspace? – The Right Blend of Both 
The Nexus exists on at least two planes.  Terrorists use cyber media to recruit, finance, plan, and 
execute actions that have both direct and indirect impact on the physical world, thus creating an 
intersection between cyber space and the physical world.  Within the greater terrorist 
organization there is an intersection between the local social network and the network aided and 
abetted by cyber media.  For those terrorist organizations that remain hierarchical and function 
by establishing individual personal contact among local cells, there is a degree of security that is 
ostensibly absent in the open world of cyber media.  The personal contact with individuals 
known over many years is one way of mitigating the risk of infiltration.  The anonymity of the 
Internet increases the risk of admitting to the organization a mole from an adversarial group.  As 
cyber media matures, commercially available tools provide authentication, encryption and 
various forms of security.  While helpful, these measures do not provide as much security as 
personal knowledge of an individual.  Thus, the most successful terrorist organizations employ a 
hybrid of cyber and personal contact to enable their operations. 
Leadership and Trust 
When personal contact is the hallmark of leadership, followers make many demands on the 
individuals who assume that role.  We speak of strong, charismatic leaders, leaders with an 
imposing presence and a record of winning in some arena whether it be political or military.  
Cyberspace changes that expectation.  Leadership becomes the ability to persuade through cyber 
means.  When physical presence is no longer required, the leader could be the “skinny guy with 
coke bottle glasses in the second row” – the same individual we would totally disregard were the 
leadership manifested in a personal, physical presence. 
It is ironic that Islamic fundamentalists who have a great distrust for globalization have made 
such excellent use of cyber media, one of the most significant tools for establishing global 
business and economy.  In traditional Islamic societies, the flow of communication and lines of 
trust are firmly and hierarchically established.  Cyber media bypasses the traditional gatekeepers 
and adjudicators of belief.  Terrorists make use of this to get their message out, but at the same 
time it creates a break in the conventional lines of trust firmly established in traditional societies.  
What we have seen to date is a major engagement of the Islamic diaspora and minimal cyber 
presence in the Middle East itself.  In cyberspace, where users can also be producers playing a 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
60 
pro-active part in the content as well as consuming it, there exists “intense engagement in 
political, social and cultural issues that moves around traditional gatekeepers, with their 
qualifications to interpret and monopolies on educational technology, and admits claims to 
authority and legitimacy based on other -- frequently on ‘scientific’ -- intellectual techniques, 
sureties and communities.”(Anderson, 1997b)  In this way, modern argument enters the cultural 
and religious world and the traditional authority figures lose control of perceived truth.  Cyber 
media is a two edged sword for radical Islam. 
Return to Ender’s Game 
Orson Scott Card may have been prophetic in his vision of a synthetic world that was so close to 
the real world that the boundaries could be crossed unwittingly; however, games of various sorts 
are catching up with that vision.  In 2003 a US-based hate group called “National Alliance” 
released a video game, Ethnic Cleansing, in which “Kikes and Niggers” (sic) await their deaths 
at the hands of the Klansman.  National Alliance did not have the capability to build this game 
from the ground up, but used the growing market in which sellers of game engines and open-
source 3D software packages make it possible for novice groups to create engaging games with 
minimal investment.  Terrorists have used the same capability to great effect.  Counter-Strike, 
one of the earlier popular games, permits play of terrorists against counter-terrorists using 
weapons that behave remarkably like their real counterparts.  On the other hand, with the same 
technology, it would be easy to build and rehearse in a target of choice – an Airbus, perhaps.  
Hizbollah’s Special Forces pits the Israelis against Palestinians – the resistance always wins.  
Films of Palestinian children, boys and girls, playing Jihadist games and discussing how they 
aspire to die for Islam are testimony to the effectiveness of gaming as a medium for inculcating 
ideas.  Playing games is fun, it’s engaging and inspires the quest for actual jihad in the hearts of 
the children. 
The games cited above are all fps or first person shooter games.  Another class of games is the 
role playing game and in some of these games, the boundary between the physical and the 
synthetic is porous.  In such games, the user is able to build his own territory, buildings and 
services and sell them to other players, but in real world currency. Such games are now making 
news as environments where terrorists can lurk.16 
Nascent economies have sprung to life in these 3-D worlds, complete with currency, banks, and 
shopping malls. Intelligence officials who have examined these systems say they are convinced 
that the qualities that many computer users find so attractive about virtual worlds – including 
anonymity, global access, and the expanded ability to make financial transfers outside normal 
channels – have turned them into seedbeds for transnational threats….Because of the nature of 
the systems, the companies also have almost no way of monitoring the creation and use of virtual 
buildings and training centers, some of them protected by nearly unbreakable passwords. 
The threat of financial markets within the games is mitigated by the fact that they are only a 
problem when they touch real world finances which we understand how to track.  Crime in 
                                                
16 “Virtual personalities called a threat to U.S.”, Washington Post, February 8, 2008, 
http://www.detnews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080208/BIZ04/802080311/1013 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
61 
cyberspace may best be pursued and defeated in the geophysical domain in which the criminals 
live.  However, the use of cyber media as a strategic communication tool is far more 
problematic.  Synthetic worlds are engaging and in that they are persistent, physical (apparently) 
and interactive, they mimic the real world.  Gamers, typically young adults in their twenties, 
spend upwards of 20 hours a week living in an alternate universe and absorbing its culture and 
messages.  We talk of memes that transfer ideas within cultures.  Role playing games may be the 
viral form of transferring memes. 
Are There Winning Strategies? 
The sense of open communication in which the Internet was developed is probably the most 
critical element of cyber media to preserve.  The spread of interactive communication among 
people via blogs, websites and games is natural, human, social and creative.  For the terrorist, 
cyber media is a two edged sword, an enabler that also erodes his hierarchical authority and 
dilutes his view of the world.   
As cyber media expands into the Middle East, the adopters will likely resemble the inventors – 
individuals who value human communication and who put a premium on intellectual 
achievement.  Their discourse is more apt to be in harmony with the core values of the US than 
with the radical terrorist organizations.  We may find natural allies among these individuals if we 
hold to our core values. 
The anonymity of cyber media makes it difficult to retaliate or pose an immediate threat to the 
terrorist; however, since the terrorist organizations retain a hybrid system in which cyber media 
is coupled with human social networks, it may be best to consider countering terrorists in the 
physical world rather than in the cyber world. 
Finally, encouraging moderate voices of the Islamic community to be a welcoming presence on 
the Internet as an antidote to the current jihadist websites would provide the diaspora with a 
creative alternative as they seek to explore their cultural identities. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
62 
5 Models of Emergent Behavior of Violent Non-State Actors in Cyberspace    
by Robert Popp, National Security Innovations; Laura Mariano, University of Connecticut; 
Krishna Pattipati, University of Connecticut; Victor Asal, State University of NY at Albany; and 
Katya Drozdova, National Security Innovations. 
Executive Summary – Chapter 5 
For violent non-state actors (VNSAs) on a mission to spread their message, or cyberterrorists 
who just want to create mischief, cyberspace offers limitless resources and opportunities for 
achieving these goals.  The Internet is unparalleled in its ability to grant individuals access to a 
mass audience in an environment that has almost no enforceable personal conduct regulations or 
monitoring capabilities. According to a report compiled by Dr. Gabriel Weimann of the United 
States Institute of Peace, as of 2004, all active terrorist groups had established a Web presence of 
some kind, with the intention of exposing current and potential supporters, as well as enemies, to 
their ideologies (Weimann, 2004). The behavior of such groups in cyberspace has been studied 
extensively and can be broadly classified by the impact it has on the cyber and corporeal realms.  
Figure 1 below depicts this interaction and categorizes the behavior according to its origin and 
impact.  Cyber-psychological activities include dissemination of propaganda and disinformation, 
intimidation, and indoctrination via cyber-based communication channels.  Cyber-cyber 
interactions describe efforts to negatively impact the cyber infrastructure, while attacks planned 
via cyber means that target the corporeal realm are illustrative of the cyber-corporeal connection.  
A final category of interaction that is germane to this discussion is the corporeal-cyber 
connection, which represents actions originating in the corporeal realm that affect the cyber 
infrastructure.  Table 1 below provides examples of recent actions from each of these categories.  
This chapter focuses on the cyber-psychological and cyber-corporeal connections, with further 
discussion of the use of cyberspace by VNSAs to disseminate propaganda, recruit members, 
create publicity, collect and share data, network, plan, coordinate, raise funds, and wage 
psychological warfare (Weimann, 2004). 
The wide-ranging and covert nature of VNSA activity in cyberspace makes modeling their 
emergent behavior a difficult task that requires a large-scale, multidisciplinary effort.  The 
current paradigm combines technology and perspectives from the sub-disciplines of data 
collection, data mining and analysis, and predictive modeling; each of these contributes a piece 
to the puzzle.  Automated data collection techniques address the issue of extracting “clean,” 
meaningful, and relevant information from the seemingly limitless datasets that constitute the 
cyberspace.  The methodology must be able to locate a “needle-in-a-haystack”, since the activity 
is often intentionally hidden, scattered across many sites, and frequently moved or removed.  
However, without the kind of content-rich datasets that data collection techniques can provide, 
modeling is cumbersome and time consuming, if not infeasible.  An example of such a dataset is 
the so-called ‘Dark Web’ collection, which contains about two terabytes (2 TB) of extremist/ 
terrorist related content collected using a semi-automated Web-crawling approach developed by 
researchers at the University of Arizona’s Artificial Intelligence Lab (Univ. of Arizona, 2008). 
Once a raw dataset is available, data mining and analysis techniques can be applied with the goal 
of extracting usable knowledge from the information.  The results of these analyses often 
generate the datasets that inform predictive models.  The field has been heavily researched, and 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
63 
consequently there are many types of data mining and analysis techniques that are well-suited to 
counter-terrorism applications; indeed, numerous studies have been conducted to evaluate their 
effectiveness.  Some of the techniques discussed in this chapter include link and social network 
analysis, automated classification of Web content by machine learning techniques, and a 
qualitative assessment of the technical sophistication, Web interactivity, and content-richness of 
terrorist/extremist sites on the Internet.  Predictive modeling techniques identify discernible 
patterns of behavior that have the potential to assist analysts with situational assessment, 
forecasting, and deterrence strategies (Asal et al, 2008).  In addition, modeling can be used to 
simulate the impact of counter-terrorism strategies on the performance and strength of covert 
VNSA networks.  The modeling techniques discussed in this article include the use of hidden 
Markov models and dynamic Bayesian networks to detect, track, and counteract terrorist 
networks, and agent-based techniques for assessing terrorist network destabilization strategies. 
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, “spurred extraordinary efforts intended to protect 
America from the newly highlighted scourge of international terrorism” (Jonas and Harper, 
2006).  These efforts included a significant interest in the potential use of predictive modeling 
techniques as a means of uncovering covert terrorist networks and plots, and since then, the 
implementation of such techniques has been surrounded by controversy.  According to the 
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, if the government had 
pursued leads available at the time, the attacks could have been prevented (Jonas and Harper, 
2006).  This raises the question:  Could data mining and predictive modeling techniques have 
played a role in averting the tragedy?  Experts agree that these techniques have their place in the 
counter-terrorism domain, as long as they are employed with a clear understanding of their 
limitations.  The consensus is that meaningful results should only be expected if the models are 
well-informed, particularly by seed information from authoritative outside sources (Last, 2005).  
Predictive modeling should be used as a “power tool for analysts and investigators - a way to 
conduct low-level tasks that will provide clues to assist analysts and investigators” (DeRosa, 
2004). 
Research on the application of modeling techniques to the study of emergent behavior of VNSAs 
in cyberspace is ongoing.  The continued growth of clean, content-rich raw datasets like the Dark 
Web collection is critical for the further development of modeling techniques, as is the 
development of information portals that provide efficient access to the data (Univ. of Arizona, 
2008).  Multilingual techniques for the classification of Web content are another critical area of 
research, particularly for Arabic Web content.  The ontology of the Arabic language poses 
significant challenges for classification techniques that are based on English phenomenology. 
Consequently, continued development of language specific techniques are needed (Abbasi and 
Chen, 2005).  However, it is the advancement of methodologies for the simulation of counter-
terrorism measures that could have the largest impact on the use of predictive models for 
decision support.  Further development of this application can help realize one of the main goals 
of predictive modeling:  to provide analysts with the ability to accurately predict the outcome of 
multiple counter-terrorism strategies before selecting a course of cyber or corporeal action.  
Overall, it is evident from the current status of this field of research that when used responsibly 
and with a clear understanding of their limitations, data mining and predictive modeling 
techniques have the potential to be powerful counter-terrorism tools. 
This chapter discusses seven topics as follows: 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
64 
 Emergent Behavior of Violent Non-State Actors in Cyberspace 
 Overview:  Data Collection, Analysis, and Predictive Modeling 
 Data Collection 
 Data Mining and Analysis 
 Predictive Modeling 
 Benefits, Challenges, and Caveats 
 Research and Development Directions 
Emergent Behavior of Violent Non-State Actors in Cyberspace 
For violent non-state actors (VNSAs) on a mission to spread their message, or cyberterrorists 
who merely want to create mischief, cyberspace offers limitless resources and opportunities for 
achieving these goals.  The Internet is unparalleled in its ability to grant individuals access to a 
mass audience in an environment that has almost no enforceable personal conduct regulations or 
monitoring capabilities.   
According to a report compiled by Dr. Gabriel Weimann of the United States Institute of Peace, 
as of 2004, all active terrorist groups had established a Web presence of some kind, with the 
intention of exposing current and potential supporters, as well as enemies, to their ideologies 
(Weimann, 2004).  The behavior of such groups in cyberspace has been studied extensively and 
can be broadly classified by the impact it has on the cyber and corporeal realms.  Figure 1 
depicts this interaction and categorizes the behavior according its origin and impact.   
 
Figure 1:  Interaction between cyber and corporeal actions of VNSAs (Asal et al, 2008). 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
65 
Cyber-psychological activities include dissemination of propaganda and disinformation, 
intimidation, and indoctrination via cyber-based communication channels.  Cyber-cyber 
interactions describe efforts to negatively impact the cyber infrastructure, while attacks planned 
via cyber means that target the corporeal realm are illustrative of the cyber-corporeal connection.  
A final category of interaction that is germane to this discussion is the corporeal-cyber 
connection, which represents actions originating in the corporeal realm that affect the cyber 
infrastructure.  Table 1 provides examples of recent actions from each of these categories.   
 
VNSA Activity Example 
Cyber →  Psychological 
 Propaganda 
 Intimidation 
 Indoctrination 
 Disinformation 
• Beheading video (Graphic) 
http://www.bigducky.com/videos/beheading_videos/beheading.htm 
• Bin Laden video 
http://english.aljazeera.net/English/archive/archive?ArchiveId=7403 
http://youtube.com/watch?v=cI5dNgbE5n0 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyber →  Cyber 
• 11/18/2001 Nimda virus 
“Richard Clark, Chairman of the President’s Critical Infrastructure 
Protection Board, said the problem of cybersecurity and data protection 
had its own 9/11 on 18 September 2001 when the Nimda virus spread 
through the Internet-connected computers around the world, causing 
billions of dollars of damage.” 
http://www.iwar.org.uk/cyberterror/resources/cyberplanning/alqaeda.htm 
• Denial of Service attack on Estonia 
Estonian attack see Spears: spearb7@mac.com 
• Oak Ridge National Laboratory attack 12/7/07 
http://www.industrialdefender.com/general_downloads/incidents/2007.12.07_ 
    hackers_launch_major_attack_on_us_military_labs.pdf 
Cyber →  Corporeal 
 Covert 
Communications 
 Planning 
 Recruitment & 
Training 
 Fundraising 
 Intelligence 
Gathering 
 Training 
• Alneda.com 
“which US officials said contained encrypted information to direct al 
Qaeda members to more secure sites, featured international news on al 
Qaeda, and published articles, fatwas (decisions on applying Muslim 
law), and books.” 
http://www.iwar.org.uk/cyberterror/resources/cyberplanning/al-qaeda.htm 
• Google maps 
http://maps.google.com/maps?q=3601+Wilson+Blvd&ie=UTF8&oe=utf8& 
    client=firefox-a&hl=en&near=Arlington,+VA+22201&f=l 
• The Web of Jihad: Strategic Utility and Tactical Weakness 
“Eyes-on surveillance is priceless.”  
http://www.stratfor.com/web_jihad_strategic_utility_and_tactical_weakness 
• Steganography 
Conway, M. 2004. “Code Wars: Steganography, Signals Intelligence and 
terrorism.” Technology and Terrorism. 
Corporeal →  Cyber • Destruction of equipment needed to connect to cyber and media 
world: 
Example of government doing this:  
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/15/world/middleeast/15briefs-004.html?_r=  
    1&oref+slogin 
Table 1:  Examples of recent actions of VNSAs via cyber-psychological, cyber-
cyber, cyber-corporeal, and corporeal-cyber means (Asal et al, 2008). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
e  by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
66 
This chapter focuses on the cyber-psychological and cyber-corporeal connections, and the 
following sections further elaborate on the use of cyberspace by VNSA to disseminate 
propaganda, recruit members, create publicity, collect and share data, network, plan, coordinate, 
raise funds, and wage psychological warfare (Weimann, 2004). 
Psychological Warfare 
Terrorists wage psychological warfare in cyberspace by spreading disinformation, delivering 
threats, and posting horrific images of violence, such as the video of the brutal murder of 
kidnapped American journalist Daniel Pearl that was posted on several terrorist websites.  This 
type of warfare can generate fear in both cyber and corporeal spaces.  “Cyberfear” (Weimann, 
2004) surrounds the concern over what an attack on computer infrastructures can do, such as the 
denial-of-service attacks on Estonia in April of 2007 that forced Internet security experts to cut 
off all Internet access in the country (Kirk, 2007).  Threats originating in cyberspace can have a 
very real effect in the corporeal world as well.  Since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, Al Qaeda has 
been using the Internet to create and fuel a “widespread sense of dread and insecurity throughout 
the world and especially in the United States” by posting announcements on their websites that 
allude to plans for another “large-scale attack” on the US (Weimann, 2004). 
Publicity, Propaganda, and Recruitment 
Before the Internet, the only means of generating publicity and disseminating information to a 
large audience was through traditional outlets such as television, radio, and print media, forums 
which have little interest in furthering the cause of known terrorists.  The Internet provides these 
groups with unlimited time and freedom to express their ideologies as they choose, in the process 
shaping how the world sees them and their enemies (Weimann, 2004).  According to the 
Weimann report (Weimann, 2004), most terrorist sites do not celebrate their group’s violent 
actions.  Instead, the majority call attention to restrictions they feel have been placed on their 
freedom of expression, and invoke sympathy for comrades that are political prisoners or who 
have sacrificed their lives for the cause (Weimann, 2004).  It is theorized that this methodology 
is tuned to resonate with Western audiences, who “cherish freedom of expression and frown on 
measures to silence political opposition” (Weimann, 2004).  The majority of sites also attempt to 
justify their use of violence by claiming that a weak, oppressed organization, such as theirs, has 
no other recourse but to turn to violence.  They also tend to refer to themselves as “freedom 
fighters,” and couch their ideologies and methods as a means of “regain[ing] the dignity of their 
people” from the oppressors (Weimann, 2004).  Through the use of persuasive audio/video 
media items, the groups seek to recruit supporters, and they will troll online chat rooms and 
cybercafés looking for interested parties who might be willing to take a more active role in the 
organization. 
Data Collection and Sharing 
According to former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, “an Al Qaeda training manual 
recovered in Afghanistan tells its readers [that by] using public sources openly and without 
resorting to illegal means, it is possible to gather at least 80 percent of all the information 
required about the enemy” (Weimann, 2004).  This statement speaks to the potentially key role 
cyberspace plays in the investigation of targets and planning of attacks by terrorists.  Information 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
67 
about nuclear power plants, public buildings, and airports is easily accessible on the Internet, and 
with programs such as GoogleEarth, high definition reconnaissance images can be viewed from 
any computer.  In terms of the technical knowledge required to create a chemical or explosive 
weapon, the Internet contains dozens of sites that provide homemade “recipes” for such devices, 
in addition to the more well-known manuals such as The Terrorist’s Handbook and The 
Anarchist Cookbook (Weimann, 2004). 
Networking, Planning, and Coordination 
Terrorist networks are becoming increasingly decentralized, and are now primarily composed of 
semi-independent cells that have little discernable hierarchy.  The Internet provides the means by 
which these loosely connected groups can communicate quickly, cheaply, and anonymously, and 
thus it is used heavily to plan attacks.  For example, the Al Qaeda members responsible for 9/11 
communicated with each other via thousands of encrypted messages posted in a password 
protected area of a website.  These messages were recovered from the computer of Abu 
Zubaydah, the alleged mastermind of the attacks.  The operatives maintained their Internet 
anonymity by using public Internet cafes and e-mail sources.  Steganography, an encryption 
method that hides messages inside graphics files, is also used to disguise instructions involving 
maps, photographs, directions, and technical documents (Weimann, 2004). 
Fundraising 
VNSA groups use the Internet to generate funds through legal and illegal means.  Frequently 
they will ask for donations directly from their websites or offer an online store that sells items 
such as books, T-shirts, and bumper stickers supporting their causes (Conway, 2006).  
Exploitation of charities is another common fundraising scheme.  In several instances, fake 
charities have been established that purport to represent a humanitarian cause, when in reality 
they are fronts that funnel the donated money to terrorist organizations.  In December 2001, the 
US government seized the assets of a Texas based charity called the Holy Land Foundation for 
Relief and Development when it was discovered that its funds were being diverted to Hamas 
(Weimann, 2004).  The government also froze the assets of the Benevolence International 
Foundation, the Global Relief Foundation, and the Al-Haramain Foundation, three sham charities 
that had funneled money to Al Qaeda (Weimann, 2004). 
According to Weimann, a great deal of attention has been paid to the “exaggerated threat of 
cyberterrorism,” overlooking “the more routine uses of the Internet” by violent non-state actor 
groups.  He asserts that “it is imperative that security agencies continue to improve their ability 
to study and monitor terrorist activities on the Internet and explore measures to limit the usability 
of this medium by modern terrorists.”  The modeling techniques discussed below attempt to 
address these issues by creating a picture of the emergent behavior of violent non-state actors in 
cyberspace through the use of state-of-the-art data collection, data analysis, and predictive 
modeling techniques. 
Overview:  Data Collection, Data Analysis, and Predictive Modeling 
The daunting task of modeling the emergent behavior of violent non-state actors in cyberspace 
requires a massive, multidisciplinary effort that combines technology and perspectives from the 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
68 
fields of data collection, data mining and analysis, and predictive modeling.  Each approach 
contributes a piece to the puzzle, and the integration of these techniques creates a cohesive 
approach to the problem.  Figure 2 illustrates the relationships among these components and their 
place in the sequence of the overarching modeling process.   
 
Figure 2:  The integration of data collection, data analysis, and predictive 
modeling techniques creates a cohesive approach to the problem of modeling 
the emergent behavior of VNSAs in cyberspace (Asal et al, 2008). 
Automated data collection techniques address the technical issues of extracting meaningful, 
relevant, usable information from the seemingly limitless datasets that constitute the cyberspace.  
The methodology must be able to locate a “needle-in-a-haystack”, since the activity is often 
intentionally obscured, scattered across many sites, and frequently moved or removed.  However, 
without the kind of content-rich datasets that automated data collection techniques can provide, 
modeling is cumbersome and time-consuming, if not infeasible. 
Once a raw dataset is available, data mining and analysis techniques can be applied with the goal 
of extracting usable knowledge from the data.  The results of these analyses often generate the 
datasets that inform predictive models.  The field has been heavily researched, and consequently 
there are many types of data mining and analysis techniques well-suited to counter-terrorism 
applications and numerous studies have been conducted to evaluate their effectiveness.  Some of 
the techniques discussed in this chapter include link and social network analysis, automated 
classification of Web content by machine learning techniques, and a qualitative assessment of the 
technical sophistication, Web interactivity, and content-richness of terrorist sites on the Internet. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
69 
Predictive modeling is the final piece of the puzzle.  Modeling techniques rely on the knowledge 
extracted by data mining techniques to identify discernible patterns of behavior that have the 
potential to assist analysts with situational assessment, forecasting, and deterrence strategies 
(Asal et al, 2008).  The results of applying these techniques to the counter-terrorism domain 
provide analysts with information that may not have been readily apparent, potentially 
influencing strategic decision-making.  In addition, predictive modeling can be used to simulate 
the impact of various counter-terrorism strategies on covert networks.  The modeling techniques 
discussed in this chapter include the use of hidden Markov models and dynamic Bayesian 
networks to detect, track, and counteract terrorist networks, and agent-based techniques for 
assessing terrorist network destabilization strategies.  An elaboration of each of the three 
elements described above follows. 
Data Collection and the Dark Web 
Researchers at the University of Arizona’s Artificial Intelligence Lab, headed by Professor 
Hsinchun Chen, have undertaken the task of mining the so-called ‘Dark Web,’ a moniker 
describing the cyberspace equivalent of clandestine back-alley meetings, recruitment efforts, and 
propaganda dissemination by VNSAs.  Using a systematic web-mining approach, the Dark Web 
Project tackles the “needle-in-a-haystack” search for the covert movements and communication 
patterns of extremist and terrorist groups in cyberspace, providing researchers with the kind of 
content-rich datasets that can inform various analysis and predictive modeling techniques. 
The data collection process utilizes a semi-automated Web spidering technique, which offers a 
significant increase in efficiency over manual collection methods (Zhou et al, 2006).  The 
process begins with the identification of extremist groups and a seed batch of Web sites based on 
information provided by authoritative outside sources, such as the US State Department and the 
UN Security Council reports, and studies published by private terrorism research centers.  
Information on these entities, such as group and leader names, and group-specific jargon are 
manually compiled to create a keyword lexicon that is used to query major search engines for 
additional content.  The set of seed sites, consisting of those identified by outside sources and the 
manual lexicon queries, is expanded by extracting their out-links and back-links.  The spider 
collects the complete contents of the target sites, including all Web page text, hyperlinks, 
multimedia content, and available attachments (Zhou et al, 2006).  Currently, the Web site 
collection consists of the complete contents of 1,000 sites, and partial information from 
approximately 10,000 linked sites (Univ. of Arizona, 2008). 
Additionally, the researchers collected the complete contents of forums containing extremist/ 
terrorist content that have been identified in the manner described above.  Forums are of 
particular interest, since they are a public communication medium uniquely suited to the 
propagation of ideas in a dynamic way.  The content collected from the forums can offer insight 
into the real-time communication patterns of NSAs in cyberspace, as well as potentially identify 
developing trends and sympathizers (Qin et al, 2007).  Encrypted or password protected forum 
content is a particularly significant finding for obvious reasons.  In such cases, membership to 
the forum as a “curious neophyte” is requested manually, giving the spider access to this content 
(Qin et al, 2007).  Researchers collected the complete contents of 300 terrorist forums, including 
authors, headings, postings, threads, time-tags, and any attached media (Univ. of Arizona, 2008). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
70 
The Dark Web Collection currently contains about 2 TB of extremist/terrorist related content 
from 500,000,000 pages, files, and postings from over 10,000 sites in Arabic, Spanish, and 
English.  New Web-content is collected every 2 to 3 months.  The researchers believe that the 
“Dark Web collection is the largest open-source extremist and terrorist collection in the 
academic world,” and are currently developing a multi-lingual knowledge management system 
called the ‘Dark Web Portal’ that will provide efficient access to the Dark Web Collection (Univ. 
of Arizona, 2008).  The Portal utilizes document summarization, categorization, and 
visualization techniques to allow users to quickly locate the information they seek (Zhou et al, 
2005). 
Data Mining and Data Analysis 
A step beyond the collection of a content-rich raw dataset, exemplified by the Dark Web 
collection, is the extraction of useful knowledge from this data through data mining and 
automated data analysis techniques (Jensen, 2003).  Data mining identifies predictive patterns in 
the raw dataset which can be used by automated data analysis applications to “find previously 
unknown knowledge through links, associations, and patterns” in the data (Jensen, 2003).  
Automated data analysis techniques can be broadly classified as either subject-based or pattern-
based.  For subject-based queries, analysis begins with knowledge of the subject, such as a 
suspicious individual, place, or phone number identified by authoritative intelligence sources.  
Subject-based queries seek additional information that will provide a broader understanding of 
the subject, such as activities an individual has engaged in and links to people, places, and things 
with which they are familiar (DeRosa, 2004).  Link and social network analysis are subject-based 
query techniques that have been widely used both in the public and private sectors, and they have 
significant potential to be a useful weapon in the counter-terrorism arsenal (DeRosa, 2004).  
Several examples of the application of link/social network analysis to the counter-terrorism 
domain are described below, including a hyperlink interconnectivity analysis of Jihadi 
communities on the Internet, and the social network mapping of the Al Qaeda cell responsible 
for the 9/11 attacks. 
Pattern-based queries seek to identify pre-defined patterns of behavior within datasets, and the 
models can come from data mining techniques or other intelligence sources (DeRosa, 2004).  
Perhaps the most well-known example of pattern-based searching in the private-sector is its use 
by credit-card companies to detect fraud.  The banks create a model of fraudulent activity by 
searching databases that are known to contain a combination of valid and invalid transactions.  
An example of such a pattern would be for the thief to make a small purchase with the stolen 
card to confirm that it works, immediately before making a substantial purchase (Jonas, 2003).  
The bank monitors all credit card transactions for instances of fraudulent patterns, and issues an 
alarm if one is detected.  For a case such as this, the bank is looking for a broad pattern in 
unrelated financial transaction data.  This methodology does not generalize to the domain of 
terrorist activity, however.  There is no broad pattern of activity associated with terrorist 
organizations; they tend to be loosely connected semi-autonomous cells, and it is the “relational” 
data describing the connections between people, places, and things that are of importance 
(DeRosa, 2004).  Several examples of the application of the pattern-based methodology to the 
counter-terrorism domain are described below, including content-based monitoring of Web 
browsing behavior, automatic classification of Web content, and authorship identification of 
anonymous documents. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
71 
Data Analysis:  Link/Social Network Analysis 
The researchers at the University of Arizona, who are responsible for the Dark Web Collection, 
have been analyzing the data set from several different perspectives, including link/social 
network analysis.  Using the Dark Web collection methodology, they studied Jihadi communities 
on the Internet in an effort to better understand how these groups interact and communicate in 
cyberspace.  The data collection process began with three Jihad seed Web sites:  
www.qudsway.com of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, www.hizbollah.com of Hizbollah, and 
www.ezzedine.net of the Izzedine-Al-Qassam, the military wing of Hamas (Reid et al, 2005).  
The Google back-link search service was used to find all the sites linked to the initial three, and 
after performing manual keyword lexicon searches to expand the set and filtering to remove 
outliers, a testbed of 39 sites remained.  Web spidering collected approximately 300,000 
documents from these sites and those linked to them.  In order to identify hidden communities, a 
similarity measure was computed between all website pairs based on the number of hyperlinks 
shared between the sites.  The hyperlinks were weighted proportionally according to how deeply 
they are embedded within a site, with the most weight given to links available from homepages. 
A multidimensional scaling (MDS) algorithm (Duda et al, 2001) was used to generate a two-
dimensional graph of the link structure, from which clusters representing highly-linked 
communities were extracted.  Six main clusters were identified, and the results conform to what 
has already been established regarding the relationship among these groups (see Figure 3).   
 
Figure 3:  2D graph of the link structure of hyperlinked Jihadi 
communities on the Web (Reid et al, 2005). 
For example, the figure indicates a strong link between the Hizbollah cluster and Palestinian 
organizations, which is not surprising since Hizbollah is a known sympathizer with the 
Palestinian cause.  At the top-left portion of the graph is the Hizb-ut-Tahrir political party 
cluster.  While not officially recognized as a terrorist group, the results indicate that they have 
links to the Hizbollah cluster.  The demonstrated link between the Al Qaeda and Hamas clusters 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
72 
was also expected.  While this particular study did not produce any results that do not mesh with 
the current sociological and ideological understanding of the relationships between the Jihadi 
groups studied, it is possible that this type of link/social network investigation will provide 
analysts with the ability to identify relationships between organizations and individuals that they 
might not have otherwise seen, and to allow them to monitor the development of these 
relationships over time. 
Another example of the use of link/social network analysis for terrorism related applications is 
the work of Valdis Krebs on mapping the structure of the covert network of Al Qaeda members 
responsible for the Sept. 11th attacks.  Krebs used publicly available data from news sources on 
the Internet to visually represent the social relationships among the 19 individuals identified as 
hijackers, as well as their relationships with co-conspirators who provided knowledge, money, 
and skills to the effort, but did not board the planes (Krebs, 2002).  Because Krebs relied on 
publicly released news reports as his data source, his analysis was ill-informed since the amount 
of relevant relationship information released to the media was limited or intentionally incorrect.  
To counteract this, he applied the work of social network theorists such as Malcolm Sparrow 
who study the structure of covert networks under the conditions of missing information, fuzzy 
node inclusion criteria, and consistently dynamic datasets.  Krebs decided to map the strength of 
the relationships between the key players in terms of how much time they spent together, with 
the strongest ties belonging to individuals who attended the same school or training programs:  
the resulting map can be seen in Figure 4.   
 
Figure 4:  Link analysis of the 19 hijackers and co-conspirators responsible for 9/11.  
Analysis was done by Valdis E. Krebs using open source news data (Krebs, 2002). 
 
 
 
 
 
Ob ain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
73 
Additionally, attributes of network centrality were computed for each individual, including 
Degree, Closeness, and Betweenness.  The Degree attribute indicates the node’s level of activity 
in the network; Closeness is a measure of the node’s ability to access others and monitor ongoing 
events, and Betweenness describes the node’s ability to control the flow of communication in the 
network (Krebs, 2002).  Krebs’ analysis of the network structure revealed Mohamed Atta to be 
the most likely ring leader of the group, since he obtained the highest score of all participants for 
each of the centrality attributes described above.  This result has been confirmed many times 
over by intelligence experts, and by bin Laden himself, who verified Atta’s leadership role in a 
video tape (U.S. Department of Defense, 2001). 
While not directly illustrative of how link/social network analysis has been used to model the 
emergent behavior of VNSAs in cyberspace, the Krebs example demonstrates both the potential 
and limitations of using link/social network analysis for such an application.  With the benefit of 
hindsight in this case, it is natural to ask the question:  Given the amount of information that was 
available prior to the 9/11 attacks, could we have predicted and prevented them had we simply 
known how and where to look?  According to the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks 
upon the United States, the government may have been able to prevent the tragedies had they 
pursued leads that were available to them at the time (Jonas and Harper, 2006).  This finding 
does not imply, however, that techniques such as link and social network analysis can be used to 
reveal the structure of any and all covert VNSA organizations.  Krebs asserts that uncovering 
covert criminal networks is an extremely difficult task, since their behavior is so unlike that of a 
normal social network.  In the case of the 9/11 hijackers, the strong ties between nodes that were 
“formed years ago in school and training camps…remain[ed] mostly dormant and therefore 
hidden to outsiders,” unlike normal social networks (Krebs, 2002).  The lack of transparent 
connections among group members, coupled with the self-imposed isolation of network 
members from the outside world make social network analysis a blunt instrument when it comes 
to its predictive and preventive capabilities.  Krebs cautions that “we must be careful of ‘guilt by 
association’.  Being linked to a terrorist does not prove guilt - but it does invite investigation,” 
making social network analysis more aptly applied to “the prosecution, not the prevention of 
criminal activities” (Krebs, 2002). 
Data Analysis:  Web Monitoring 
Law enforcement agencies have been interested in monitoring the Internet activity of suspicious 
individuals ever since the emergence of the Internet as a standard communication medium in the 
1990s.  Programs such as Carnivore provided the FBI with the ability to monitor specific types 
of electronic communication described explicitly by a court order, such as e-mails and browsing 
records.  The architecture of the Carnivore system consisted of a Windows-based computer 
installed at an ISP with a 1-way tap into the Ethernet segment to which it is attached.  The 
computer filters the packet traffic and stores those packets that conform to filter specifications 
defined by the court-order.  Restrictions on packet collection ranged from permission to access 
the full contents of communication to only address information, such as To and From e-mail 
addresses and IP addresses involved in FTP and HTTP sessions (Smith et al, 2000).  The data 
was mined for information at a later time. 
The FBI discontinued the Carnivore program (since renamed DCS1000) several years ago; 
however, the Carnivore methodology is exemplary of most electronic communication 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
N E.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
74 
surveillance protocols in use today.  That is, a mass of data conforming to certain content 
parameters is collected and analyzed later using various data mining and analysis techniques.  
Researchers at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, propose a new methodology and 
objective for monitoring these electronic communications based on real-time surveillance of 
users’ browsing behavior.  They have developed a content-based model for classifying and 
identifying browsing activity called the Advanced Terror Detection System (ATDS), which they 
have applied specifically to the identification of behavior that conforms to a “typical terrorist 
signature”.   
The underlying assumption of the ATDS is that the content of a user’s Web browsing behavior 
can be used to create a signature of interest that can be compared to a pre-classified set of 
signatures, such as one that might describe “typical terrorist” or normal Internet usage (Shapira, 
2005).  The method begins with a learning phase, during which the system is provided with a set 
of Web pages representing the browsing behavior of a “normal” set of users.  Each document 
browsed is converted to a vector of weighted terms, where the weighting criteria corresponds to 
the relative frequency with which the term appears on the page and the term’s position, i.e. if the 
term is found in the page title, it is assigned a higher weight, since its contribution to the 
document’s content is assumed to be higher.  A cluster-generator receives the vectors and 
performs cluster analysis on the data, identifying discrete areas of interest based on the frequency 
of the weighted terms across the set of vectors derived from the user’s browsing session.  These 
discrete areas of interest are the centroids of the cluster, and they are the elements that make up 
the set of normal user’s browsing interests (Elovici et al, 2005). 
The monitoring process consists of an on-line packet sniffer, which captures the data sent and 
accessed by a group of users at a network level, much like the Carnivore system.  The packets 
are sent to a filter which excludes pages without any textual content from further analysis.  Each 
text item is vectorized and compared to the centroids of the normal user signature using the 
Cosine method of computing the distance between vectors.  If the distance between the 
monitored page vectors and any of the centroids is higher than the dissimilarity threshold, the 
user has demonstrated an interest that is not reflected in the set of normal user interests, possibly 
signifying abnormal browsing behavior.  Whether or not an alarm is raised depends on parameter 
choices such as the sensitivity of the dissimilarity threshold, and the number of “normal” pages 
required to classify the overall browsing behavior as normal (Elovici et al, 2005). 
Researchers evaluated the performance of the ATDS by monitoring 38 computer stations in a 
teaching lab for one month from which they collected 13,300 English pages corresponding to 
what would be considered “normal” browsing behavior.  They also collected 582 terror-related 
pages for the simulation of an abnormal sequence of accesses, and chose a random 582 pages 
from the normal set, which they used to simulate the normal browsing behavior.  The system was 
evaluated to determine the optimal alarm thresholds and queue size of pages to monitor.  Queue 
size of 2, 8, 16, and 32 pages were tested for alarm thresholds of 50% and 100% of the queue 
having dissimilar interests to the normal profile.  The system reached almost ideal performance 
for a 32 page queue and 100% alarm threshold (Elovici et al, 2005). 
The researchers assert that the intention of the ATDS is to aid law enforcement officials in 
tracking down suspected terrorists based on the content of their Web browsing.  They envision 
that the system would run in real-time and would be able to monitor a large group of users 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
75 
simultaneously without being detected.  Ideally, officials would also have access to individuals’ 
identification information based on their IP addresses, which would require the cooperation of 
the ISPs or a court-order (Shapira, 2005).  The scalability of this technique is potentially an 
issue, since each Web page has to be vectorized and compared in near real-time; this may not be 
feasible for monitoring large groups (Shapira, 2005).  Additionally, researchers have yet to 
evaluate the methodology with a testbed of Web pages that mixes normal and abnormal page 
accesses, which would more accurately reflect the usage patterns of a real individual (Elovici et 
al, 2005).  Currently, no new data have been published that address these issues. 
While the full capabilities of the ATDS have not yet been fully investigated, the underlying 
concept provides a new idea about what Web monitoring can mean and introduces a framework 
indicating that it may be possible to achieve real-time monitoring of Web-content.  Much future 
work is needed, however, to establish this type of methodology as a technique that can feasibly 
be used by law enforcement officials to identify suspicious individuals with minimal numbers of 
false positives. 
Data Analysis:  Automatic Content Classification 
The investigation of emergent behavior of VNSAs in cyberspace is a problem that is confounded 
not only by the difficult task of obtaining a clean, relevant dataset, but also by the sheer volume 
of data that is available.  Raw data requires pruning to isolate terror-related content, and manual 
sorting techniques are simply not efficient enough to handle data sets of the magnitude of the 2-
TB Dark Web collection.  Automatic classification of Web content is currently being 
investigated as a means of addressing this problem.  Classification techniques are typically 
applied to a “function that has a discrete set of possible values,” and the algorithms have the goal 
of automatically identifying which of these values describe a previously unclassified piece of 
data (Last, 2005).  The discrete values can be any number of properties, as long as there is a way 
to quantify the presence or absence of the property within the data in question, making 
classification algorithms applicable to a broad range of problems.  The type of data to be 
classified determines the appropriate method of classification.  For example, the most general 
classification models are based on a decision-tree methodology to represent the conditional 
dependence between inputs.  The branches of a decision tree “can be interpreted as if-then rules 
of varying complexity,” and traversing the branches of the tree applies the rules of the model to 
each new piece of data.  Examples of decision-tree based algorithms are C4.5 and ID3.  Other 
pattern recognition approaches utilize Probabilistic Neural Networks (PNN), Bayesian learning 
methods, Support Vector Machines (SVM), Principle Component Analysis (PCA), Gaussian 
Mixture Models (GMM), K-nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithms, and linear and quadratic 
discriminants (Duda et al, 2001), (Bishop, 2006).  An in-depth discussion of these techniques is 
beyond the scope of this report. 
In the counter-terrorism domain, the automatic classification of Web content as terror-related or 
not is perhaps the most straightforward type of classification problem, since it has only two 
possible outcomes.  The application of classification algorithms to Web content is not so 
straightforward, however, and a significant component of the analysis process resides in 
manipulating the data into a form that is friendly to the preferred algorithms.  Researchers at 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, have tackled this problem using a graph-based 
classification technique with the goal of automatically recognizing terror-related websites in 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
76 
English and Arabic (Markov and Last, 2005).  Their technique translates the textual HTML 
content of a Web page into a graph where each node is a unique keyword and the connections 
between the nodes describe their position relative to each other and location in the document 
(title, link, text).  Figure 5 depicts a CNN news page and its corresponding graphical 
representation.  This representation of the document is an alternative to the vector representation 
utilized by the content-based Web monitoring methodology described above, and the technique 
was chosen because it captures the inherent structural information of the original document, such 
as order, proximity, and location of terms (Markov and Last, 2005). 
 
 
Figure 5:  Left:  CNN News page used as part of 
the automatic content classification methodology 
described above. Above:  Corresponding graphical 
representation (Markov and Last, 2005). 
The classification process begins with a training set of pre-classified Web documents and their 
corresponding graph models.  Sub-graphs representing the key concepts of the document are 
extracted from the larger graph using the Smart and Naïve extraction algorithms (Markov and 
Last, 2005).  The sub-graphs are analogous to the centroids of Internet browsing interests 
described in the content-based Web monitoring methodology.  Previously unclassified 
documents are processed similarly and their sub-graphs are compared with the training data.  The 
algorithms that can compute the similarity between classified and unclassified content directly 
from their graphical representations, such as the K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algorithm, are 
computationally intensive and therefore not suitable for real-time classification of large amounts 
of Web content.  Accordingly, the researchers converted the unseen graphs to vectors of Boolean 
features where a “1” represents the presence of a sub-graph that matches the training data.  Many 
different classification models can be applied to data in this type of vector format, such as neuro-
fuzzy networks, artificial neural networks, the Naïve Bayes, SVM, decision tree (C4.5, ID3), and 
PNN Classifiers. 
The researchers tested this methodology on 648 manually collected Arabic Web documents, 200 
of which were pre-classified as “terrorist-related” and 448 as “non-terrorist.”  They used the ID3 
decision tree classifier algorithm and tested the technique to determine the optimal number of 
nodes per graph, classification rate threshold, and sub-graph extraction algorithm.  The results 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
77 
can be seen in Figure 6.  The most accurate classification results were obtained using the Smart 
sub-graph extraction technique on 100 node graphs.  Nine documents were classified incorrectly; 
five non-terrorist sites were classified as “terrorist”, and four “terrorist” sites were missed 
(Markov and Last, 2005).  While the testbed of this study was relatively small, the results 
indicate the potential for this technology to be successfully applied to much larger datasets. 
 
 
Figure 6:  Results for Naïve and Smart sub-graph extraction techniques of Arabic 
Web documents.  The most accurate classification results were obtained using the 
Smart sub-graph extraction technique on 100 node graphs (Markov and Last, 2005). 
Data Analysis:  Authorship Identification 
Communication channels such as forum postings, chat room dialog, and email offer a fast, 
inexpensive, and largely anonymous way to reach millions, making them an ideal 
communication method for VNSAs who wish to namelessly disseminate extremist propaganda. 
The application of authorship analysis techniques to this type of data can offer insights into the 
character and identity of the creator of an anonymous textual document.  Characterization 
techniques “attempt to formulate an author profile by making inferences about gender, education, 
and cultural backgrounds on the basis of writing style,” while identification is a classification 
task that has the goal of  assigning authorship to an anonymous document based on a stylistic 
comparison with previously classified documents (Abbasi and Chen, 2005). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
78 
The linguistic discipline of stylometry is the basis for most authorship analyses (Abbasi and 
Chen, 2005).  The stylometric methodology applies statistical analysis techniques to a textual 
document, with the goal of extracting features that are indicative of the author’s unique writing 
style.  This feature set can then be compared to documents with confirmed authorship that have 
been evaluated in a similar manner.  There are four major categories of stylistic features that are 
the focus of such an analysis:  lexical, syntactic, structural, and content-specific. A lexical feature 
breakdown contains information, such as word frequency, number of words per sentence, total 
number of characters, and characters per sentence.   
Certain generalizations about the author’s writing style can be made from a lexical analysis.  For 
example, the inclusion of a large number of relatively long words can indicate that the author has 
a large vocabulary and a more complex writing style.  Syntax features refer to the order and 
pattern of words used to construct a sentence, which can be established through punctuation and 
the use of “function words” such as while and upon (Abbasi and Chen, 2005).  An example of a 
syntactical signature would be an author’s consistent choice to use the word thus instead of 
hence in the same context.  A document’s structural features, such as the layout of the text, 
structure of greetings, number of paragraphs, and average paragraph length, and the use of 
content-specific words are also of interest in a stylometric analysis.  For example, in a forum 
where the topic of discussion is computers, an author’s use of the content-specific word RAM as 
opposed to memory is a distinguishing writing style characteristic. 
As part of the Dark Web project, researchers at the University of Arizona have applied 
authorship identification techniques to English and Arabic Web forum postings collected using 
the spidering methodology described previously.  The testbed for the study consisted of 20 Web 
forum messages for each of 20 authors, for a total of 400 messages per language.  The English 
forum texts were downloaded from sites associated with the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, 
and the Arabic messages were collected from strongly anti-American forums associated with the 
Palestinian Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.  The researchers had to adapt traditional authorship 
identification techniques, which were developed for use on literary texts, to the personality of 
Web forum texts.  The latter  tend to be shorter and more informal, and contain a substantial 
amount of misspellings and abbreviations.  The large number of potential authors further limited 
the efficacy of traditional techniques for this application. 
Extracting features from the Arabic text posed additional challenges due to the language’s 
morphological characteristics.  In particular, the diacritics that mark phonetic values in Arabic 
words are rarely used in online communication, which confounds feature extraction algorithms 
based on a methodology designed for English documents.  In addition, Arabic words are shorter, 
which limits the usefulness of the text’s lexical information for establishing a unique writing 
style.  For example, longer words in English documents indicate a more complex writing style, 
but this generalization does not translate to Arabic documents. 
The researchers resolved these issues by implementing separate feature extraction methodologies 
developed specifically for Arabic and English text.  In addition, the problems posed by the short, 
noisy nature of forum text were offset by the availability of data that is unique to Web content, 
such as the presence of hyperlinks and embedded images, font size and color choice, greeting 
structure, and in some cases contact information.  This information expanded the breadth of the 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
79 
structural features category and further informed the classification techniques that were used to 
identify authorship (Abbasi and Chen, 2005). 
After automatic feature extraction, classification algorithms were applied to the data in order to 
identify authorship based on comparison with pre-classified feature sets.  The researchers 
experimented with two different machine learning classification algorithms:  C4.5 and Support 
Vector Machines (SVM).  The C4.5 technique is a decision-tree based algorithm chosen because 
of the ease with which decision trees can be visualized.  SVM was chosen because it is a 
computational learning method that can handle noisy data.  The study produced results that 
pleasantly surprised the researchers, especially in light of the results obtained by Zheng et al. 
(Zheng et al., 2005), Peng et al. (Peng, et al., 2003), and Stamatatos et al. (Stamatatos et al, 
2001) in previous authorship attribution studies (Abbasi and Chen, 2005).   
The SVM classification technique produced the best results for both languages, achieving 
97.00% accuracy for English and 94.83% for Arabic when all four feature categories were 
incorporated into the analysis.  Using this multilingual methodology, the group plans to 
investigate the scalability of the technique for application to a much larger group of potential 
authors.  In addition, they plan to perform a more comprehensive analysis of the English and 
Arabic feature sets across texts to see if some of the attributes, such as the use of persuasive or 
violent language, are indicative of a stylistic signature of the group as a whole. 
Data Analysis:  Qualitative Content Analysis 
The majority of content analysis techniques that have been applied to the study of the behavior of 
VNSAs in cyberspace are quantitative in nature.  The classification techniques described above 
are representative of approaches, where the goal of the analysis is to automate the process of 
identifying terrorism-related content within a dataset by comparing it to a “terrorist-content” 
template of some kind.  This type of analysis does not address the qualitative properties of the 
data, however, which is a perspective that is being investigated by the researchers from the 
University of Arizona responsible for the Dark Web collection.  Using a dataset collected by the 
semi-automated spidering methodology described above, they used quantitative methods to study 
qualitative attributes of the dataset, including technical sophistication, content richness, and Web 
interactivity, with the goal of gaining insight into the level of advancement and effectiveness of 
terrorists’ use of the Internet (Qin et al, 2007).  The researchers also performed a benchmark 
comparison of the terrorist/extremist sites to US government sites, which have been identified as 
the top in the world in terms of Web technical sophistication and interactivity by the CyPRG 
group of the University of Arizona (CYPRG, 2008). 
The study focused on a qualitative analysis of the Web presence of Islamic terrorist groups 
rooted in the Middle East, such as Al Qaeda, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and Hamas.  About 
220,000 multimedia Web sites and documents were evaluated for 13 technical sophistication 
attributes, five content richness attributes, and 11 Web-interactivity attributes which compose the 
so-called Dark Web Attribute System (DWAS).   
The level of a site’s technical sophistication was measured by its use of basic HTML techniques 
(lists, tables, frames, and forms), advanced HTML techniques (DHTML/SHTML, predefined 
and self-defined script functions), and embedded multimedia content, such as background 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
80 
images, music and streaming of audio/video.  In addition, a site’s use of dynamic Web 
programming languages, such as CGI, PHP, and JSP/ASP, for functions such as user login and 
online transaction processing was also evaluated.  As shown in Table 2, each attribute was 
assigned a weight based on the opinion of Web experts obtained through an email survey (Qin et 
al, 2007). 
 
Technical Sophistication attributes Weights 
Basic HTML techniques 
• Use of lists 
• Use of tables 
• Use of frames 
• Use of forms 
 
1 
2 
2 
1.5 
Embedded multimedia 
• Use of background image 
• Use of background music 
• Use of stream audio/video 
 
1 
2 
3.5 
Advanced HTML 
• Use of DHTML/SHTML 
• Use of predefined script functions 
• Use of self-defined script functions 
 
2.5 
2 
4.5 
Dynamic web programming 
• Use of CGI 
• Use of PHP 
• Use of JSP/ASP 
 
2.5 
4.5 
5.5 
Content Richness Attributes Scores 
Hyperlink 
File/Software download 
Image 
Video/audio file 
No. of hyperlinks 
No. of downloadable documents 
No. of images 
No. of video/audio files 
Web Interactivity Attributes Weights 
One-to-one interactivity 
• Email feedback 
• Email list 
• Contact address 
• Feedback Form 
• Guest book 
 
1.75 
2.25 
1.25 
2.75 
1.5 
Community-level interactivity 
• Private message 
• Online forum 
• Chat room 
 
4.25 
4.25 
4.75 
Transaction-level interactivity 
• Online shop 
• Online payment 
• Online application form 
 
4 
4 
4 
Table 2:  List of technical sophistication, content richness, and Web interactivity 
attributes and corresponding weights (Qin et al, 2007). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
81 
The content richness attributes evaluated the variety and volume of information offered by a site, 
and was measured by the number of hyperlinks and number of downloadable documents, 
images, and audio/video files it contained.  The third attribute category, Web interactivity, 
evaluated the sites for three types of interactivity:  one-to-one level interactivity, community-
level interactivity, and transaction level interactivity such as online shops, online payment 
options, and online application forms that provide functionality for activities such as donating to 
extremist groups or applying for access to restricted content (Qin et al, 2007). 
Attribute information was automatically extracted from the terrorist/extremist dataset and from 
277,000 documents collected from US government sites.  The results of a statistical analysis of 
the datasets indicate that US government sites are significantly more advanced in the use of basic 
HTML techniques to organize the sites and the implementation of dynamic programming 
languages to provide functions such as user login and online applications.  The results also 
indicate that there is significantly more embedded media available on terrorist sites as compared 
to the government sites.  The researchers believe this to be a significant finding that demonstrates 
the extent to which the Internet is used by NSA groups as a means of disseminating information.   
Since multimedia content is more attractive and leaves a more lasting impression than text, the 
effort these groups have expended to include such content indicates a desire to make a strong 
statement to both supporters and enemies.  Examples of such content include movie clips of 
suicide bombing attacks in Iraq posted to online forums, video clips of the beheading of 
American Nicholas Berg posted on a Malaysian terrorist site, and pictures of executed Iraqi 
“traitors” who cooperated with US forces (Qin et al, 2007). 
The US government sites demonstrate a higher degree of content-richness based on the much 
larger volume of downloadable multimedia contents they provide.  This result seems 
incongruous with the analysis of embedded media discussed above, but it is actually indicative of 
the nature of the majority of the terrorist sites investigated.  While US government sites are 
usually hosted on dedicated Web servers, the NSA groups’ sites are often hosted by free ISPs, 
which restrict the sites’ size and use of bandwidth.  It is theorized that this explains the extra 
effort expended to include embedded multimedia content as an alternative to downloadable files. 
The results of the Web interactivity comparison indicate that the US government sites support 
significantly more one-to-one level interaction, while the terrorist/extremist groups support much 
more community-level interaction through online forums, bulletin boards, and chat rooms.  This 
confirms the results of studies that indicate that NSAs are using the Internet as an integral 
method of communication.  Forums such as www.shawati.com and www.kuwaitchat.net have 
tens of thousands of members and hundreds of thousands of postings, where the members are a 
mix of NSAs, supporters, and sympathizers.  In some cases, forum members can receive regular 
messages from members of terrorist groups, such as the late terrorist leader Abu Mus’ab Zarqawi 
in Iraq, who used to post messages directly to the forum www.islamic-f.net. 
The results of the statistical analysis of the two data sets demonstrate that although there are 
significant differences between the US government and terrorist/extremist sites sub-attributes, 
there is no appreciable difference in the broader categories of technical sophistication, content 
richness, and Web interactivity.  This implies that NSA groups employ the same level of Internet 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
82 
sophistication as the US government when it comes to communicating with the public (Qin et al, 
2007).   
The significant volume of forum and chat room postings that were uncovered during the data 
collection process indicates that they are methods of communication heavily employed by 
terrorists/extremists, and the authors of the study suggest that security and law-enforcement 
experts “should pay more attention” to these types of online communication.  The researchers 
continue to pursue this type of qualitative analysis; future research directions include 
incorporating additional attributes to the DWAS, expanding the analysis to Web sites from other 
parts of the world, performing a time-series analysis of the Dark Web data, and exploring the use 
of more advanced machine learning techniques to search for patterns in the media content 
collected from the sites (Qin et al, 2007). 
Predictive Modeling 
An adequately informed application of predictive modeling techniques has the potential to 
provide analysts with situational assessment, forecasting, and deterrence strategies (Asal et al, 
2008).  Traditionally, a realistic model can only be constructed from a training set of historical 
records, but (fortunately) terror-related plots are small in number, with “only one or two major 
terrorist incidents every few years - each one distinct in terms of planning and execution” (Jonas 
and Harper, 2006).  Thus, the models often have to be augmented by input from outside 
authoritative sources, and rely heavily on hypotheses that are based on historical patterns of 
behavior.  This makes the availability of a clean, content-rich dataset crucial to the success of the 
model.  While they do not specifically model the emergent behavior of VNSAs in cyberspace, 
the examples that follow are indicative of state-of-the-art research in the application of predictive 
modeling techniques to the counter-terrorism domain.  The models focus on the corporeal 
behavior of VNSAs;  however, they are more well-informed by the inclusion of information 
regarding their cyberspace activities obtained by the collection and analysis methods described 
above. 
Predictive Modeling:  Hidden Markov Models and Bayesian Networks 
Researchers at the University of Connecticut are developing a tool for modeling and detecting 
terrorist networks that can “assist analysts with:  1) identifying terrorist threats; 2) predicting 
possible terrorist actions; and 3) elucidating ways to counteract terrorist activities” (Allanach et 
al, 2004).  The architecture of the so-called Adaptive Safety Analysis and Monitoring (ASAM) 
tool “is based on the premise that terrorist networks can be evaluated using transaction-based 
models” and suspicious links between people, places, and things.  For example, a sequence of 
events (transactions) that may or may not be cause for concern could consist of an individual 
withdrawing money from the bank, buying chemicals that could be used to create a chemical 
weapon, and then purchasing a plane ticket to the United States.  The ASAM tool models the 
evolution of such transactions using hidden Markov models (HMMs) and dynamic Bayesian 
networks (DBNs). An HMM is a type of stochastic signal model used to evaluate the likelihood 
of a sequence of observations and to infer the most likely sequence of events from a noisy 
sequence of observations.  The model represents the interconnection between a hypothetical 
series of transactions that lead to the completion of the task that is being modeled.  Figure 7 
depicts a Markov chain model developed by the researchers to represent a plot by members of Al 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
83 
Qaeda to execute a truck bombing during the 2004 Olympics in Athens, Greece.  There are 9 
states in this model and the probability of transition between the states is printed by the edges 
that connect them (Singh, Allanach et al, 2004).  The HMM models are parameterized by the 
transition probability matrix, emission matrix, and the initial probability vector. 
 
Figure 7:  Markov chain representing a hypothetical plot by members of Al Qaeda to execute a 
truck bombing at the 2004 Olympics in Athens, Greece (Singh, Allanach et al, 2004). 
The HMMs are the foundation of the ASAM tool, since they provide the “template models” for 
potential terrorist activity; new transactional data is compared to these templates as a way of 
tracking the development of scenarios.  In general, if there is enough historical data available, the 
parameters of the model can be generated automatically from a “learning” algorithm called the 
Baum-Welch algorithm (Singh, Tu et al, 2004).  For counter-terrorism applications, it is nearly 
impossible to collect adequate historical data to make this approach feasible, so the researchers 
designed the models and assigned parameters based on the recommendations of intelligence 
analysts.   
The information gathered from the HMMs is reported to probabilistic models that represent 
larger scale terrorist activities.  These overarching plots are represented by dynamic Bayesian 
networks (DBNs), and the ASAM system utilizes a hierarchy of subordinate dynamic Bayesian 
networks (sub-DBNs) that report upwards to a final comprehensive DBN that evaluates the 
overall probability of terrorist activity.   
Figure 8 depicts the DBN representing the global threat model for potential terrorist activity at 
the 2004 Olympics (GeNle 2.0, 2003).  Each node in the model represents a terrorist sub-plot 
that is described by an underlying HMM, and the links between nodes represent direct 
probabilistic dependencies between the subplots.  The conditional probabilities of each node are 
updated whenever they receive information from their corresponding HMM, and the global 
threat level at any given time is a function of the current conditional probabilities assigned to 
each subplot. Simply stated, the global threat level increases as the terrorist groups successfully 
execute the subplots described by each node in the overarching network. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
84 
 
 
Figure 8:  Dynamic Bayesian network representing the global threat level for a 
terrorist attack at the 2004 Olympics in Athens (GeNle 2.0, 2003). 
The inputs to the ASAM system are relevant transactional data, such as proven communication 
between suspicious individuals and financial transactions.  Table 3 shows the transactions that 
would characterize the states of the HMM of the truck bombing scenario shown in Figure 7.  
This type of transactional information could be generated by a program such as the Evidence 
Extraction and Link Discovery (EELD) project, a government initiative with the goal of 
extracting relevant data from large quantities of classified and unclassified data sources 
(Allanach et al, 2004), (EFF, 2008).   
As the incoming transactions fulfill the state transition requirements of the HMMs, the 
transaction space evolves and the probability of the terrorists successfully executing the plot can 
be evaluated.  Each state transition that is detected can be visualized as the completion of a link 
between nodes on a graph, as shown in Figure 9.  Using a probabilistic graph matching 
methodology, the pattern these links create can be compared to the HMM state representing 
successful task completion, resulting in a measure of the probability that the terrorist group is 
executing the subplot.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
85 
State Transactions 
1 AQ announces attack on western targets: 
• Spiritual leader gives inflammatory preachings in Middle-East. 
• Al Jazeera, a Middle-East based media, reports that AQ website announces an 
attack on western targets 
2 Recruitment/training of new members: 
• The ring leader in AQ recruits terrorists to carry out the truck bombing attack. 
• AQ cell recruits operators to execute the attack and drive the vehicle. 
3 Set up AQ cell: 
• The terrorists are embedded in Greece a few months or a year before the Olympics 
and set up a cell. 
• AQ ring leader assigns the operators, planners and facilitators for the attack.  The 
facilitator provides driving licenses, passports, etc. to the operators. 
• AQ cell members rent two or three apartments and they pay rent by cash. 
4 Money for operation: 
• The AQ ring leader sends money to the AQ cell members via messengers. 
5 Planning for attack: 
• The terrorists reconnoiter the target location multiple times. 
• The terrorist cell members communicate with the ring leader. 
6 Gather resources: 
• Terrorists purchase or steal chemicals, blasting caps and fuses for explosives in 
Turkey and transfer via trucks to Greece. 
• Terrorists purchase or steal respirators and chemical mixing devices in Greece. 
• Terrorists purchase electronic parts such as satellite cellular phones from illegal 
sources. 
• Terrorists rent a truck. 
7 Target reconnaissance: 
• Suspicious persons (bomb building experts, persons on the watch lists) reconnoiter 
the potential targets. 
• Terrorists perform dry runs of routes to identify speed traps, road hazards, etc. 
8 Weapons installed: 
• Terrorists modify the truck to handle heavy loads and neutralize any security 
arrangements at the target. 
9 Attack: 
• The terrorists drive the truck into the target and detonate the bomb. 
Table 3:  Transactions for the truck bombing Hidden Markov Model depicted in 
Figure 7 (Singh, Allanach et al, 2004). 
This information is then reported to the corresponding sub-DBN and used to compute the global 
threat level.  The ASAM tool can provide analysts with three types of results:  1) A likelihood of 
observations, which is a “measure of the confidence of the match between the observed events 
and the template models”; 2) Evidence from observations such as transaction type, description, 
and time; and 3) Probability of a terrorist attack, which is a function of the global threat level 
based on the overarching DBN. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
86 
 
Figure 9:  Graphical representation of state transitions in a  
Hidden Markov Model (Allanach et al, 2004). 
The researchers performed several simulations using the ASAM tool, including one which 
utilized the truck bombing HMM shown in Figure 7.  They generated synthetic transaction data 
to simulate the events corresponding to the truck bombing plot, and mixed the data with 
background “noise” transactions.  The simulation investigated the “likelihood of observations” 
result, which corresponds to the probability the HMM reports to its DBN node (Figure 10b), and 
the global probability of a terrorist attack for the abridged DBN shown in Figure 10a.  The 
results of the simulation indicate that the global probability of a terrorist attack peaks at 48%, 
which could be interpreted by an analyst as likely.  The developers of the ASAM system assert 
that it is intended to provide analysts with “soft alerts rather than hard decisions.”  False 
positives are an inevitable result, but they can be minimized by obtaining accurate model 
parameters from the input of multiple intelligence analysts.  Future work includes the addition of 
feedback capabilities via influence diagrams, which will allow analysts to simulate the impact of 
counter-terrorism measures on the threat level. 
The ASAM system is also a component of a larger collaborative tool for counter-terrorism 
analysis called the Network Modeling Environment for Structural Intervention Strategies 
(NEMESIS).  The NEMESIS environment “provides a forum for information exchange among 
multiple modeling or analysis tools, and model-based team collaboration” (Popp et al, 2004).  
The platform utilizes Organizational Descriptive Language (ODL), which allows users to 
experiment graphically with different types of models.  In addition to ASAM, NEMESIS 
incorporates the Organizational Risk Analysis (ORA) tool developed by researchers at Carnegie 
Mellon University.  ORA is a “network tool that detects risks and vulnerabilities in an 
organization’s design structure,” which makes it useful for simulation of terrorist network 
destabilization strategies, such as those discussed below (Popp et al, 2004). 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
87 
 
Figure 10a (Above):  Simplified global threat model used in 
simulation of impact of truck bombing attack 
Figure 10b (Right):  Likelihood of observation result from 
the application of the truck bombing HMM (top), and 
corresponding global probability of terrorist attack (bottom) 
(Singh, Tu et al, 2004). 
Truck Bombing HMM
 
Predictive Modeling:  Destabilization of Terrorist Networks 
The modeling techniques discussed so far have approached the problem of modeling the 
emergent behavior of VNSAs in cyberspace from a passive perspective, excluding analysis of the 
impact counter-terrorism measures may have on the group’s ability to function.  This type of 
analysis is currently being investigated by researchers at the Carnegie Mellon center for 
Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems (CASOS).  They propose a 
Dynamic Network Analysis (DNA) approach, which “extends the power of thinking about 
networks to the realm of large-scale, dynamic systems with multiple co-evolving networks under 
conditions of information uncertainty with cognitively realistic agents” (Carley et al, 2003).  The 
approach takes into account the dynamic and covert nature of terrorist networks, which are 
generally composed of semi-autonomous cells as opposed to hierarchical structures.  Attempting 
to destabilize terrorist networks using strategies developed for well-defined, hierarchical 
networks will not be effective, hence the development of the DNA approach. 
The group approached the problem by focusing on three key questions:  “What is the size and 
shape of the covert network?; ”How does the nation in which the covert network exists impact its 
form and ability?”; and “If we do x to the covert network, what is likely to happen?”  The 
approach they developed (Carley et al, 2003) utilized the following seven step process for 
assessing various destabilization strategies: 
1. Identify key network entities and connections between them. 
2. Identify key processes by which entities or connections are added or dropped, or in 
the case of connections, changed their strength. 
3. Collect data on the covert network. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
88 
4. Determine performance characteristics of the existing system. 
5. Determine performance characteristics of the optimal system, if applicable. 
6. Locate vulnerabilities in the network and select destabilization strategies. 
7. Determine performance characteristics in the short and long term after destabilization 
strategy has been applied. 
The initial testbed for this methodology was composed of open-source data describing the 
terrorist network associated with the embassy bombing in Tanzania.  Generally, the group 
defines “entities” as people (agents), knowledge, resources, events, tasks, groups, and countries, 
but for this analysis a simplified set was used that consisted of people, resources, and tasks.   
The performance of the system was simulated using the software DyNet, also developed by the 
CASOS group.  DyNet is a “multi-agent network system for assessing destabilization strategies 
on dynamic networks,” and input to the system is a “knowledge network” composed of the 
“individuals’ knowledge about whom they know, what resources they have, and what task they 
are doing” (Carley et al, 2003).  The group also assessed the efficiency of the network’s structure 
by comparing it to its optimal configuration, which was ascertained by minimizing the 
vulnerabilities caused by workload and distribution of resources and communication ties.  The 
results indicate that the organization was not particularly well-designed since it required 88 
changes to “who is doing what and has what resources to reach the optimal configuration.”  It 
was also noted, however, that these results could indicate that a substantial amount of 
information on the organization’s structure is missing. 
Next, the impact of four destabilization strategies on the performance of the network was 
assessed.  The strategies included elimination of the person with the highest degree of Centrality, 
Betweenness Centrality, Cognitive Load, or Task Exclusivity.  (Betweenness and Centrality are 
defined above in the discussion of link/social network analysis).  The simulation was a two-step 
process, beginning with the use of the Organizational Risk Assessment (ORA) tool developed by 
the CASOS group, which evaluated the “resource congruence” of the group with and without the 
individuals high in these measures.  DyNet was then applied to the altered networks, and the 
performance was evaluated for changes in the ease and rate of communication flow, and the 
ability of the organization to adapt to these changes.  Table 4 lists the results of the assessment 
for the two agents whose removal had the largest impact on the performance of the network:  
agents 5 and 7.  The results indicate that the removal of either agent does not significantly affect 
the network’s distance from the “optimal” configuration, so the researchers conclude that the 
effects of either removal in this case would be small. 
Some of the results appear incongruous.  For example, removal of agent 5 actually increases the 
resource congruence of the network, which is not exactly an expected outcome for removal of an 
important node.  However, the researchers explain that “resource congruence is a strict measure 
such that congruence is decreased when either agents do not have the resources they needed for 
the task to which they are assigned or when agents have resources that are not necessary for the 
task they are assigned.  Removal of agent 5 is reducing the presence of unnecessary resources … 
[making] the organizational design leaner.”  The diffusion results, which indicate the rate and 
ease with which information can be spread throughout the network, are more intuitive.  Removal 
of agent 7 is disruptive to the flow of communication because it decreases the potential diffusion 
rate.  In contrast, removal of agent 5 actually increases the potential rate of communication 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
89 
between nodes.  The researchers point out that this “potentially makes the organization more 
vulnerable to information warfare attacks,” since both correct and incorrect information can be 
disseminated more rapidly as a result of removing this agent. 
 
Measure Original Design 
After 
Removal of 5 
After 
Removal of 7 
Hamming from Optimal 88 83 86 
Resource Congruence .475 .525 .475 
Performance as Accuracy - Initial Impact 78.5625 78.22 82.72 
Performance Recovery – Percentage 
Increase in Performance 
95.55 89.72 93.7 
Diffusion Initial 21.62291 14.70212 13.27369 
Diffusion Recovery – Percentage Increase 
in Diffusion 
71.23304 89.05325 50.87843 
Table 4:  Impact of agent removal on terrorist network’s performance 
characteristics (Carley et al, 2003). 
The results of this study demonstrate the potential of this methodology, but it is clear that much 
future work is needed to perfect the process.  As emphasized by the CASOS group, it is 
important to take into account the fact that covert network assessments will be ill-informed and 
constantly changing, and the lack of complete information on the structure of the Tanzania 
terrorist network is a likely cause of the somewhat inconclusive simulation results.  These issues 
further emphasize the importance of having a content-rich dataset that can adequately inform 
predictive models. 
Benefits, Challenges, and Caveats 
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, “spurred extraordinary efforts intended to protect 
America from the newly highlighted scourge of international terrorism” (Jonas and Harper, 
2006).  These efforts included a significant interest in the potential use of predictive data mining 
techniques as a means of uncovering covert terrorist networks and plots, and since then, the 
implementation of such techniques has been surrounded by controversy.  According to the 
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, if the government had 
pursued the leads available at the time, the attacks could have been prevented.  This raises the 
question:  Could data mining and predictive modeling techniques have played a role in averting 
the tragedy?  According to a report by Jeff Jonas and Jim Harper for Policy Analysis (Jonas and 
Harper, 2006), the answer to that question is no.  They describe data mining as “not well-suited 
to the terrorist discovery problem,” and they have defined data mining as “the process of 
searching data for previously unknown patterns and using those patterns to predict future 
outcomes.”  In particular, they do not feel that predictive data mining would have made an 
impact on preventing 9/11.  They assert that what law enforcement officials needed was not new 
technology, but “a sharper focus and perhaps the ability to more efficiently locate, access, and 
aggregate information about specific suspects.”   
The report also emphasizes the high likelihood of false positives - cases where individuals are 
incorrectly classified as “suspicious” due to some combination of activities that correlated with a 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
90 
“terrorist-behavior” pattern.  They cite the use of predictive data mining in consumer direct 
marketing campaigns that utilize demographic profiles of potential customers to target mailings 
to individuals that are statistically likely to buy certain products.  Despite having access to 
millions of customer profiles to train their algorithms, the positive response rate for this type of 
advertising is in the single digits, corresponding to a minimum 90% false positive rate (Direct 
Marketing Assoc., 2004).  In comparison, terror-related plots are much smaller in number, with 
“only one or two major terrorist incidents every few years - each one distinct in terms of 
planning and execution” (Jonas and Harper, 2006).  This lack of historical data prohibits the 
creation of valid predictive models, opening the door to the possibility of an overwhelming 
number of false positives that would waste valuable financial and law enforcement resources. 
While Jonas and Harper strongly disagree with the use of predictive data mining for the detection 
of covert terrorist plots and networks, their opinions are not contrary to what most researchers 
believe to be the limitations, realistic expectations, and proper application of predictive modeling 
techniques.  The consensus is that these techniques should only be expected to produce 
meaningful results if they are well-informed, particularly by seed information from outside 
authoritative sources (Last, 2005).  Predictive modeling should be used as a “power tool for 
analysts and investigators - a way to conduct low-level tasks that will provide clues to assist 
analysts and investigators” (DeRosa, 2004). 
Another controversial issue surrounding the use of predictive data mining techniques is their 
potential to infringe on individuals’ privacy if not executed in a responsible manner.  If “data 
mining or automated data analysis…is deemed acceptable given the potential harm of 
catastrophic terrorism,…there will be great temptation to expand to use of [the] tools” to other 
high profile illegal behavior - a phenomenon known as “mission creep” (DeRosa, 2004).  Experts 
propose the implementation of a four step plan “designed to protect privacy and prevent abuse,” 
should the government gain access to large databases of private information (DeRosa, 2004).  
The plan consists of:  1) Developing technology to address inaccurate data and false positives;  
2) Developing technology designed to “mask or selectively reveal identifying data”;  3) 
Implementing audit technology; and  4) Implementing “permissioning” technology.   
As mentioned previously, reducing false-positives can be accomplished by utilizing “cleaner” 
datasets and perfecting the models used for pattern-based analyses.  Anonymization will provide 
analysts with access to identifying information, such as names, addresses, and social security 
numbers, on a need-to-know basis only.  Audit technology is a secondary level of defense 
intended to “watch the watchers;” that is, protect against authorized users with access to 
identifying information who would abuse their authority.  Finally, permissioning technology 
involves the implementation of rule-based processing where policies are built directly into the 
search engines that have access to private data.  Users would be required to present evidence of 
permission to access content, such as a warrant, and the system would automatically grant access 
to only that content (DeRosa, 2004). 
Research and Development Directions 
Research on the application of modeling techniques to the study of emergent behavior of VNSAs 
in cyberspace is ongoing.  As evidenced by some of the results discussed above, there is room 
for significant progress to be made in this field.  The University of Arizona group responsible for 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
91 
the Dark Web collection continues to analyze the data from several different perspectives.  
Forthcoming publications include a study of “sentiment and affect” analysis of Web content.  
The analysis allows them to quantify the levels of radical sentiment and violence in Web content 
with the goal of identifying sites that warrant further investigation (Univ. of Arizona, 2008).  The 
study also examines the process by which “ideas become infectious based on their contents,” and 
the group implemented visualization techniques that can be used to monitor the change in 
sentiment and affect over time among a group of people. 
The continued growth of clean, content-rich raw data sources, such as the Dark Web collection, 
is critical for the further development of modeling techniques, as is the development of 
information portals that provide efficient access to the data.  The Dark Web Portal is an example 
of a database access tool that utilizes document summarization, categorization, and visualization 
techniques to allow users to quickly locate, browse, and analyze the multilingual information 
they seek (Zhou et al, 2005).   
Given the magnitude of the Dark Web collection, an access tool such as the Portal is a necessity, 
and work is ongoing to include additional natural language processing techniques such as entity 
and relations extraction to improve its ability to interpret user search commands.  The further 
development of multilingual techniques for the classification of Web content is also a critical 
area of research, particularly for Arabic Web content.  The ontology of the Arabic language 
poses significant challenges for classification techniques that are based on an English 
phenomenology, so continued development of language-specific techniques, such as those 
employed by the Dark Web group in the authorship identification study described above, are 
needed. 
 Given the interdisciplinary nature of the modeling process, collaborative tools like NEMESIS 
are particularly useful in the counter-terrorism domain.  Having a platform that incorporates 
multiple modeling methodologies (such as ASAM and ORA) that can combine inputs from 
multiple users is an invaluable tool, and further development of these types of collaborative tools 
can help make predictive models more effective.   
It is the advancement of techniques for the simulation of counter-terrorism measures, however, 
that could have the largest impact on the use of predictive models for decision support.  Further 
development of this application can help realize one of the main goals of predictive modeling:  to 
provide analysts with the ability to accurately predict the outcome of multiple counter-terrorism 
strategies before selecting a course of corporeal action.  Overall, it is evident from the current 
status of this field of research that when used responsibly and with a clear understanding of their 
limitations, data mining and predictive modeling techniques have the potential to be powerful 
counter-terrorism weapons, particularly as tools that may be applied to better understand and 
predict the behavior of violent non-state actors. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
92 
References  
Abbasi, A., and Chen, H. 
2005 “Applying Authorship Analysis to Extremist-Group Web Forum Messages,” IEEE 
Intelligent Systems, Special Issue on Artificial Intelligence for National and Homeland 
Security, Sept/Oct 2005, pp. 67-75. 
Achen, Christopher H. and Snidal, Duncan   
1989  “Rational Deterrence Theory and Comparative Case Studies,” World Politics, Vol. 
41, No. 2, pp. 143-169. 
Allanach, J.; Tu, H.; Singh, S.; Willett, P.; and Pattipati, K. 
2004 “Detecting, Tracking and Counteracting Terrorist Networks via Hidden Markov 
Models,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, March 2004. 
Anderson, Jon W. 
1997a  Globalizing Politics and Religion in the Muslim World. Journal of Electronic 
Publishing 3(1). http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/archive/Anderson.html. 
 
1997b “Cybernauts of the Arab Diaspora:  Electronic Mediation in Transnational Cultural 
Identities”, Couch-Stone Symposium on Postmodern Culture, Global Capitalism and 
Democratic Action, University of Maryland, April 1997 
 
2003a  New Media, New Publics:  Reconfiguring the Public Sphere of Islam. Social 
Research 70(3):887-906.  
 
2003b “The Internet and Islam’s New Interpreters”, In New Media in the Muslim World:  
The Emerging Public Sphere, Ed. Dale. F. Eickelman and Jon W. Anderson, Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington , IN, p. 48. 
 
2007  Transnational Civil Society, Institution-Building, and IT:  Reflections from the 
Middle East. CyberOrient:  Online Journal of the Virtual Middle East. 
http://cyberorient.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=19&Itemid=28. 
Arbatov, Alexei and Dvorkin, Vladimir,  
2006 “Beyond Nuclear Deterrence:  Transforming the US-Russian Equation,” Washington, 
DC:  Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Arquilla, John; Ronfeldt, David; and Zanini, Michele 
1999  Networks, Netwar, and Information-Age Terrorism. In Countering the New 
Terrorism. Ian O. Lesser, Bruce Hoffman, John Arquilla, David Ronfeldt, and Michele 
Zanini, eds. Pp. 39-84. Santa Monica, California:  RAND. 
Asal, V. H.; Drozdova, K.; Mariano, L.; Pattipati, K.; Popp, R.; Rousseau, D; and Santos, E. 
2008 “Models of Emergent Behavior in Cyberspace,” Presentation:  Promoting and 
Protecting U.S. Interests in the Cyber World:  Violent (and non-Violent) Non-state Actors, 
Arlington, VA, Jan. 9-10, 2008.  
Atran, Scott and Stern, Jessica 
2005  Small Groups Find Fatal Purpose through the Web. Nature 437(7059):620. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
93 
Atran, Scott 
2006  A Failure of Imagination (Intelligence, WMDs, and 'Virtual Jihad'). Studies in 
Conflict and Terrorism 29:263-278.  
Benard, Cheryl 
2005 “Cybermullahs and the Jihad – Radical Websites Fostering Estrangement and 
Hostility among Diapora Muslims”, published in “A Future for the Young”, Cheryl Benard, 
RAND working Paper, WR 354, Sept. 2005 
Bishop, C. M. 
2006 Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. 
Bodnar, John W. 
2003  Warning Analysis for the Information Age:  Rethinking the Intelligence Process. 
Washington, D.C.:  Joint Military Intelligence College.  
Carley, K.; Reminga, J. and Kamneva, N. 
2003  “Destabilizing Terrorist Networks,” NAACSOS Conference Proceedings, Pittsburgh, 
PA. 
Carr, Orson Scott 
1977 First Meetings in Enders Universe, Tor, New York, 2003, p.151, “Ender’s Game”, 
first published in Analog magazine, 1977 
Chesser, Nancy, ed. 
2007 Deterrence in the 21st Century:  An Effects-based Approach in an Interconnected 
World. Washington, D.C.:  Prepared for US Strategic Command Global Innovation and 
Strategy Center (USSTRATCOM/GISC), Strategic Multilayer Analysis Team. 
Conway, Maura 
2004  Terrorism and IT:  Cyberterrorism and Terrorist Organizations Online. In Terrorism 
and Counterterrorism:  Understanding the New Security Environment. Russel D. Howard and 
Reid L. Sawyer, eds. Pp. 271-288. Guilford, Connecticut:  McGraw-Hill/Dushkin. 
 
2005 “Terrorist Use of the Internet and Fighting Back, prepared for Cybersafety:  Safety 
and Security in a Networked world:  Balancing Cyber-Rights and Responsibilities, Oxford 
Internet Institute, Oxford University, UK, 8-10 September, 2005 
 
2006 “Terrorism and the Internet:  New Media-New Threat?” Parliamentary Affairs 
Advance Access, Feb. 10, 2006. 
 
2007a  Terrorist Use of the Internet and the Challenges of Governing Cyberspace. In Power 
and Security in the Information Age:  Investigating the Role of the State in Cyberspace. 
Myriam Dunn, Victor Mauer, and Felisha Krishna-Hensel, eds. London:  Ashgate.  
 
2007b  Terrorism and the Making of the ‘New Middle East’:  New Media Strategies of 
Hizbollah and al Qaeda. In New Media in the New Middle East. Philip Seib, ed. Pp. 235 - 
258. London:  Palgrave. 
 
2008  Cyberterrorism:  The Ultimate Threat to Critical Infrastructures? In Power and 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
94 
Security in the Information Age:  Investigating the Role of the State in Cyberspace. Myriam 
Dunn, ed. London:  Ashgate. 
CTC 
2006  The Islamic Imagery Project:  Visual Motifs in Jihadi Internet Propaganda. West 
Point, New York:  Combating Terrorism Center, United States Military Academy. 
CYPRG website 
2008  http://www.cyprg.arizona.edu/ 
Der Derian, James  
2000 “Virtuous War/Virtual Theory,” International Affairs.  London:  Royal Institute of 
International Affairs, Vol. 76, No. 4. pp. 771-788. 
DeRosa, M. 
2004  “Data Mining and Data Analysis for Counterterrorism,” CSIS Press, Mar. 2004. 
Direct Marketing Association 
2004 “DMA Releases New Response Rate Report,” news release, October 17, 2004, 
http://www.the-dma.org/cgi/dispnewsstand?article=2891. 
Duda, R. O.; Hart, P. E. and Stork, D. G. 
2001 Pattern Classification, 2nd edition, Wiley, New York. 
EFF website 
2008  http://w2.eff.org/Privacy/TIA/eeld.php. 
Elovici, Y.; Shapira, B.; Last, M.; Zaafrany, O.; Friedman, M.; Schneider, M. and Kandel, A. 
2005 “Content-based Detection of Terrorists Browsing the Web Using an Advanced Terror 
Detection System (STDS),” Intelligence and Security Informatics Proceedings, Vol. 3495, pp 
244-255. 
Epstein, Joshua M. and Axtell, Robert L. 
1996  Growing Artificial Societies:  Social Science from the Bottom Up. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, and Washington D.C.:  MIT Press, and the Brookings Institute.  
Fallows, J. 
2008 Personal email to SMA core team member Carl Hunt, 8 January 2008. 
Fisher, Uri J.  
2006  “Deterrence, Terrorism, and American Values,” Paper presented at Annual 
International Studies Association Meeting, San Diego, CA, March 22-25. 
Gates, R.  
2008 Speech delivered by the Secretary of Defense to the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, “Pre-Alfalfa Luncheon,” January 2008. 
GeNle 2.0,  
2003 Decision Systems Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh. 
George, Alexander L. and Smoke, Richard  
1989  “Deterrence and Foreign Policy,” World Politics, Vol. 41, No. 2., pp. 170-182. 
Gleick, James 
1987  Chaos:  Making a New Science. New York:  Penguin Books.  
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
95 
Gruen, Madeleine 
2004  White Ethnonationalist and Political Islamist Methods of Fundraising and Propaganda 
on the Internet. In Terrorism and Counterterrorism:  Understanding the New Security 
Environment. Russel D. Howard and Reid L. Sawyer, eds. Pp. 289-302. Guilford, 
Connecticut:  McGraw-Hill/Dushkin. 
 
2006  The Khalifate is Way Cool:  The Role and Method of Hibz at-Tahrir US in the 
Proliferation of Party Ideology Worldwide. Hudson Institute Lecture, August 13 2006, 
Washington D.C. 
 
2007  Hizb-ut-Tahrir's Activities in the United States. Terrorism Monitor 5(16):7-9. 
http://www.jamestown.org/terrorism/news/uploads/TM_004_002.pdf. 
Holland, John H. 
1998  Emergence:  From Chaos to Order. New York:  Basic Books.  
Jensen, D. 
2003 “Data Mining in Networks,” presentation at CSIS Data Mining Roundtable, 
Washington, D.C., July 23, 2003, 
http://kdl.cs.umass.edu/people/jensen/papers/nrcdbsse02.html. 
Joint Chiefs of Staff 
2000  Joint Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for Joint Intelligence Preparation of the 
Battlespace JP 2-01.3. Washington, D.C. 
http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp2_01_3.pdf. 
Jonas, J. and Harper, J. 
2006  “Effective Counterterrorism and the Limited Role of Predictive Data Mining,” Policy 
Analysis, No. 584, Dec. 11, 2006. 
Jonas, J. 
2003 “Using Data to Detect and Preempt Bad Things from Happening,” presentation at 
CSIS Data Mining Roundtable, Washington, D. C., July 23, 2003. 
Kirk, J. 
2007  “Estonia Recovers from Massive DDoS Attack:  Denial-of-Service onslaught may 
have Russian origins,” Computer World, May 17, 2007, 
http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9019725. 
Krebs, V. 
2002  “Uncloaking Terrorist Networks,” First Monday, March 25, 2002, 
http://www.firstmonday.org/Issues/issue7_4/krebs/. 
Lambert, Susan 
2006, "Do We Need a “Real” Taxonomy of e-Business Models?"  School of Commerce,  
Flinders University, ISSN:  1441-3906,  http://commerce.flinders.edu.au/researchpapers/06-
6.pdf  
Last, M. 
2005 “Using Data Mining Technology for Terrorist Detection on the Web,” Fighting 
Terror in Cyberspace:  Series in Machine Perception and Artificial Intelligence, Eds:  M. 
Last, and A. Kandel, Vol. 65. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
96 
Lesser, Ian O. 
1999  Countering the New Terrorism:  Implications for Strategy. In Countering the New 
Terrorism. Ian O. Lesser, Bruce Hoffman, John Arquilla, David Ronfeldt, and Michele 
Zanini, eds. Pp. 85-144. Santa Monica, California:  RAND. 
Markov, A., and Last, M. 
2005 “Identification of Terrorist Web Sites with Cross-Lingual Classification Tools,” 
Fighting Terror in Cyberspace:  Series in Machine Perception and Artificial Intelligence, 
Eds:  M. Last, A. Kandel, Vol. 65. 
Morgan, Patrick M.   
1983 Deterrence:  A Conceptual Analysis.  Beverly Hills, CA:  Sage Publications. 
Peng, F. et al.,  
2003 “Automated Authorship Attribution with Character Level Language Models,” 
presented at the 10th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL 
2003); http://users.cs.dal.ca/~vlado/papers/2003-EACL03-139.pdf. 
Pennell, C. R., Ed.  
2001 Bandits at Sea:  A Pirates Reader. New York, N.Y., NYU Press. 
Peshkova, Svetlana 
2002  i-Islam@hizb-ut-tahrir.org. Anthroglobe. 
http://malinowski.kent.ac.uk/docs/IslamAtWWW.htm. 
Popp, R.; Pattipati, K.; Willett, P.; Serfaty, D.; Stacy, W.; Carley, K.; Allanach, J.; Tu, H. and 
Singh, S. 
2004 “Collaborative Tools for Counter-Terrorism,” IEEEAC paper #1392, Dec. 19, 2004. 
Qin, J.; Zhou, Y.; Reid, E.; Lai, G. and Chen H. 
2007 “Analyzing terror campaigns on the Internet:  Technical sophistication, content 
richness, and Web interactivity,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 65. pp. 
71-84. 
Reid, E., Qin, J.; Zhou, Y.; Lai, G.; Sageman, M.; Weimann, G. and Chen, H. 
2005 “Collecting and Analyzing the Presence of Terrorists on the Web:  A Case Study of 
Jihad Websites," IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security (ISI 2005), 
Atlanta, Georgia, 2005. 
Rivkin, David B. Jr.  
2006 “The Virtues of Preemptive Deterrence” Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy  
29(1), pp. 85-104. 
Robb, John 
2008, Personal email to SMA core team member Carl Hunt. 
Sageman, Marc,  
2004 Understanding Terror Networks, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA. 
 
2008 Leaderless Jihad:  Terror Networks in the 21st Century, Univ. of Pennsylvania Press. 
Schumpeter, J. A.  
1942 The Process of Creative Destruction, Unwin. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
97 
Shapira, B. 
2005 “A Content-based Model for Web-Monitoring,” Fighting Terror in Cyberspace:  
Series in Machine Perception and Artificial Intelligence, Eds:  M. Last, & A. Kandel, Vol. 
65. 
Silber, Mitchell D. and Bhatt, Arvin 
2007  Radicalization in the West:  The Homegrown Threat. Pp. 90. New York City Police 
Department, Counterterrorism Unit, New York 
http://www.nypdshield.org/public/SiteFiles/documents/NYPD_Report-
Radicalization_in_the_West.pdf. 
Singh, S.; Allanach, J.; Tu., H.; Pattipati, K. and Willett, P. 
2004 “Stochastic Modeling of a Terrorist Event via the ASAM System,” IEEE Conference 
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, The Netherlands, October, 2004. 
Singh, S.; Tu, H.; Allanach, J.; Areta, J.; Willett, P. and Pattipati, K. 
 2004 “Modeling Threats,” IEEE Potentials, Aug/Sept, 2004. 
Smart, W.  
1912 The Distribution of Income, Being a Study of What the National Wealth is and of 
How it is Distributed According to Economic Worth. London, Macmillan and Company. 
Smith, S. P.; Crider, J. Allen; Perritt Jr., H. H.; Shyong, M.; Krent, H.; Reynolds, L.L. and 
Mencik, S. 
2000 “Independent Review of the Carnivore System:  Final Report,” IIT Research Institute, 
Dec. 8, 2000. 
Speckhard, Anne 
2007 “De-Legitimizing Terrorism:  Creative Engagement and Understanding the Psycho-
Social and Political Processes Involved in Ideological Support for Terrorism” Democracy & 
Security. 
Stamatatos, E.; Fakotakis, N. and Kokkinakis,  G. 
2001 “Computer-Based Authorship Attribution without Lexical Measures,” Computers and 
the Humanities, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 193-214. 
Tunander, Ola 
1989 “The Logic of Deterrence,” Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 353-365. 
U.S. Department of Defense 
2001. 
Univ. of Arizona  
2008 University of Arizona Artificial Intelligence Lab Dark Web Terrorism Research site:  
http://ai.arizona.edu/research/terror/index.htm. 
USSTRATCOM 
2006  Deterrence Operations Joint Operating Concept. Pp. 77. Omaha, Nebraska:  United 
States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) www.dtic.mil/futurejointwarfare. 
Weimann, Gabriel 
2004  www.terror.net:  How Modern Terrorism Uses the Internet, United States Institute of 
Peace Special Report 116, March 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
98 
 
2006 “Terror on the Internet:  The New Arena, the New Challenges”, United States 
Institute of Peace Press, Washington DC. 
Whiteneck, Daniel 
2005 “Deterring Terrorists:  Thoughts on a Framework,” The Washington Quarterly 28(3), 
pp. 187-199.  
Zagare, Frank C. 
2004  Reconciling Rationality with Deterrence. Journal of Theoretical Politics 16(2):107-
141.  
Zanni, Michele, and Edwards, Sean J. A. 
2001 “The Networking of Terrorism in the Information Age,” in Networks and Netwars:  
The Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy, ed. John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt (Santa 
Monica, CA:  RAND corporation) p. 30. 
Zheng, R. et al. 
2005 “A Framework of Authorship Identification for Online Messages:  Writing Style 
Features and Classification Techniques,” Journal of American Society of Information Science 
and Technology (JASIST). 
Zhou, Y.; Qin, J.; Lai, G.; Reid, E. and Chen, H. 
2005 “Building Knowledge Management System for Researching Terrorist Groups on the 
Web,” Proceedings of the 11th Americas Conference on Information Systems, Omaha, NE, 
Aug. 11-14, 2005. 
 
2006 “Exploring the Dark Side of the Web:  Collection and Analysis of US Extremist 
Online Forums,” in Proceedings of the Intelligence and Security Informatics:  IEEE 
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI 2006), San Diego, 
CA, USA, May 23-24, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
99 
Appendix A:  Workshop Participants and Contributors  
Participants in 9-10 January 2008 Workshop in Arlington, VA 
Name Organization Report* 
Alrich, Amy IDA yes 
Anderson, Jon Catholic University  
Asal, Victor SUNY Albany yes 
Astorino-Courtois, Allison NSI yes 
Axtell, Rob George Mason U and  
Santa Fe Institute 
yes 
Barnett, Thomas Enterra Solutions yes 
Benard, Cheryl Rand  
Cabayan, Hriar OSD yes 
Cares, Jeff Alidade Incorporated  
DeJong, Kenneth George Mason U  
Hamilton, Bart STRATCOM/GISC  
Henze, Roger CAPT STRATCOM/GISC  
Heuring, Terry IDA  
Hunt, Carl IDA yes 
Kuznar, Lawrence NSI (on leave from Indiana U) yes 
Meadows, Brian SPAWAR  
Numrich, Sue IDA yes 
Pattipati, Krishna University of Connecticut yes 
Pease. Michael IDA  
Popp, Bob NSI yes 
Robb, John Global Guerillas  
Rousseau, David L., Prof SUNY Albany  
Sanford, Mark S. SRC  
Santos, Eugene Dartmouth U  
Shannahan, Michael Lt Col STRATCOM/GISC  
Shaw, Alan IDA  
Steinberg, Ken Savant Technologies yes 
Veazie, Todd Joint Staff yes 
Vlahos, Michael Johns Hopkins  
Vorce, Jeffrey Joint Staff  
Wu, Tim Columbia Law School yes 
Contributors to this report who were unable to attend 9-10 January 2008 Workshop 
Name Organization Report* 
Borda, Matthew Creighton U yes 
Fallows, James Atlantic Monthly Magazine yes 
Mariano, Laura University of Connecticut Yes 
Drozdova, Katya NSI yes 
*  “yes” indicates contribution to this report 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
N E.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
100 
Appendix B:  Workshop Notes   
Edited by Alan Shaw, Institute for Defense Analyses 
 
Workshop:  Promoting and Protecting U.S. Interests in the Cyber World: Violent (and non-
Violent) Non-state Actors; held 9-10 January 2008 at Directed Technologies, Inc, Arlington, VA 
Workshops are, by their nature, only moderately ordered discussions.  Agenda topics are often 
addressed out of sequence, or intermittently; topics not on the agenda often arise in the course of 
discussions and become foci of interest.  Ideas are raised, tested, developed, and often 
significantly altered.  This workshop was no exception.  Indeed, because of its exploratory 
nature, the discussion was perhaps even less orderly than what is typical.  That has the salutary 
effect of stimulating thinking, and allowing ideas to emerge and be developed.  This appendix is 
not a transcript of the proceedings.  It is more of a summary “think piece” in which the workshop 
participants did the thinking, and others attempted to capture the participants’ main thoughts as 
they support the purposes of the workshop.  It summarizes the workshop discussion in more or 
less chronological order, and so complements and supports the main body of the workshop report 
paper, which captures the main ideas and presents them in an orderly fashion.17  
This appendix does not include prepared briefings and other presentations. 
Workshop Day 1: 
Who and what are we talking about deterring? 
The basic charge is to consider violent non-state actors (VNSA); the participants noted that, if 
taken strictly, this could be too narrow.  A state can exert leverage on a VNSA.  Deterring the 
VNSA might be facilitated by deterring the state sponsor; or deterring the VNSA may be a tool 
to affect the state.  VNSA implies political actors, but we shouldn’t dismiss criminals from 
consideration. 
Similarly, just because a group is non-violent doesn’t mean that it isn’t very much against us or 
able to cause us significant problems that we would like to be able to deter.  On the other hand, 
we tend to lump folks whose idea of world order differs from ours together with those who 
oppose us with violence.  By concentrating on violent actors, we may overlook other significant 
opponents; but treating all who see the world differently than we do as if they were VNSAs 
could also be a mistake. 
The tendency is to concentrate on deterring (or stopping) major acts.  However, aggregated small 
actions can have a large net effect.  Small perturbations can create large problems in the 
                                                
17 REPORT EDITOR’S NOTE:  This transcription is a conversational recap of the events of the 9-10 January 2008 
VNSA Workshop as compiled by the editor named above.  While not an “Event Minutes,” it is a depiction of 
relevant points and lines of query presented during the workshop and some of the interactions between participants 
in which these points were raised and discussed.  The points and issues contained within this appendix serve to back 
up the formal observations made in the main body of the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obta n
ed b  
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
101 
aggregate, including creating disorder that states or VNSAs can then exploit.  Sequential small 
changes can be cumulative, leading to a situation that we don’t like and is hard to reverse.  This 
leads us to think about deterrence as affecting activities so as to shape the future in a way that we 
want it to be. 
We need to be careful about thinking in terms of the binary US and THEM.  This complex 
environment features a range of players, each of whom is part of the context: good guys, bad 
guys, neutrals, non-adversaries; violent actors, non-violent actors; real actors and fictitious 
persona.  One suggested part of the approach to deterrence is to deter types of actions rather than 
specific actors.  Trying to conduct a certain type of act brings an automatic, unpleasant response, 
like the directed energy weapon that causes pain to anyone who enters into the protected area.  
Or data-base equivalent of retail store dye packs.  The hacker can steal the data, but he can’t sell 
it.  Maybe it has bad data embedded in the real data, and the hacker cannot separate the two. 
The globalized Internet environment 
Part of what we are talking about here is navigating through a period of rapid expansion and 
evolution, which does not, as yet, have an adequate rule set.  Although it takes time, a rule set 
will emerge.  So maybe we should be thinking about how we identify the rule set that we want, 
and then do what we can to steer the world in that direction.  However, it is unrealistic to think 
that there will be an identifiable end state.  Things will get more settled, while continuing to 
evolve. 
Globalization is a major factor in this discussion.  This is not the first time in history that 
globalization has occurred.  For example, the 13th and 14th centuries were an earlier period of 
globalization.  In these periods, political structures are challenged, and non-state actors challenge 
states.  After some time, new structures, new rules, new alignments take effect, and things get 
less open and chaotic.    
The Internet is an increasingly ubiquitous global medium. This more or less global Internet 
presence expands opportunities to entities beyond nation states.  The Internet allows for the 
creation of virtual personae.  So we can be dealing with an actor who is an on-line persona that 
differs from any specific physical person.  The person behind the virtual persona can be several 
steps removed and insulated.  One physical person can have many virtual personae.  Several 
people can collectively be behind one virtual persona, and so on.  Through this medium, a 
persona can appear or act almost anywhere almost instantaneously. 
While a VNSA can operate on the Internet, no violence occurs on the Internet.  However, cyber 
activities can support violent actions. (note: later in the discussion, some participants took 
exception to this, citing virtual violent actions that can have similar psychological effects to 
actual violent actions, the use of “hacking” to cause physical damage to facilities, and doing 
violence to cyber assets such as financial databases.) 
Examples were offered of violence in cyberspace: 
1. An attack on State Department computers that resulted in “fried” hard drives 
 
 
 
 
 
Obt in
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
102 
2. rape in 2nd life – physical persona complains of psychological effects as a result of rape in a 
virtual world (remember 2nd life entities are built by the real person with considerable 
investment of time and interest) 
3. Pictures of Abu Ghraib atrocities, video footage of beheadings: images of violence that may 
encourage actual violence.  Pictures have more of a visceral impact than words do. 
So what can be accomplished in the cyber world?  This is the context within which to define 
deterrence and deterrent actions.  We can practice persuasion and dissuasion.  We can attempt to 
“keep bodies at rest” (i.e. inhibit the beginnings of movements or activities that are not in our 
interest).  We can try to practice “deradicalization”; but there was skepticism that this can really 
be done.  We can try to influence “fence sitters” to fall in one direction rather than the other.  We 
can work through public channels or private (i.e. open access or restricted access); directly or 
through intermediaries (either willingly complicit or unwitting accomplices).   
How to deter 
Consider the Muslim world.  We are worried about the radical activists, but they are only a small 
subset.  The radicals draw recruits from a much larger population.  And they vie with other 
movements for influence.  (Later on in the discussion, there will be explicit consideration of 
playing to, and encouraging the growth of, a Muslim middle class as a counterweight to the 
radical movements.)  The radicals seek a stronger role for Islam.  Other Muslims share this goal, 
but don’t necessarily share the detailed view of what Islam is and what that stronger role should 
be, or endorse the radical approach to achieving it. 
Returning to the topic of types of deterrence activities, the following were offered: 
1. directly deterring or preventing specific cyber activities, whether criminal or hostile, that 
would be captured under the general heading of “hacking” 
2. fighting information battles 
3. dissuasion, persuasion, shaping opinions, and so on 
4. creating rules for actions and behavior in cyberspace; creating a stable environment that 
supports our needs.  
It was noted that prosperity can also be a deterrent to radical behavior. 
Whatever we think we would like to do has to be formulated within an environment in which the 
future is highly uncertain, and which our powers to shape are limited. 
There was some discussion of terminology and concepts, particularly extending political/ 
military/ social concepts like “shaping” into cyberspace, and extending the concept of “hacking” 
into the political/ military/ social realm.  Both such extensions were viewed as interesting, but 
also somewhat stretched. 
There is also exploitation of cyber activities, particularly for gathering intelligence, to probe 
adversaries’ networks, support, connections, and thought patterns. 
The participants restated two basic issues:  
1. Are we concerned with deterring cyber activities (activities conducted in cyberspace), or 
using cyberspace to deter activities in the physical world? 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
103 
2. Are we concerned with cyber tools, such as the instruments of hackers and thieves, what they 
can do and how they can be deterred, or are we concerned with a broader set of activities in 
the cyber world? 
Regarding this, it was noted that the Internet provides both the ability to reach large populations, 
and a medium through which individuals (or small groups) can achieve disproportionate power.  
So where is the focus: on the broad world or on the few very dangerous individuals? 
Cyber social environment 
There is an inherent relationship between rules and tools - and policy stands behind the rules that 
are established.  Rules make some tools viable, while limiting the utility of others.  The dynamic 
is that rules are generated based on current tools and demonstrated activities using those tools.  
The rules rein in the use of the tools, and therefore stimulate development of new tools that can 
operate outside the strictures of the rules.  This, in turn, provides stimulus for revising the rules.  
Before we can develop rules to control activities, we need to know our policy, i.e. what we want 
to allow and what we want to curtail.   
The US wants both openness and controls on hacking activities that we consider dangerous. 
There are real personae and virtual identities.  People can be bolder with their virtual identities 
than they are when using their real identities.  One person can establish multiple virtual 
identities; several people can all support and contribute to one virtual identity.  How individuals 
relate to their virtual identities is an interesting and important question. 
Socialization and social dynamics can be different in cyberspace.  Virtual personalities are 
structured differently from real personalities.  The same is true for relationships. Groups of 
individuals who only interact through passing messages can have different dynamics from 
groups that interact face-to-face.  The time constants can be different.  Groups can form, act, and 
disband quickly in cyberspace.  Current models of behavior may or may not work in cyber 
world. Ties formed on the Internet are not familial, not a deep identity such as that of a tribe, but 
based on shared ideas, experiences, identity.  Self-selection plays a major role in community 
formation. Cyber space speeds up developments and reactions and takes developments and ideas 
to places it wouldn’t have reached before.  Use of the Internet can support greater span of 
control, or greater individual initiative.  The Internet’s key technical features that enable these 
developments are speed and reach of communication.  How they are used is a social issue. 
The topic of terrorist radicalization via the Internet is worthy of further exploration.  How do 
radicals find each other?  Where do they meet in cyberspace, and does that then extend to 
physical space?  By what means are participants kept involved?  What is the relationship among 
cyber activities, virtual personalities, and the real world?  The person who is online still has a 
physical reality, which may be affected by his cyber activities.  The Internet offers an 
opportunity for people who are physically separated to meet and coordinate.  It also offers the 
opportunity to put aside other sources of separation (i.e., other than geographic separation.  
People only need to agree on the matter being discussed to work together; they can differ on 
other matters.) 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
104 
How and when does a cyber group invade physical space?  If it does, how do you maintain that 
universe? The cyber universe makes them more insular, not able to fit in, more uncomfortable in 
the physical world. 
Similar considerations apply to perceptions.  How the US (or some other entity) is perceived can 
be strongly shaped by what information is available on the Internet.  At the extreme, the accepted 
on-line image of the US is how the US will be perceived.  There are people who believe that 
“everything” on the Internet is true.  Moreover, there are few checks on bad information.  So the 
Internet offers Islamist radicals an opportunity to present Muslim publics with a very hostile 
image of the US. 
The Internet allows an actor to create content, volume and gain adherents, for almost no cost. We 
need to be concerned with the psychological impact, too. 
Increasingly, the Internet is a visual medium that allows the wide circulation of very powerful 
images, such as Abu Ghraib and the al Qaeda beheadings.  However, the radicals don’t have a 
monopoly on such use of the Internet (unless we cede it to them).   
Perceptions and cyber space 
Islamists are preoccupied by the “pollution” of western culture that is flooding into Muslim 
countries via the Internet, including via Arab news media.  Arab culture is not penetrating the US 
public; US culture is penetrating the Arab world.  This influence provides us with an 
opportunity.  
(At this point in the discussion, Carl Hunt read an essay that James Fallows had sent him for this 
meeting.  A revised version appears as the Foreword.  Mr. Fallows notes that recent history has 
shown that it is possible to generate a very positive perception of the United States, and that such 
a positive perception is a powerful generator of deterrence and good relations.) 
The best engine for creating a positive image of the US is the projection of American ideals and 
the benefits thereof through the efforts of the private sector.  The public sector can help, but 
caution should be exercised so as not to do any harm.  (This admonition applies particularly to 
the military.)  Some participants voiced skepticism about being able to do “good marketing”, but 
observed that we should at least avoid “bad marketing”.  There may also be value in “taking 
down” anti-American marketing by our adversaries. 
Some participants observed that cyberspace had offered opportunities to avoid problems that 
were generated by OIF (Operation Iraqi Freedom), but that the US, for whatever reasons, missed 
those opportunities and instead made mistakes.  The Internet offered at least an underused source 
of information, and possibly the opportunity to exert influence that might have changed 
perceptions and thereby events. 
Deterrence would seem to take place in social cyberspace.  For us, social cyberspace is fixed, 
static.  It is spreading—moving to new communities.  When it’s new to you, it’s almost mystical; 
the world of myth making is within the realm of cyberspace.  Things can happen there that would 
not happen anywhere else.  We don’t know much about the social cyberspace world.  The world 
of myth making is not detached from the real world.  What is the connection between cyberspace 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
105 
and the social forms that can transfer to it, can’t transfer to it, and can shape it?  Behind all of the 
cyber world, behind these capabilities, there are physical actors who could be deterrable in 
classic ways.  Can actors who are classically deterrable also influence others?  How does this 
myth making serve as a possible means to influence/affect VNSA? 
Classical deterrence theory is too narrow for all threats/actors.  However, the cost- benefit-risk 
model is not irrelevant in this case.  In the cyberworld we may lack the necessary direct and deep 
knowledge of our adversary. 
We (should aim to) simultaneously persuade, dissuade, deter – we use multiple approaches to 
shape the actions of the other.  Consider “rational actors” - just because something is irrational to 
you, does not make it irrational, it means their premises are different from yours.  Consider 
subjective rationality – bounded rationality which satisfies one or more but not all interests. 
Neither you nor the “adversary” can have full information.  Have you thought of a calculus to 
evaluate their degree of uncertainty or incompleteness of their information?  In cyberspace there 
is an overload of information over which no one has total control.  Lack of information cuts both 
ways.  Why do we think we need to know everything?  It is better to consider what is the 
minimal amount of information that we need.  We can use the Internet to interfere with the 
information. 
Cyber actions can impact the physical world directly, can impact the cyber world, and can 
impact the psychological/social world.  Cyber attacks can bring down facilities by affecting their 
information or control systems.  Cyber attacks can deny information service.  Information, 
especially graphic pictures and videos, can have intense psychological effects. 
Policy and regulatory context 
Policy and law—both domestic and international—are important areas to consider.  These shape 
the cyber environment.  We need to consider: domestic, legal and governmental challenges, role 
of corporate America, international law, issues of cyber defense and offense.  Government-
directed “un-regulation” is driving US policy – don’t try to regulate the development of the 
Internet, except for funding. 
American views with respect to the Internet are dominated by a basic theory of openness:  
protocols are all public, unlike cable television, etc, which are industrially developed products.  
The US government makes aggressive effort to get other countries to maintain an open Internet – 
allow Google and Amazon to be everywhere – globalization of the First Amendment.  
In contrast with this emphasis on openness, we also recognize the value of regulation, at least in 
some areas.  Our impulse is to exert more control, for example, to protect intellectual property or 
be able to inspect and control content on the Internet, or to protect user identities.  Some degree 
of regulation is inevitable; if regulation is not instituted to keep the net open, then the door is 
open to other regulations that tighten it up.  If we can’t get China to agree to and abide by 
regulations that foster openness, China could institute internal regulations that are much more 
restrictive than we would like. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
106 
European policy has strong privacy policies as protection from predatory American companies 
who seek to exploit them.  Each country has its own interests: e.g., US is focused on intellectual 
property, Germany is privacy, China is controlling political threats, etc. 
Internet still mirrors the American origins, but other countries are trying to morph it.   
One basic challenge is how far we can go in regulation to enforce our interests before we 
undermine the US image of a free environment, counter to the values of the US as perceived by 
us and the rest of the world. 
The US can use a combination of incentives and punishments to enforce its Internet policies.  US 
funding means that US gets to set rules.  Entities that want to do business in the US have to play 
by US rules, and so on.  We can impose conditions for any countries that want to be connected to 
the US – i.e., must maintain security of Internet or don’t connect to US.  All such actions will 
still have to be balanced with considerations such as open Internet and protection of intellectual 
property. 
Workshop Day 2 
Who, what, and how to deter 
The basic issue is whether we are talking about: 
1. deterring hacking – working in the computer network domain; or 
2. changing minds and hearts – getting to the “left of boom” 
We are not really trying to change their ideology, but there is a way of looking at the swamp they 
live in and attempt to drain the swamp in some way, shape or form – influence the population to 
the degree that the most violent alternatives cease to look as attractive. 
There are two faces to deterrence: compellence and relationship (or influence).  Relationship can 
be co-optation.  During the Cold War, we effectively ceded the Soviets a notion of parity; we 
bestowed legitimacy on the Soviets.  Similarly we are in a position to co-opt some of these 
groups (VNSAs).  Calling this world the swamp makes it look more like an evil place and keeps 
us from looking at the groups as targets for co-opting.  We don’t even think about talking with 
these groups, connecting with then in any positive direction.  Consider establishing relationships 
as the basis for cooptation; basis of legitimacy needed; give the co-opted something positive. 
We have to produce the notion of what “deterrence” actually means.  We might better use the 
term “influence” rather than the word “deterrence.”  
Cold war deterrence started from the principle of symbolic equivalence.  What is the principle in 
the current case?  Might be called co-participation in post-modernity.  Globalization develops in 
part from conscious efforts to use it.  They are in this with us.  We are all in this post-modern 
world where bounds are blurred and identities are blurred. The trick is to train the larger 
categories of radicals and potential radicals to understand the implications of the global, post-
modern world.  Start from a general principle – in this case, we’re all in this global world 
together – competing to define and refine the notion of what post-modern culture is like (where I 
can’t close off my culture to preserve it).  Globalization has escaped our old notion of 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtai
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
107 
Americanization, it has also escaped the neo-liberalism – has already escaped all our definitions 
of it – “We recognize you as denizens of the post-modern world.”  
“Embourgeoisement” of the Middle East is an important development that has gotten little 
attention.  Workshop participants were unaware of anyone having studied the rise of the middle 
class in non-western societies.  A goal is to help people become middle class.  Change rests on 
demographics and economics.  In the Middle East, the median age is half of what it is in the 
West. The (Muslim) middle class is defined by prosperity and piety.  We can support both (piety 
and the desire for prosperity) to develop to our advantage.  The middle class are our natural 
allies.  The Muslim middle class will develop in a moderate direction; middle classes always do. 
On the other hand, Saudi Arabia has for ages encouraged the development of Salafist outlook at 
the expense of other sects.  Saudi Arabia has used funding to build their religious control – do we 
have a chance to be an effective counterpoint?  
There are unintended consequences to Salafist proselytizing, for many Muslims. There are two 
complications – it’s Saudi state sponsorship and it’s too “hot.”  There are more Muslims in India 
than in all the Arab countries.   
There might be value in understanding how the Pentecostals gained footing in Brazil and in other 
Latin American countries, where the Catholic Church is residually state-sponsored. 
Religions are great for communications.  You can’t stop religion and radical religions.  (The 
spread of religion is) part of the quid pro quo of connectivity, everyone wants all the connectivity 
but not all the content.  (This is not just true for religion, but for things like materialism and 
pornography.  If connectivity is available, vested interests will seek to exploit it.)  If you reach 
out to religions, you have to distinguish between the nations and super-nations.  Globalization 
began in Europe with the rise of nation states, who expressed their power and exercised influence 
largely through colonial empires.  Globalization via this colonial model was successful in North 
America, less so in Latin America.  Hallmarking the gradual collapse of colonial model, North 
America emerged as a successor.  The Far East was the next arena to arise thru the same model. 
In the Middle East, who will be the agents of globalization?   Most likely it will not be 
Europeans, nor Japanese, and while North Americans may seek to serve in this capacity, the 
potential for influence is limited due to the presence of the military as agents.  In order to engage 
the Middle East and Africa in the globalized system, the agent of change will have to be capable 
of handling the tumultuous environment.  Asia has profound demographic issues and has to deal 
with a far more rapid evolution to handle the transitions – they will be most in need of the job 
and resource markets in Africa.  The Chinese and Indians will teach the Middle East and North 
Africa how to be Muslim and modern.  The US can do only certain things with the military, 
some things with political and governance, but economics and infrastructure will come from 
India, China, and Malaysia.   
Every culture has a concept of cosmos and chaos.  Cyberspace and the Internet fit within this 
framework.  Globalization defuses and cyberspace defuses.  This is where some find their 
empowerment – particularly non-state actors who begin to try to wield power like states.  When 
the leading edge comes into your area, the marginalized welcome it as power while national 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
O  
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
108 
entities tend to want to stop.  Empowerment of the Internet is like this.  As this edge spreads, we 
get more of the non-state actors – they see loosening of bonds – they don’t necessarily want to 
live in chaos forever. The sense of chaos is universal, but has a curve to it.   
The Internet gives rise to universalist visions – transnational visions.  We need to understand the 
larger context of universalist vision – how can the Internet, in breaking down national barriers 
and erasing geographical limitations, empower non-state actors? 
We can monitor Internet traffic and have a vast window into the leadership class thought process 
(recognizing that there is denial and deception)… “if I can find fundamental times and links, I 
can manipulate them.” 
Related matters and general thoughts 
While the available tools can be used to gain tremendous insight into Internet power brokers, 
who they are and how they operate, caution must be exercised.  Here’s an example of how 
quantitative techniques for assessing power relationships through e-mail can yield inaccurate 
results.  During a fleet exercise, patterns of email were gathered to figure out the most important 
people in the network, where they were and what their patterns of usage were.  The most 
important were defined as those that had most emails and sent most emails.  That turned out to 
be the Chaplain.  So they pulled the chaplain.  Then the most important person was the N1 who 
was coordinating personnel.  Some of the email accounts are positional, that is they were used by 
different people as shifts changed.  N3 and N5 emerged after long analysis.  Some thought that 
you should not  take chaplain and N1 off network – it’s the best D&D available.  Content 
networks don’t map on communications networks.   
We Americans typically don’t want a relationship, we want a machine that handles our problem.  
The tool builders are all about the people they are dealing with via cyberspace.   
I have voice, video and data that can span the world in seconds.  Relationship to me is 
amorphous – so you need to teach me to use the tools.  Cyberspace can be used. 
Generation Y is populating the military.  What are the implications of deterrence for the next 
generation – what are they inheriting? 
Here’s what you are going to be looking at – Apple will completely change the way the world 
works – every phone is going to be its own broadcasting unit.  Direct and indirect 
communication will contribute to spheres of influence.  Every phone is a TV station.  
Relationships can be built without collusion in transit, perhaps even without any organizational 
influences. 
Instantaneous communications is going to change things – it can be used to build relationships.  
Consider not just broadcast to the whole world, but broadcast to a small world.  Sociologically 
what emerges are small world networks – clusters with links to other clusters – maybe to 
religious scholars and their students.  Recently, Islamists seem to have the edge in building their 
relationships, although US and Western youth seem equally adept.   
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
SE.CO
M 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
109 
We can change aspects of behavior.  Consider racism and sexism in the US – we haven’t 
changed our culture, but over a couple of generations we have changed these aspects of our 
behavior.  Can we hold people to that behavior even when unintentional by setting the 
conditions?  Not going after extremists, but those who can influence those who can be 
extremists. 
This conversation has two threads:  deter someone from doing something with cyber, deter 
someone from using cyber as a threat – and they are different.  The two are related.  Deterrence 
is not always direct.  But is the issue about using cyberspace to influence or is it about deterring 
something specific with respect to cyberspace itself? 
One approach is to focus on specific acts that you want to prevent or stop.  For example, deter a 
non-state actor from violence.   
If we gave 1000 Airmen a video camera and told them to post what they wanted to on a 
webpage, would that influence a kid to be recruited by Jihadists? 
How do you see the effect of the Madrassas and the education push as influencing the size of the 
pipeline for Jihad?  They can push it, but can’t create demand that isn’t there. 
Madrassas are not spreading terror – they tend to be very standards oriented, but adhere more to 
a local standard.  Setting international standards of behavior requires that they teach math 
science and language – there has likely been over-focus on Madrassas in the hinterlands where 
they taught rote religion and how to fire a gun.  Madrassas are competing with public schools.  
Perhaps the West can re-instill the legacy of the Middle East as a main keeper of some of the 
world’s intellect and history as it did in the Dark Ages throughout the rest of Europe. 
In terms of exerting influence and establishing relationships, the information age is different than 
previous eras because it is no longer hierarchical in a traditional sense.  How states influence 
non-state actors is only one component of the interactive relationships inherent in the cyber 
realm.  In reality we want non-state actors/ organizations to influence other non-state actors/ 
organizations – deterrence in the cyber age may mean energizing non-state actors to self-deter. 
To practice deterrence in a cyber world, we have to understand the former old world restrictions 
on who wields power and influence and move away from that traditional hierarchy.  For 
example, with non-governmental groups, self-policing occurs due to the reality that harm affects 
all NGOs.   
In the connected world, indirect connections are more powerful in the collective than direct 
connections. 
What are the means to successful deterrence in cyberspace?  One participant stated: I have yet to 
hear how you can deter behavior in cyberspace.  To which another responded: because you can’t 
do it. 
However, research is coming out now on how to influence in cyber world but it hasn’t gotten 
into textbooks as yet.  This subject is currently widely debated and in need of further exploration. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
110 
Wrap session 
We’ve extended the definition of deterrence to include influence.  We should also include 
actions like deflection and redirection.  Look for (potential) allies in populations we want to 
affect, and those who have similar goals, and support their efforts.  Don’t just consider allies in a 
political sense, but all like-minded groups: NGOs, media, artists, pop culture (such as, for 
example, soap operas).  The radicals have reached out; moderate groups should be supported in 
their out-reach efforts. Don’t cede the field to the radicals.  Oppose messages that support suicide 
bombers with messages that discourage suicide bombing.  Such are the thoughts behind 
Deterrence 2.0! 
We should be similarly expansive in identifying the forms of media to exploit: digital and 
analogue.  Build sustainable deterrence using digital and analog media. 
So is “deterrence” the right terminology?  Some think it would be a disaster, because it carries 
the imprint of DoD and the baggage of the cold war. The application of deterrence in the cold 
war had all the components; deterrence is our aim at what we are doing.  The basic calculation in 
deterrence is cost-benefit.  But “deterrence” carries a strong implication of compellence and 
coercion. 
There are different domains to be considered.  We need to deter specific acts, including criminal 
acts.  For much of the rest that we have been discussing, the issue is wider, like leveling the idea 
space. 
A way ahead is by enabling, empowering, and allying ourselves with people who are in some 
ways like minded.  However, a public and overt process may not work in this case – public 
association with US may not be helpful.  What we want is to empower with less overt action. 
Concepts of cold war deterrence are largely the same as those concepts currently being 
discussed.  The difference is whether actions taken are direct or indirect.  In cyber deterrence 
with non-state actors, actions will require more indirect actions.  Our presence in the cyber world 
should be friendly, welcoming to relationships.  Our cyber profile would benefit from a shift in 
public perceptions. 
A small percentage are out to kill and it’s that tiny minority that we are out to deal with and 
prevent the spread of their philosophy.  There is an issue about whether we can influence a 
radical terrorist organization – less likely to change their mindset, but can still influence them, 
can influence that core element by influencing the sea in which they swim – although we believe 
they are winning, they are sure that we are winning because of the influence of globalization.  
You have to have redirection measures because the youth want to act – give them something 
constructive to do: a tiny hard core minority is viewed as glamorous by too many and dissuasion 
is critically important.  Cyberspace gives us opportunity to get many alternative messages out. 
If someone is violently bent, fundamentally fixated, we may not be able to deter them from their 
view—but influence, especially indirect, may still be possible.  In addition, although de-
radicalization may not be possible, the fence sitters and moderates may be susceptible to 
influence.  The goal may be not to change the fence sitters way of thinking, rather to prevent the 
radicals from changing their views and swaying them to their side 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
111 
This tiny radical group appears glamorous to the large group.  There exist fault lines on the 
radical side that we can explore.  We might be able to make them seem less glamorous.  
Occidentalism/Globalization is so influential—it is impossible to undo this influence—and this is 
why in the eyes of people such as Osama Bin Laden we have won the cultural war. 
Several participants pointed out that globalization has been changing the international 
environment in a way that the radicals don’t like.  Open news sources are an engine of that: 
BBC, al-Jazeera.  We may view al-Jazeera as providing a Muslim point of view, but the radicals 
see it as spreading information that undermines their cause.  Radio Free Europe satisfied a 
similar demand during the cold war.  (That model should be extended into the globalized 
cyberworld.) 
Today there is a demand for identity in a rapidly changing world.  A central principle is (could 
be): core American values of professionalism, economic upward mobility, with a dose of piety.  
We might encourage piety through non-violent Muslim clerics, support those who share values 
with us and oppose the radicals.  Encourage economic upward mobility indirectly through our 
partners who have what the youth need – trade.  Discover how to educate for professionalism 
and need partners to employ the newly created professionals (currently émigrés because of lack 
of opportunity). 
An unconventional warfare campaign contains the exertion of influence at local levels— go right 
through the local establishments as the ones who receive support and use it directly – as opposed 
to going through a federal government. 
Micro-targeting is not a new concept– but the tools are new, visibility on the Internet is ability to 
find and work with presences on line. 
We could do things like find the websites that are most popular with Arab or Iranian youth (who 
speak English, or who are living in the US), and make those websites available in local 
languages. There is a huge expansion in the Arab language on the web and a huge lack of content 
in Arab language.  We have to be careful to take into consideration the huge diversity in the 
Islamic world. 
We need the open playing field of a relatively unconstrained Internet environment.  How do we 
keep the Internet free and open?   Promotion of open cyberism is a deterrence strategy.  
However, doing so means that from time to time you will have a small group that uses the net to 
enable them to blow up a subway – we may have to tolerate the occasional violent act.  We need 
the openness to mine the openness, we also need to solve our own stability and continuity -  we 
have to have resiliency and continuity; this points to the need to have the appropriate network 
security – it will get worse on a case by case basis and the cyber security industry is in a hole and 
fighting an uphill battle. 
We do better when everybody does better and it should be in our national strategy to provide it 
and defend the cyber world.  One participant suggested that we could advocate a UN or some 
other international body to govern it. 
Perhaps we can put this in some form of a query framework 
1. how are our adversaries using the Internet and cyber media in general 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
112 
2. what do we do about that 
3. how do we go beyond that 
We should have a better understanding of how we can use cyber tools to understand our 
environment on a persistent basis.   In order to gain such insights, we need to look at the 
socialization process, forming of communities and effect of that type of organization and 
empowerment. 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
113 
Appendix C:  Acronyms  
ASAM Adaptive Safety Analysis and Monitoring (U. Conn. tool) 
ATDS Advanced Terror Detection System (model from Ben-Gurion University) 
BN Bayesian Network 
CASOS Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems (CMU 
group) 
CMU Carnegie Mellon University 
CNN Cable News Network 
COA Course of Action 
CPU Central Processing Unit 
DBN Dynamic Bayesian Network 
DIME Diplomacy, Information, Military, and Economic 
DIMEFIL Diplomacy, Information, Military, Economic, Financial, Intelligence and 
Law Enforcement 
DMU Data Marshalling Unit 
DNA Dynamic Network Analysis (CMU approach) 
DoS Denial of Service 
DWAS Dark Web Attribute System 
FTP File Transfer Protocol 
GISC Global Innovation and Strategy Center (STRATCOM) 
GMM Gaussian Mixture Models (analysis algorithm) 
HMM Hidden Markov Model 
HTML Hypertext Markup Language 
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
ICANN Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
IDA Institute for Defense Analyses 
IMC Intelligent Memory Core 
IMF International Monetary Fund 
IP Internet Protocol 
ISP Internet Service Provider 
IT Information Technology 
KNN K-nearest neighbor (analysis algorithm) 
MDS multidimensional scaling (analysis algorithm) 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
EFEN
SE.CO
M 
 
Deterring VNSA in Cyberspace 
114 
MRSA Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
NEMESIS Network Modeling Environment for Structural Intervention Strategies 
NGO Non-Government Organization 
NSA Non-State Actor 
NSI National Security Innovations 
NYPD New York Police Department 
ODL Organizational Descriptive Language 
ORA Organizational Risk Analysis (tool from Carnegie Mellon University) 
OSD Office of Secretary of Defense 
PCA Principle Component Analysis (analysis algorithm) 
PNN Probabilistic Neural Networks (analysis algorithm) 
SMA Strategic Multi-layer Assessment 
SOA Service Oriented Architecture 
SOI Spheres of Influence 
SPAWAR Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (US Navy) 
SRC Syracuse Research Corporation 
STRATCOM Strategic Command 
SUNY State University of New York 
SVM Support Vector Machines (analysis algorithm) 
TB Terabyte = 240 bytes, approximately 1012 bytes 
USG US Government 
VNSA Violent Non-State Actor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obtain
ed by 
INSID
E 
DEFE
NSE.C
OM 
 
