15
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended
for Law Enforcement
MATTHEW EDWARDS, AWAIS RASHID, and PAUL RAYSON, Lancaster University
As an increasing amount of crime takes on a digital aspect, law enforcement bodies must tackle an online
environment generating huge volumes of data. With manual inspections becoming increasingly infeasible,
law enforcement bodies are optimising online investigations through data-mining technologies. Such tech-
nologies must be well designed and rigorously grounded, yet no survey of the online data-mining literature
exists which examines their techniques, applications and rigour. This article remedies this gap through a
systematic mapping study describing online data-mining literature which visibly targets law enforcement
applications, using evidence-based practices in survey making to produce a replicable analysis which can be
methodologically examined for deficiencies.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: J. [Applied Computing]: Surveillance Mechanisms; J.4 [Social and
Professional Topics]: Government Surveillance; J.0 [General and Reference]: Surveys and Overviews
General Terms: Documentation, Security, Measurement
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Systematic survey, literature review, online data mining, OSINT, open-
source intelligence, law enforcement, cybercrime
ACM Reference Format:
Matthew Edwards, Awais Rashid, and Paul Rayson. 2015. A systematic survey of online data mining tech-
nology intended for law enforcement. ACM Comput. Surv. 48, 1, Article 15 (September 2015), 54 pages.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2811403
1. INTRODUCTION
The increasing fusion of digital and physical life presents two key challenges to law
enforcement agencies: the population’s online presence means that law enforcement
must learn to adapt to crimes taking place only online; yet this increasingly digital
interaction also provides a valuable and increasingly necessary evidential resource
for officers investigating both physical and online crimes. With Internet accessibility
widening and an increasing amount of crime taking on a digital aspect, online inves-
tigation is becoming a critical tool for law enforcement organisations, and scientific
examination of such processes becomes ever more a key issue.
With manual inspection of online information being labour-intensive and the un-
precedented scale of information online, law enforcement agencies seek to optimise
their surveillance or investigation of online data sources through the use of various
data-mining technologies. This behaviour has diverse implications, including raising
social and ethical questions about privacy and the role of state surveillance as well as
posing unique technical challenges for the data-mining technologies being employed.
The field of computer science, particularly data-mining research, has a key role to
play in shaping the future of these investigations. To date, there is no comprehensive
Authors’ addresses: M. Edwards, A. Rashid, and P. Rayson, Security Lancaster, School of Computing
and Communications, InfoLab21, Lancaster University, LA1 4YW, UK; emails: {m.edwards7, a.rashid,
p.rayson}@lancaster.ac.uk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by
others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.
c© 2015 ACM 0360-0300/2015/09-ART15 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2811403
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:2 M. Edwards et al.
survey which draws together those problems already being addressed in the computer
science literature around this field and highlights which areas need to be given more
attention. Our aim in this article is to remedy this gap by identifying open-research
problems and a research agenda for the community at large.
While the broader aim of our study is to survey the literature for gaps, guiding
questions were developed to help target the extraction of information:
(1) What are the problems (crimes, investigative requirements) being addressed in the
literature?
(2) Which online data sources are being used?
(3) What are the methods (data-mining techniques) which are being employed to pro-
vide solutions?
(4) Are studies making use of multiple data sources?
(5) Are studies validating their contribution’s utility to law enforcement practitioners?
Drawing on a base of computer-science literature, we carry out a comprehensive
search for and evaluation of peer-reviewed studies concerning the mining of digital
data sources for law enforcement purposes. Our study is aimed at examining the visible
state-of-the-art with regards to techniques and the criminal activities being addressed.
This review will not only help identify gaps to be addressed in the state of the art but
also inform ongoing public debate about the privacy implications of such technologies.
Taking inspiration from a recent trend towards evidence-based practice in software
engineering, we perform a systematic mapping study (SMS), with the intent of produc-
ing a survey which not only covers the available literature and has replicable results,
but also can be methodologically examined for deficiencies.
It is an important part of a review’s design to make clear not only the scope of the
survey, but the intended purpose. Our primary concern is that the results of the survey
identify gaps in the published research regarding data mining of online sources for
crime detection or investigation purposes. The results of the study can then be used to
inform ongoing work in this area.
Two terms should be considered as key here. First, the specification of online data
sources, meaning data which can be gathered from examination of Internet-based
sources. This separates our study from other areas of research, such as work which
makes use of restricted criminal records or other police databases, as well as distancing
the study from many areas of digital forensics which focus on the investigation of hard
disks or active machine memory. Second, the specification of data mining with applica-
tion in crime detection. While many data-mining methods have plausible application
in this domain, we consider only publications which make an explicit reference to such
employment. We should also make it clear that, for our purposes, we are excluding
from this definition data mining which is performed for purely Information Security
reasons, thus leaving aside a mature literature on Intrusion Detection Systems and
related work which has already been surveyed [Axelsson 2000].
In Section 2, we outline the automated search which we carried out, and the subse-
quent systematic screening, quality analysis, and composition of results. In Section 3,
we present an overview of the literature covered in the study, identifying the data-
mining methods being used and the applications to which they are being applied. In
Section 4, we describe broad patterns and publication trends visible across our corpus.
In Section 5, we conclude with an analysis of the state-of-the-art we have uncovered,
while noting limitations to the scope of our review.
2. METHOD
A systematic literature review (SLR) attempts to provide answers to a specific research
question through a transparent and objective approach to the collection and synthesis
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:3
Table I. Terms Sets Used in Combination to Construct Search Queries
First Term Set
Crime
Police
Law Enforcement
Second Term Set
Artificial Intelligence
Data Fusion
Data Mining
Information Fusion
Natural Language Processing
Machine Learning
Social Network Analysis
Text Mining
of existing scientific literature on the topic. This method can be contrasted with non-
systematic literature reviews, whose contents may be unrepresentative of a field of
research due to, for example, narrative-driven distortion, in which reviewers include
only papers whose findings support their line of argument; or narrowness of study, for
which reviewers are unaware of a large number of relevant publications because they
were never personally exposed to them.
In designing our survey, we drew heavily on the work of Okoli and Schabram [2010],
which recommends an explicit eight-step system to SLRs. Certain key deviations from
this procedure adapted the process to the specific form of SLR which we engaged in, an
SMS. A description of the main features of SMSs is provided by Budgen et al. [2008],
but the key distinction between the two types can be summarised as an SMS being an
SLR which aims to more broadly survey the available literature rather than answer
specific research questions.
2.1. Search Procedure
The search process, carried out between December 2012 and January 2013, was
designed as an automated search, targeting four key computer-science publication
databases: IEEExplore [IEEE 2013], The ACM Digital Library [ACM 2013], Springer-
Link [Springer 2013] and ScienceDirect [Elsevier 2013]. In each database, 24 queries
were carried out1, as defined in Table I and the resulting papers’ metadata collected.
In total, 13,246 unique results were collected2.
The title and abstract of each result were then examined by a reviewer and classified
as either relevant or irrelevant to the study according to the following criteria. If the
answer to any of these questions was no, then the study was not included.
(1) Does the study appear to address or make use of online data, that is, types of
data which may be discovered online (either on the Web or otherwise)? Specifically
excluded are data such as disk images from a crime scene and restricted databases.
(2) Does the study have a stated or heavily implied application in law enforcement,
crime detection, monitoring or investigation? For the purposes of this study, studies
dealing primarily with attacks against computer infrastructure (intrusion detec-
tion systems) are specifically excluded.
(3) Does the study appear to have a methodology which involves either fully automated
or machine-assisted processing of data?
1These were identified through a series of pilot searches to determine the relevance and effectiveness of
particular search strings.
2In the ScienceDirect search engine, queries matching over 1000 results will return only the first 1000
items; a similar effect at 2000 results is observed in the IEEExplore search engine. None of our search
queries reached such limits.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:4 M. Edwards et al.
Following the screening process, we gathered all references from each of the 116
accepted papers, along with all papers identified by Google Scholar as having cited the
accepted items. These were also put through the screening process just described.
2.2. Analysis Procedure
Following the search and screening stages, we obtained the full text of each accepted
paper, along with a full citation. Items whose full text could not be located, those which
turned out to be in a non-English language, or which on review of the full text did not
meet the screening criteria, were discarded. This resulted in a final included list of 206
accepted papers. Each paper was examined to answer specific questions regarding its
quality. Each paper was given a value of 0, 0.5, or 1 for each of the following points,
with 0 being a negative response, 0.5 being a partial positive response, and 1 being a
positive response. The overall quality rating for each item is the sum of its individual
scores on these responses.
(1) Does the paper outline its method in a replicable manner?
(2) Does the paper make its evaluation replicable?
(3) Where evaluation is qualitative, does the evaluation make use of domain experts?
(4) Where evaluation is quantitative, is an appropriate statistical assessment of results
carried out?
Alongside the quality analysis, questions related to this review’s main aims were
answered for each paper.
(1) What problem[s] is (are) being addressed?
(2) Which data source[s] is (are) being used?
(3) What method[s] is (are) being employed?
(4) Does it make use of multiple data sources?
(5) Does it validate the contribution’s utility to practitioners?
All examination was carried out by the same examiner, making use of a predefined
data extraction form made up of these questions. As well as grouping results based
on paper authorship, we examined groupings according to whether papers were ad-
dressing a similar problem and whether they were using the same methods or data
sources.
2.3. Limitations
There are a number of limitations inherent in the methodology of this review which
should be considered when examining its results. The most prominent is that the
judgement of whether any candidate article met the inclusion criteria was performed
by only one person. This increases the risk of reviewer bias and human error affecting
results, especially with regards to the classification of borderline cases. An alternate
methodology using multiple reviewers could mitigate this risk, but raises new prob-
lems of inter-reviewer consistency, not to mention practical considerations of funding
and training. A sample of candidate articles was independently reviewed by a second
reviewer following the same protocol, with a disagreement rate of 15% between the two
reviewers over the acceptance of articles.
The range of our query terms was necessarily limited in order to produce a man-
ageable volume of candidate articles to be considered for inclusion. While efforts were
made to select the most relevant query terms, a side effect of this necessarily limited
range is that some relevant works may not have been considered for inclusion in the
review.
The use of search terms which explicitly reference crime and law enforcement meant
that only papers which explicitly identified their methods as being relevant to such
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:5
Table II. Number of Studies for Each Method and Problem Category
Finance Cybercrime Harassment Unclear Intelligence Children Extremism Identification Total
CV 3 0 2 2 0 6 2 6 21
SNA 2 2 0 0 8 0 9 1 22
IE 2 4 0 2 14 6 14 0 39
ML 3 1 7 4 3 4 10 11 43
NLP:AA 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 28 30
NLP:AP 0 0 1 1 0 14 2 1 19
NLP:SA 0 0 5 0 0 0 8 0 13
NLP:TC 2 1 4 1 3 7 4 1 23
NLP:O 0 0 0 7 0 1 0 0 8
ETC 2 6 0 2 3 5 4 9 29
Total 12 14 14 15 24 37 47 48 206
Row totals indicate the number of papers per method, but rows will not add up to these totals due to
multiple-problem studies. Similarly, the totals will not sum to 206 because of multiple method categories
being assigned to several papers and the column totals indicate papers per problem, not counting duplicates
across rows.
an application area would be included. As such, papers describing methods which
are or may be useful to law enforcement in online data-mining tasks may have es-
caped inclusion. Additionally, we must consider the possibility that research behind
tools developed specifically for law enforcement application in this domain may have
been withheld from publication, either due to commercial confidentiality or for con-
siderations of the public good. Indeed, since the collection of data for this review was
completed, mainstream attention has been drawn to the revealed reality of this possi-
bility [Greenwald et al. 2013].
The initial sources considered for analysis were four large computer-science publi-
cation databases. While other sources were therefore initially excluded, there was no
source restriction (beyond attainability) placed on items from papers’ citation lists or
papers identified by Google Scholar as having cited included titles. In total, 93 confer-
ences and 59 journals provided articles. The most prominent venues in the accepted
paper corpus were the IEEE Intelligence and Security Informatics conference, and the
Digital Investigation journal.
3. RESULTS
Within the 206 papers reviewed, we identified 8 broad problem topics that the papers
sought to address, represented as columns in Table II:
(1) Financial crime, which relates to fraud or crimes like copyright infringement, whose
principle damage is economic. Financial criminal activity does not always leave
visible traces in online data sources, as much financial information is kept private.
However, a number of specific areas are visible. Primarily, there is the example
of copyright infringement, one of the more widespread criminal activities visible
online, which can be examined via a number of public interfaces, not least the peer-
to-peer (P2P) filesharing mechanisms often used to commit it. Another online lens
into financial crime comes via online auction sites, whose transactions are, to some
extent, available to the public for scrutiny. Finally, when an allegation of fraud
is being investigated, the email records of suspects can indicate collusion and/or
implicate co-conspirators.
(2) Cybercrime, which is intended to cover crimes focused on information systems.
While a majority of cybercrime will take place online, and leave traces in data
sources such as firewall and server logs, much of this category of crime is excluded
from our study, as it involves a vast body of work in intrusion detection and similar
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:6 M. Edwards et al.
fields. The works which we did consider in the scope of this study which dealt with
cybercrime mostly focused on the social and economic background to cybercriminal
activity, often mined from online fora where criminals share or sell information.
(3) Criminal threats or harassment. The type of threat dealt with in this category
ranges from the identification of serious bomb and murder threats in messages
to filtering instances of ‘trolling,’ of which the aim is merely to provoke shock.
Identifying such messages has proven more difficult than the identification of spam
mail due to the varied possible representations of threats. Some form of sentiment
analysis may prove critical to any solution to this problem.
(4) Police intelligence—the creation of tools to support government or law enforcement
in the general detection of crime – is one of broader problem categories when it
comes to criminal acts addressed. Generally speaking, the interest is in either the
investigation of criminal organisations or some spatially restricted prediction of
crime, but other minor crimes are also addressed. A large body of this work aims to
augment police investigations by filtering knowledge from web-based news articles,
the intent being to provide situational awareness and keep investigators abreast
with public information.
(5) Crimes against children, including grooming and child trafficking. Online grooming
of children has become very high-profile, and a number of publications focus on
means of detecting it – either by identifying the age of a conversational partner
or by directly modelling predatory behaviour in instant-messaging conversation.
Other online data is also examined in relation to these crimes, most significantly
filesharing networks which are often used to distribute images or videos of child
abuse.
(6) Criminal or otherwise links to extremism and terrorism. The specific nature of the
problem addressed is entirely focused on either white supremacists from the United
States or Islamic fundamentalists. In both cases, the primary online lenses into the
groups are the online fora which they use to discuss matters pertaining to their
ideologies. Much of the research effort is in examining their social networks and
analysing the persuasive techniques which they have employed.
(7) Identification of online individuals in criminal contexts. The Internet being a the-
oretically anonymous medium, a critical issue for many criminal matters is iden-
tifying a person. Given the highly textual nature of much online activity, means
for identifying a person from that individual’s writing dominates this problem, but
data sources can be diverse, including email, online posts, instant-messaging logs,
and even images.
Additionally, some papers made reference to criminality in a broad sense, but ap-
peared not to address specific crimes or categories of crime. These were labelled as
‘Unclear’. Some papers were labelled as addressing multiple problem topics. The most
prominent problem topic was online identification—broadly, the problem of identifying
individuals based on only online data, a problem which was particularly related to
the analysis of malicious emails and language-based classifiers. This topic was closely
matched numerically by those papers addressing extremism or terrorism. Generally,
the crimes most often focused on were terrorism or extremism related, or else linked
to crimes against children.
Also identified were five broad classes of method common to several papers, including
different types of online data being gathered and analysed. These are represented as
rows in Table II. Of the method categories, the largest was natural language processing
(NLP), with machine learning (ML), information extraction (IE), social network anal-
ysis (SNA), and computer vision (CV) falling far behind. Some papers did not fit into
these five categories neatly, thus a miscellaneous (‘ETC’) category houses them. The
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:7
NLP subsection, due to being much greater in size, is broken down into Authorship
Attribution (AA), Author Profiling (AP), Sentiment Analysis (SA), Text Classification
(TC) and Other Methods (O). Data types observed included webpage and forum con-
tents, including data from social networks, email data, instant-messaging data, and
network traces.
We next provide a short analysis of each paper collected. These reviews are collected
by topic area in order to facilitate access for researchers from different fields. Each of
the following sections discusses papers grouped by the broad class of the method which
they follow, with the nested subsections further dividing the topic by the broad class of
the problem addressed.
3.1. Computer Vision
3.1.1. Identification with Computer Vision. Identification tasks in computer vision mostly
rest on visual identity, a troublesome concept in an environment in which a new face –
or no face at all – is so simple to obtain. The majority of the uncovered literature looks at
a particular subset of visual identity – recognising the visual representation of a person
in a particular online environment, such as the game Second Life. The challenges here
have significant overlap with the development of facial recognition systems in general,
including automating adequate preprocessing to find comparable facial images and
minimizing the runtime of any face-matching system. Additional problems are raised
by the possibility of ‘different worlds,’ in which the same person may use a different
visual identity, something not generally possible in the real world. Some authors posit
that avatars made by the same person may be consistent across different services or in
some way connected to their actual visual appearance, but this appears to be unproven.
Klare et al. [2011] discuss the application of computer vision to the facial recog-
nition of online avatars, justifying the research topic with reference to criminals, es-
pecially terrorist groups using virtual environments—particularly the online game
Second Life—as training simulators, and studying two key applications. The first of
these involved inter-reality avatar-to-photograph matching, in which avatar faces gen-
erated from photographs were matched against other photographs of the same subject.
Off-the-shelf face-recognition technology sufficed here, given that the avatar was gen-
erated automatically from an actual image of the target. While a useful result, this
merely suggests that their automatic avatar-generation system preserves key infor-
mation for facial recognition, not that users will do so when crafting their own avatars.
Addressing this, the second application used a collection of actual Second Life avatars
and attempted to match different images of these avatars. The authors discovered ac-
ceptable classification accuracy, although they reported a performance bottleneck in
face and eye detection, with significant improvement in accuracy coming from manual
eye location. A question left unanswered is whether avatars can be recognised across
different digital platforms.
Baili et al. [2011] introduce a new method for avatar facial recognition, employing
wavelet transforms alongside a hierarchical multi-scale local binary pattern (HMLBP).
The authors build on other developments in this area, including earlier propositions
of the use of wavelet transforms and local binary patterns. The study focuses on re-
detecting avatars from Second Life and Entropia—another online world—from pictures
in different poses. While the results show improvements over earlier work, the method
still relies on correctly cropped input, achieved in the dataset through manual effort.
This hurdle must be addressed for a completely automated system for detection and
recognition of avatar faces.
Mohamed and Yampolskiy [2012a, 2012b] both continue with the use of wavelet-
based local binary patterns for redetecting avatar faces, but with new variations, one
making use of Eigenfaces and the other making use of directional statistical features.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:8 M. Edwards et al.
Both experiments reused the Second Life and Entropia datasets presented in the previ-
ous publications. In the first of these two publications, the authors mention the design
of a fully automated system for addressing the cropping problem as a target for on-
going work. In the second, the authors include a comparison of the classification time
for a number of leading techniques, an important consideration for any near-realtime
detection and recognition system.
In summary, this niche area of facial recognition has shown significant development
with regards to the core task of reidentification of avatars from within an online envi-
ronment like Second Life or Entropia. Still awaiting research is meaningful deployment
of these classification systems, with work evaluating automated cropping and exploring
usable interfaces for the online environment appearing on the horizon. In crossing re-
alities, some initial work evaluating the traceability of the results of automatic avatar
generation has been undertaken (e.g., Klare et al. [2011]), but it remains to be seen
if links between a user’s visual appearance and virtual avatar can be determined or
indeed if avatars are consistent across online environments.
Other computer-vision work on identification includes that of Zhang et al. [2009]
and Wei et al. [2008]. Zhang et al. [2009] focus specifically on image spam—spam
emails which make use of text presented as images in order to avoid text-based filtering
techniques. They cluster spam images by visual features, and report a high success rate
with respect to a manually identified ground truth. Their approach analyses images
for evidence of various types of templates being reused by spammers, as divined by
layout, colour, and texture. What they do not report in this paper is whether typical
spam filtering, or indeed linguistic analysis, can be applied to text extracted via optical
character recognition. Wei et al. [2008] describe a more general spam-origin toolkit
which makes use of website image comparison (from following links in spam emails) as
one tool in its arsenal, alongside WHOIS and IP lookup information and more typical
email attributes such as subject lines. While their analysis of a researcher-gathered
dataset appears to reveal interesting clusters of spam, and the utility of the website
image comparison, in particular, is demonstrated by all but one cluster centering on
one website image, an evaluation against manually identified ground truth would be
stronger justification of the method’s validity.
3.1.2. Computer Vision and Crimes against Children. Computer vision’s role in preventing
crimes against children is mostly connected to the recognition of child-abuse imagery
in an online population of images. This can be either searching for known child-abuse
imagery in order to filter it or identify distributors or identifying new examples. A
common problem in the second domain is distinguishing between ordinary adult
pornographic material and images of children in pornographic context, which is highly
visually similar.
Haggerty et al. [2008] present the FORWEB system, which focuses on forensic appli-
cations of existing signature analysis and web-crawling systems, the key motivation of
the authors being to automate the search-and-discovery process involving networked
servers. They clearly distinguish their approach from established storage media anal-
ysis tools like EnCase in much the same way as this review separates these areas
of study. Their file-fingerprinting scheme aims to identify images based on properties
which are much less likely to be affected by the simple alterations which throw off
hash-based file comparisons; combined with the spidering bot, this becomes a useful
tool for detecting known malicious images. Like all such tools, this relies on the exis-
tence of an up-to-date database of known suspect files (a resource which may in itself
bring significant performance overhead) and does not address the aim of identifying
unknown media of a suspect nature.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:9
Ibrahim [2009] takes a quite different approach, detailing a method whereby image
files are identified on the network, reconstructed, and then classified as either child-
abuse media or not by both a machine-learning system and an image-matching system
similar to FORWEB’s fingerprinting scheme—the intent being that such a system
would be installed on network boundaries to filter child-abuse material. Aside from
concerns about network performance, a major weakness of their trial of the system is
that for legal reasons their system only attempted to distinguish between nude and
non-nude images, which is clearly a far easier task than distinguishing child features
from adult ones.
This also applies to Uke and Thool [2012], which opens with a motivation of pre-
venting child abuse, but in a sudden switch focuses on identifying pornographic video
scenes as a proxy. The paper neither provides an implementation nor an evaluation of
the system, merely outlining methods to be explored.
This more difficult child-recognition task is tackled by Islam et al. [2011]. They
focus on detecting child-exploitation material on social networks, but contribute an
algorithm which could equally apply to P2P networks. Their skin-detection technique
is specifically tuned for the detection of child skin tones; they also suggest techniques
which help detect pornographic context. While these proposed methods are indeed
critical research areas for computer vision in child protection, the authors do not provide
the results of an evaluation or even a completed system.
Also attempting this task, Shupo et al. [2006] aim at detecting child-abuse mate-
rial on the network level as an alternative to manually searching suspicious venues
or application-layer networks. Their classification system, consisting of a stochastic
learning weak estimator combined with a linear classifier, was trained and trialled on
a sanitised dataset provided by Canadian law enforcement, a rare example of child-
abuse imagery being available for training. Notably, the classifier was tested on partial
as well as whole images, taking into account likely fragmentation of images over a
network link. While valuable for this alone, the classifiers being trialled still produced
less-than-ideal rates of false positives for a tool to be deployed at the network level.
Estimations of the base rates for child-abuse material versus adult pornography sug-
gest that alerts generated may be mostly incorrect – though this does not invalidate
the utility of the classifier as a tool for network monitoring, given appropriate human
supervision.
3.1.3. Computer Vision and Threats or Harassment. There is a specific use case for com-
puter vision in detecting visual (as opposed to verbal or written) forms of harassment
in video communication. As these systems are intended to be deployed on large video-
streaming populations, performance is critical to creating a deployable solution. The
particular misbehaviour discussed in these papers has some particular visual chal-
lenges regarding lighting and the potential detection of faces.
Xing et al. [2011] outline an unusual problem specific to the anonymous video-pairing
site Chatroulette – users exposing themselves to strangers. They stress that a consid-
erable proportion of Chatroulette’s user base would be classified as minors, and that
site policy on age restriction and obscenity is difficult to enforce due to the anonymous
nature of the service. The authors note that deanonymising the service could solve this
issue, but would damage one of the site’s key features in the process, thus turn to video-
analytic approaches for detecting offensive users. Their key observations include that
misbehaving users usually hide their faces, and that misbehaving users’ images differ
from pornographic images in that they often stay partially clothed and only expose
their genitals. Their system therefore focuses on detecting user faces as a key feature
in making a decision about the probability of misbehaviour, along with a novel skin
detection system which takes into account the abnormal context of webcam images.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:10 M. Edwards et al.
While they evaluate their classification accuracy, they do not report on performance
speed, an issue which would appear to be critical for their problem domain, as extra
delay in connection would impair the appeal of the Chatroulette service.
Cheng et al. [2012] refine this first approach into a fine-grained cascaded classifi-
cation solution which filters out easily disambiguated images earlier in the process
for the sake of efficiency. They also integrate new work on gathering contextual infor-
mation from webcam images and a new fusion system for combining probabilities of
misbehaviour. The improved system is evaluated against their older system and other
contenders, showing significant improvement, particularly in regard to the previously
unaddressed matter of classification latency.
3.1.4. Computer Vision and Terrorism/Extremism. A limited deployment of computer vision
techniques in counter-terrorism is seen in the context of the analysis of propaganda
videos released by jihadists. The problems which they address are of coding the content
of the videos in a pseudo-automated fashion, for which correct identification can be an
aide to intelligence work.
Salem et al. [2006] present an exploratory study of jihadi videos which attempts to
highlight the research and intelligence need for automatic exploration of jihadi video
content, and produce a tool to support manual coding of videos for this purpose. The
results are demonstrative of the effectiveness of their analysis on a set of terrorist
videos and not that of the performance of their coding toolkit.
Salem et al. [2008] provide an extended version of the same research, again with
more focus on the content analysis than on the support tool. In both cases, while the
authors’ work is presented as a stage towards automated video content analysis, the
requirements for progression from manual intervention are not fully detailed.
3.1.5. Computer Vision and Financial Crime. Computer vision has seen deployment in anti-
piracy efforts. The systems in this section are attempting to detect copies of restricted
material from being distributed online by comparing content to a stored visual finger-
print of pirated material – techniques also deployed in detecting known child-abuse
media. The problems addressed in these publications are primarily infrastructural,
attempting to resolve detection efforts with minimal impact on legitimate traffic.
Yin et al. [2009a] and Hui et al. [2009] describe a system for large-scale online
monitoring at the content distribution network (CDN) level, wherein videos are finger-
printed based on certain visual cues and compared to a blacklist of pirated material.
Their system is particularly notable due to the fact that it was actually deployed on
a large CDN, although the evaluation presented seems to be from laboratory results
rather than real-world performance. Nonetheless, it would appear that their system is
resilient to minor tampering such as is common with pirated material. Notably, for a
system to be deployed at a large scale, the performance overhead is quite significant,
with fingerprinting and search time together incurring a 40s delay, raising questions
about usability.
Hui et al. [2012] address problems linked to the computational and networking
overhead of this large-scale video processing by deploying server clusters closer to
the user in the CDN and distributing tasks between nodes based on proximity and
computational load. This results in reduced processing time as compared to existing
approaches, but still requires well over a minute to perform detection on movie-length
items. It would appear that, despite ongoing work to address this issue, there is scope
for improvement in the efficiency and scalability of video copy detection.
3.1.6. Other Computer Vision Applications. Hu et al. [2007] target the detection of pornog-
raphy, but do so with reference to illegal or offensive activity—whether the authors
suspect that pornography is illegal, or target illegal pornography particularly but work
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:11
with proxy data, is unclear. Their method addresses not only image recognition, but
also the text processing of suspected pornographic web content, combining this infor-
mation in their classifier. Their contour-based detection method appears to perform
better than region-based skin detection, specifically with regard to false-positive rates,
including bikini or face-focused images.
Wang et al. [2012] describe existing general-purpose information filtering systems
which they suggest could be used to defend users against various types of information,
insult, or crime. A range of methods and systems for information filtering are outlined,
but neither methods nor systems are subject to a great deal of scrutiny. How information
filtering technologies such as those presented can be linked to the prevention of crime
is also not clearly outlined.
3.2. Social Network Analysis
3.2.1. SNA and Terrorism/Extremism. As a set of tools for analysing communities and
graphs, SNA has seen particular deployment in the counter-terrorism context, for
which the analysis of groups can be useful in identifying key nodes and group behaviour.
Particularly, it is applied to graphs which are mined from online forums and blogs, in
which relationships between individuals can be determined structurally from links.
Chau and Xu [2007] and Xu and Chau [2006] focus on mining and analysing online
communities in blogs, specifically communities of blogs frequented by hate groups.
These two studies both make use of the same 28 anti-black blogrings from the Xanga
blogging platform. While the studies include semi-automatic detection of hate groups
as a key aim, the selection process presented relies on manual filtering of search results.
A more automated means of selecting hate groups could aid in making their approach
generalisable.
The work of Rı́os and Muñoz [2012] is the first of a number of studies making use
of the Dark Web Forum Portal collection. The authors focus on detecting overlapping
communities by using latent dirichlet allocation to detect topics, with a positive eval-
uation on an English-language forum from the Dark Web Portal. The treatment of
networks as allowing members to be part of more than one community is perhaps a
useful model, but whether topics of conversations reflect actual networks rather than
simply ideological leanings is not clarified.
Lenselink [2011] focuses on the process behind online radicalisation. This work in-
cludes a well-written motivating example, and a review of current theory related to
online radicalisation. Most important for this review, it also includes an SNA using
forum data from two Dark Web fora, one from the Middle East and one from Europe.
Interestingly, the author reports technical issues with a module of the Dark Web Por-
tal. The analysis suggests that radicalisation is happening between the most involved
members of the community, as identified by several measures of centrality.
Yang and Ng [2008] gathered discussion data from MySpace, using the DBSCAN
algorithm to cluster topics as points for a social network visualisation tool. While the
level of detail in the description of the algorithm is adequate, the authors’ choice of
example in their demonstration of the tool is the only link specifically to terrorism.
Further detail on what may constitute interesting patterns within the network result-
ing from their clustered topics would make the tool’s utility to terrorism investigators
clearer.
Patil et al. [2012] describe the Dark Web Attribute System, which applies content
and link attributes to items from the Dark Web collection, calculating measures of tech-
nical sophistication for various linked terrorist websites. The evaluation lacks rigour,
however, and does not effectively demonstrate what might well be useful annotation
work.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:12 M. Edwards et al.
Chaurasia et al. [2012] describe the application of SNA techniques as part of a system
for identifying and monitoring terrorists at the ISP level, also advocating their system’s
use for targeted disruption of terrorist networks through identifying key nodes. The
paper describes only a theoretical system and provides no evaluation. Most pressingly
for a paper advocating large-scale surveillance, they include no discussion of the likely
rate of false positives. Their baseline is also likely to be misleading, as they base
their threshold of typical terrorist behaviour on only terrorist content, ignoring the
possibility that terrorist individuals may access other sites. A more behaviourally
sound model of terrorist web usage would be of use in improving such a system.
Negnevitsky et al. [2005] describe a method utilising SNA for detecting changes in a
group’s behavioural patterns, as observed via email communications. They particularly
highlight homeland security and intelligence applications of this method. They do
not provide an evaluation in this paper, but discuss their ongoing development of a
simulated email dataset for that purpose. As they discuss, their current model does
not handle dynamic social networks such as those which they expect in real data, an
area which needs redressing. A key limitation of any such simulation would be its
validity as a predictor of performance on a real email network – it would seem more
advisable to work with real email datasets in developing the analysis methods outlined,
even when this means working with proxy data rather than actual terrorist network
data.
Sureka et al. [2010] analyse YouTube’s social graph to discover extremist videos
and communities. Their system works from a seed list of videos to discover YouTube
videos which are hate speech and users advocating acts of aggression. The authors
discuss the network properties of the connections they found – including the different
types of YouTube network – alongside brief topic analysis of user comments. The main
contribution here is the development of search support tools for an intelligence analyst,
adding structure and ranking content, but there is limited comment on the scope of the
approach.
In summary, SNA has been applied to a number of terrorism-related datasets with
some success, but current studies tend to present either toolsets which, due to the
nature of terrorist content, often cannot be evaluated easily, or exploratory analyses
of a particular network which demonstrate some value but do not generalise. A theme
common to a small number of papers has been using topic analysis of text to better
subdivide communities of interest, but it would appear that this approach has yet to
be validated in a meaningful manner.
3.2.2. SNA and Police Intelligence. As with terrorist organisations, SNA has been applied
to online information about criminal organisations, often mined from news reports or
other unstructured text documents. This provision provides for opportunities – addi-
tional information on time or space of interactions may be available – but also addi-
tional challenges in that relationships are not necessarily correctly represented in such
secondary sources.
Peng and Wang [2008] provide a case study in which link analysis – with links
in the form of webpage co-occurrence – is used to trace a notorious violent criminal,
producing link charts for known members of his gang and related individuals. The
method presented relies on Google search results to identify relevant webpages, which
may lead to narrowed results due to personalisation if countermeasures are not taken.
A comparison with other methods for identifying web sources could prove useful.
Hosseinkhani et al. [2012] provide a review of web mining for input into criminal
network analysis, and propose a framework which integrates the identification of crime
hot spots and criminal communities into the workflow of a web crawling agent. Detail
on how the more relevant tagging modules will be implemented is omitted.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:13
Tseng et al. [2012] focus on term networks, presenting a novel algorithm for key
term extraction, and presenting a case study similar to that of Peng and Wang [2008]
in which news related to a particular gangster was gathered and mined to describe
relationships between gangsters. The term model presented appears more powerful
than simple entity collocation, but the study presented does not make a convincing
case for the utility of this method, demonstrating only simple relationships as could be
found through more traditional means.
From this sample, the area of web mining criminal networks, like terrorism network
analysis, appears to suffer from a lack of rigorous evaluation. Identification of a means
of better evaluating the performance of information-gathering agents such as these
could help focus research efforts. A standard marked dataset suitable for evaluation
could be considered an initial step.
Lauw et al. [2005] describe attempts to discover the social networks of criminals by
mining spatiotemporal events such as web usage. A detailed explanation of the problem
and algorithmic approach are given, and the theory is validated against a dataset
collected from a university campus’s wireless network. While their system appears
technologically sound and is well presented, the intended deployment scenario is not
clear.
Karran and Llewellyn-Jones [2009] discuss integrating SNA concepts into common
digital forensics practice for investigation of email. The validating case study involves
transforming the Enron email dataset into a form suitable for SNA and highlighting
key actors from within that dataset. As the thesis itself acknowledges, social network
information is not ‘hard’ evidence which can be considered directly in court, being
instead useful in guiding further investigation. The analysis of the Enron dataset
presented (which we discuss further in Section 4.1.3) does show some utility, but it is
worth noting that the analyst’s interpretation of results seems likely to be informed
by previous knowledge of the dataset’s context. A blinded study would mitigate such
issues.
Dudas [2013] makes use of Twitter data and geolocation for building a social net-
work based on ongoing terrorist events, then provides a modifiable visualisation to
aid interpretation. Several areas for ongoing development are highlighted, including
incorporation of temporal and sentiment dimensions into the visualisation tool.
Barbian [2011] theoretically demonstrates a means of detecting hidden friendships—
relationships in a network which are not formal connections. While a potentially valu-
able intelligence tool, the paper does not provide an evaluation of this method’s efficacy.
Stolfo et al. [2006a] use SNA as part of a range of tools for investigating email data
for various crime-related purposes. The social network analysis component is only one
part of the tool, which is described only very briefly and not evaluated.
Al-Zaidy et al. [2012] describe the process of mining and analysing criminal networks
from collections of unstructured text documents, in an approach which relies on the
recognition of named entities and the detection of prominent communities of connected
names. Their approach was validated in a case study from a real cybercrime inves-
tigation, with an instant-messaging database provided by law enforcement and their
investigation being compared to an expert’s manual analysis of the chat logs. It is no-
table that the analysis was guided by the researchers’ own identification of suspicious
information – while fully automated analysis is not necessarily desirable, for purposes
of evaluation, it is necessary to distinguish the performance of the support tool from
the performance of the authors. A blinded study with a number of analysis engine
users compared to a number of manual analysis users would provide more objective
assessment of their network-mining engine’s utility.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:14 M. Edwards et al.
3.2.3. SNA and Cybercrime. Ma et al. [2011] focus on the construction of social networks
from email and blog data linked specifically to cybercriminal activity. The paper refers
most often to cybercrime as its motivation, but also to terrorists who ‘upload obscene
pictures’. The degree to which authorship identification techniques were applied is
unclear.
Nirkhi et al. [2012] apply SNA techniques—as part of a toolkit with other
subsystems—to help identify cybercriminals from email data. They appear to have
implemented their system and even gathered a dataset (Enron) on which to conduct a
trial, but provide no evaluation in this paper.
3.2.4. SNA and Financial Crime. Gray and Debreceny [2007] address financial crime
through application of SNA in mining corporate emails to prevent fraudulent transac-
tions. Taking the approach that data outside the accounting information system should
help protect against fraud involving senior management figures, they strive to mine
both the textual content and social networks of email data. They provide a competent
review of relevant work and use the Enron email dataset as an illustrative example.
Pandit et al. [2007] also use SNA in detecting fraud, but as applied to transaction data
from online auctions. Their method, working as a third-party service, applies Markov
Random Fields to model the networks and belief propagation to detect fraud within the
network. Their positive evaluation includes both a synthetic dataset and a transaction
dataset scraped from the popular auction network eBay. A third-party approach such
as this would appear to allow their system to adapt to a number of auction platforms,
but with a risk of being rendered ineffectual by changes to site templates or APIs.
3.2.5. SNA and Identification. Hadjidj et al. [2009] turn SNA methods to forensic (i.e.,
identification) analysis of temporal email data. The SNA component of this mostly text-
mining tool is employed to provide behavioural, temporal, and geographic modelling
information. A partial evaluation of a different module of the toolset is provided using
the Enron email database, but the SNA component is presented merely as a useful
analytics and visualisation workbench.
3.2.6. SNA and Crimes Against Children. Frank et al. [2010] examine the structure of on-
line child-exploitation networks, building networks of websites based on their links and
a set of predefined suspicious-activity keywords, with the ultimate goal of identifying
the major nodes whose removal would most disrupt online exploitation. They demon-
strate their deployment on four networks crawled from websites identified through
search results, identifying the key nodes through the top 10 values for in-degree and
for severity of content as identified through keywords. They also find that centrality
does not correlate with severity of content, but severe websites were highly linked to
each other, suggesting scope for targeting subnetworks of the most extreme material
where law enforcement resources are scarce.
3.3. Information Extraction
3.3.1. Information Extraction in Terrorism and Extremism. A variety of information extrac-
tion techniques can be applied in analysis of terrorists and extremism, including topic
mining and summarization. Websites and fora frequented by these groups are partic-
ularly rich sources of information. The main body of research tends to focus on either
white supremacist groups in the United States or Islamic fundamentalists.
Marcus [1998] describes a system called ProfileMiner for combating cyberterrorism.
This system amounts to an interface or series of interfaces to a database of online
information, the compilation of which is left unspecified but appears to be tied to a
commercial product called MAVIS. No evaluation is provided, nor is it clear whether
the interface was actually constructed rather than simply designed.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:15
Zhou et al. [2005a] briefly outline the motivation for and design of the Dark Web
Portal, a resource used in several papers addressing information extraction from ter-
rorist and extremist sites. Zhou et al. [2005b] describe a semi-automated system for
collecting and analyzing information on Dark Web sites, and apply this to a selection
of United States extremist web sites. Their results and methodology are subjected to
an expert evaluation with a positive outcome. While their automated collection stage
(outlined in more detail itself in Zhou et al. [2007]) appears effective, their approach
to filtering the results of said searches involves manual filtering of hundreds of URLs
followed by a second stage of search to manually bulk out the results. If value over
that of a typical search engine is to be added in a semi-automated collection and fil-
tering system, it must be to reduce such loads on the analyst. The work by Chen et al.
[2008] appears to be linked, in which a case study is carried out to collect and analyse
examples of Arabic fora. The same levels of expert evaluation and manual workload
are evident, suggesting that the only key difference in the two works is the community
being analysed.
Qin et al. [2007] and Chen et al. [2008] take a similar approach in what may be a
continuation of the same line of research. A coding system referred to as the Dark Web
Attribute System is developed to look specifically for signs of technical sophistication
and content richness in the design of the websites of extremist groups. The first paper
uses this framework to compare terrorist sites to those of US government agencies
while the second compares the Internet presence of extremist organisations drawn from
three geographical regions. The latter’s detailed analysis of these technical indicators
highlights how relatively innocuous details can be of interest when examined at scale.
A combination of this attribute system with an automatic collection system could
prove useful in identifying new groups that show above-average sophistication, perhaps
better helping identify key emerging threats.
Gerstenfeld et al. [2003] report on the observed typical behaviours of those holding
supremacist or separatist beliefs, as determined through an examination of 157 pur-
posefully selected extremist sites. Their findings include interesting results such as
disavowal of racism and a low rate of direct incitement to violence. The authors also
comment on the utility of the Internet to widely scattered extremist groups. Though
their motivation is given in terms of extremism generally, their sample appears focused
particularly on a certain group of white supremacist sites, with Islamic extremists ap-
pearing only in an ‘Other’ category.
Yang et al. [2009] describe how web-crawling technology is integrated with NLP
techniques to extract common topics from websites hosted by extremists or terrorists.
Though their evaluation does include an attempt to assess the compactness of topics, a
notable problem with their LDA results is the generation of several reasonably similar
topics. A means of better combining (or representing the distinction between) such
groups could be considered an area for study in the field of topic extraction in general.
Yang and Ng [2009] relate how a clustering opinion-extraction method targeted
specifically at opinions expressed in online discussion is trialled on a corpus drawn from
MySpace, including discussions about terrorism. Their clustering method attempts to
overcome some limitations with the DBSCAN clustering mechanism, focusing on a
distance-based clustering method. More detail on the TFIDF mechanism by which web
opinions can be represented as a vector of core concepts could help generalise their
method to nonclustering applications.
Jayanthi and Sasikala [2011] describe a process of mining hyperlinks from terrorist
webpages as part of link analysis. However, only a simulation of output from a toolkit
is provided.
Inyaem et al. [2009] focus on gathering open-source information about terrorism
via summarisation of web-based news articles. Though some details appear obscured
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:16 M. Edwards et al.
by poor translation, the authors seem to find support for an ontological approach to
detection of terrorist events, comparing this approach to a gazetteer and some form of
grammatical parser in an evaluation on Thai news articles.
Of additional interest to this problem topic and method is an information extraction
tool which is designed for general intelligence use [Skillicorn and Vats 2007]. It makes
use of terrorist subjects as an illustrative case study. The network study of blogging
sites [Xu and Chau 2006], which focuses on extremist hate groups, is also relevant.
3.3.2. Information Extraction and Police Intelligence. Information extraction can be applied
to online sources for intelligence on organised criminal activity. That the core of this is a
collection of web-mining toolkits suggests common research interest around synthesis
of web-based news articles for intelligence purposes, heavily reliant on named entity
recognition techniques, with some recurring problems including the identification of
relevant articles for processing and the reliance on a domain lexicon for identifying key
information.
Ge et al. [2010] focus on extracting ‘story’ patterns from web-based news articles as
part of open-source intelligence efforts, with pattern matching begun by the detection
of trigger words indicating certain events. Their system is demonstrated on a collection
of Chinese news articles on the 2008 Mumbai attacks, but what their published results
show is unclear. Their system’s reliance on trigger words seems to suggest that indi-
vidual implementation will either require existing domain knowledge, reducing utility
for emerging events, or else be general terms which may not fully capture specific nar-
ratives. The question of how appropriate news articles are gathered for processing is
also critical for deploying such a system.
Ku et al. [2008] focus on extracting crime information – in the form of key phrases –
from narrative reports, which is applied primarily to police and witness reporting, but
is noted for potential application to web news. Similar to the previous study, their
approach struggles with a scalable system for managing a crime lexicon, which they
resolve with manually created lists supplemented by dictionary resources.
Atkinson et al. [2010] also describe efforts to gather structured knowledge from
web-based news articles for EU security purposes, clustering articles based on textual
similarity and geographical location, then applying other event extraction tools. There
is a lack of detail on the operation of these tools.
Wenhua and Na [2010] discuss an extension of the Encase forensics toolset to allow
analysis of webpages regarding some form of illegal gambling activity. They attempt
to mine not only entities, but also the relationships between entities, in an unsuper-
vised manner. However, their approach to information extraction appears to be overly
tailored to their chosen problem domain for it to generalise to other scenarios. No
evaluation is provided.
Skillicorn and Vats [2007] focus on the problem of gathering novel information about
a topic relative to a specified set of existing knowledge. They make use of web search-
engine results regarding the known topic and use these webpages to form new queries
based on prominent nouns, clustering the results based on descriptive nouns. Their
ATHENS approach is trialled on terrorism topics, but could equally apply to other law-
enforcement or defense uses. Their method for selecting descriptive nouns compares
the frequency in the webpages under review to the frequency in the British National
Corpus (BNC), a standard English corpus. While this approach is domain independent,
strict comparisons are likely to lead to spurious noun phrases being identified, thus it
would be better to search only for nouns whose frequency is significantly greater than
in the reference corpus in order to prevent common variations diluting search terms. In
the same vein, the BNC relies on texts now well over a decade old, and is not likely to
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:17
include a number of now-common proper nouns. A different reference corpus, perhaps
drawn specifically from web sources, might make a more suitable baseline.
Wang et al. [2012c] use Twitter as a source of general crime prediction, drawing on
automatic semantic analysis, event extraction and geographical information systems
to map crime hotspots. In an evaluation on actual hit-and-run crime data, their system
outperforms a baseline uniform model. While there may be scope for improvement
in the predictive technique, more interesting developments are likely to be found in
modification of the model for deployment on a streaming Twitter feed. Wang et al.
[2012a] do so, using Twitter data to model criminal incidents geographically. They
apply a spatiotemporal generalised additive model to a combination of geographic
and demographic features of an area and textual features extracted from the Twitter
feed of a news agency, evaluating their performance against actual crime incidence
rates. Their analysis shows that the textual features provided by the Twitter data
improve prediction accuracy as compared to a previous model using only geographic
and demographic information.
Giacobe et al. [2010] aim at gathering information in extreme events, describing an
approach to open-source intelligence which was applied in an artificial competition
environment (searching for red balloons), and how experiences in the challenge may
relate generally to intelligence gathering, particularly with regard to false reporting.
Their overview is high level and rather specific to their challenge, but includes reference
to a number of techniques and technologies not otherwise captured by this review.
Dudas [2013] focuses on the detection and analysis of ‘dark networks’, with specific
focus on visualisation tools for handling networks parsed from Twitter and placed by
geolocation. No formal evaluation is provided, but the paper discusses trial usage on
real networks of interest.
Johnson et al. [2012] look at finding relationships between unstructured law en-
forcement texts (emails) and using these relationships to help augment information of
interest, analysing the semantic relatedness of documents and linking identified enti-
ties. A demonstrative application is presented, acting on a sanitized corpus of real law-
enforcement emails. Given appropriate consideration of scalability, this information-
linking tool would appear to be an impressive resource for augmentation of police
intelligence.
3.3.3. Information Extraction and Crimes against Children. Information-extraction tech-
niques are sparsely deployed in child protection, mostly aimed at child sexual traf-
ficking. Their aims include identifying children known to be missing by monitoring
trafficking networks and chat rooms for mentions of their names or other identifying
details.
Wang et al. [2012b] present an approach to combating the sexual trafficking of chil-
dren through examination of open sources such as classified advertisement sites and
bulletin boards. They examine such resources for evidence of trafficking networks and
introduce techniques to search for victims under aliases and misspelt names. Though
the authors do not present an evaluation, they discuss ongoing trial deployment, high-
lighting challenges specifically related to anonymisation of the toolkit’s interactions
with sites to prevent counter-intelligence, and with scaling their approach to wider
monitoring.
Romaniuk [2000] approaches the same problem from a different angle, applying in-
telligent agents to identify missing children on the Internet by connecting information
in open databases of missing children with web crawling and IRC chat monitoring. The
approach was partially implemented as the SADIE system at the time of publication.
The proposed ecosystem of agents dealing with specific data sources appears flexible,
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:18 M. Edwards et al.
but the exact means of calculating results’ similarity to a short query – a very key
detail for any of the agents – is left unspecified.
A common theme to both of these sexual trafficking technologies is the integration of
information from multiple sources, but both publications appear to focus on different
sources for their information. This may, in part, be due to the large time gap between the
two papers. The SADIE system outlines a high-level approach to multiple data-source
integration, but leaves many implementation matters unresolved.
Marjuni et al. [2009] attempt to extract crime information (Who, Where, When,
How, What, Why) from chat logs, drawing on published examples of sexual abuse from
adult dating and scam interactions as their data source. Tokenisation and part-of-
speech tagging of the data are discussed. Classification accuracy results for their crime
information categories are also presented, though how these results were derived is
unclear. While mining instrumental crime information as would fit the given categories
could well prove useful to investigators, the paper does not present a coherent solution
for the purpose.
3.3.4. Information Extraction and Cybercrime. Cybercriminal activity has also been mined
from online data sources, the primary source being fora in which they sell or exchange
information.
Spencer [2008] uses an XML framework to mark up relationships extracted from
hacker fora, essentially mapping the social network of said fora for usage by police.
The paper focuses heavily on the choice of technology and representation for the task –
XPath queries on tidied HTML source of the fora – with no real evaluation of the value
to law enforcement. Furthermore, the approach relies on manual exploration of the
XPath query space for page sources, a process which could, at the least, have been
guided through generated templates.
Zhuge et al. [2009] present a study of the cybercriminal economy on the Chinese web,
attempting to model the extent of this black market and the amount of malicious code
involved in its constituent websites. In addition to these contributions, the authors offer
a detailed description of a cybercriminal infrastructure. Their estimation of the value
of cybercriminal assets, particularly their attempt at breaking down these totals by
classification, allows law enforcement and cybersecurity vendors to focus their efforts
where greatest impact can be effected.
Additionally, some papers discussed earlier fall into this category. Ma et al. [2011]
construct networks of cybercriminal activity from email and blog data while Marcus
[1998] describe a system designed for fighting cyberterrorism through handling of
collected intelligence sources.
3.3.5. Information Extraction and Finance. Bernard et al. [2011] address a financial crimi-
nal matter (money laundering) by helping track financial services through web mining.
Their tool crawls the web, identifying online financial trading sites through a gener-
alised linear model applied to textual features. While the presented accuracy appears
impressive, the results were obtained via an artificially balanced dataset wherein
roughly a quarter of all websites were actually Online Financial Trading (OFT) sites –
a situation which is unlikely to be the case when the system is deployed on the web
generally.
3.3.6. Information Extraction and Online Identification. Zhu [2007], Aggarwal et al. [2007],
and Bali [2007] all cover various aspects of an email deanonymisation workbench built
on a set of mature UNIX tools. This UnMask toolkit focuses specifically on detecting
and countering spoofing attempts within email messages, examining email bodies and
headers particularly for examples of spoofed links, forms, and headers, and storing
evidence in a manner suitable for law enforcement use. Their aim of achieving this
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:19
through combining a variety of pre-existing tools is laudable for its software reuse, but
there is a lack of rigorous analysis of the performance of the antispoofing components.
The papers, however, do include a case study demonstrating potential uses of the toolkit
during an investigation.
3.3.7. Other Information Extraction Applications. Broadway et al. [2008] describe a study
aimed at improving the analysis of forensic network traces from investigations, pre-
senting a high-level packet analysis tool which has been developed and compared to
existing tools, but not formally evaluated.
alias Balamurugan et al. [2007] cover the detection of ‘suspicious’ or ‘deceptive’
emails. They do not provide a clear definition of what that may mean, other than
making an ominous reference to national security. They apply a series of classifiers to an
insufficiently explained dataset, and report high classification accuracies, particularly
for the IBk decision tree.
3.4. Machine Learning
3.4.1. Machine Learning and Online Identification. Machine-learning techniques have been
applied in online identification tasks, often working with email data, attempting in
particular to identify scammers and phishers from their campaign output.
Airoldi and Malin [2004] present the ScamSlam project. It focuses on identifying
the common origins of scams, particularly advance fee fraud, through the use of un-
supervised hierarchical clustering on scam emails detected with a Poisson filter. Their
method appears to detect a small number of scammers (20) sending most of the advance-
fee fraud messages in a corpus of 534 such scams, but they are unable to verify this
result. It is not clear how broadly their system may be applied, as the advance-fee fraud
they focused on has a fairly large text body, which may be atypical of scam email.
Stallings et al. [2012] cover the same use case, but make use of email headers to build
clusters of scam originators using WHOIS data. Using this approach, they identified 12
email addresses which were key in registering spam-origin domains. Such an approach
holds benefits in that it may be applied to many scam or spam emails without requiring
a specific additional feature in the body of the scam, but also risks vulnerability to email
spoofing.
Yearwood et al. [2010] present an approach looking at profiling rather than simply
detecting phishing attacks. Their study makes use of hyperlinks from the body of an
email as well as structural features and WHOIS information in a pair of classifiers.
They profile phishing emails by having the classifiers apply multiple labels to each
email regarding the presence of scripts, images, and the like, and the apparent legit-
imacy of linked sites from WHOIS information. The strength of the paper lies in its
clear formulation of the problem of profiling phishers rather than merely detecting
phishing.
Dazeley et al. [2010] present a combined approach for profiling large volumes of
phishing email. The results of several independent unsupervised clustering algorithms
working on a random subset of a large dataset are combined with a variety of consensus
algorithms and, in turn, used to train a number of fast classification algorithms for
use on the whole dataset. This approach of using unsupervised clustering to prime
supervised clustering would appear to work well for classification of emails into clusters
detectable in the training set, but may suffer in a deployment in which new clusters of
phishing email begin to appear.
The other identification studies using machine learning more generally address the
identification of criminals from email data. The following approaches are somewhat
unusual as compared to the more standard classifiers discussed in the later NLP
section, but contain some overlap.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:20 M. Edwards et al.
Iqbal et al. [2010] make use of an existing speaker recognition framework from the
field of speech processing in an attempt at authorship analysis, using several classifiers.
The framework is evaluated against the Enron email dataset with results indicating a
competitive approach, although the requirement of 200 training emails per author is
not insignificant.
Schmid [2012] explores the application of associative classification to authorship
attribution of text in an approach which requires the extraction and amalgamation
of rules. However, the system performs poorly on a multiauthor dataset, with a best
classification accuracy of 50% on only 10 possible authors.
Stamatatos [2006] covers authorship attribution in a trial dataset of an online
newsletter. The approach uses classifier ensembles, demonstrating how a range of di-
verse classifiers can be constructed through exhaustive disjoint subspacing, and show-
ing that the approach outperforms a simple SVM model using word frequencies. The
author goes on to enhance the model with a cross-validated committees technique.
3.4.2. Machine Learning and Terrorism and Extremism. Machine learning is deployed both
in detecting terrorism-related activities and in identifying terrorists from their online
footprint.
Cheong and Lee [2011] explore microblogging within the terrorism informatics do-
main. They perform an observational analysis of the Twitter network’s response to two
real-life terrorist events, and use this as inspiration for the design of an information-
gathering framework. They later apply the framework to a synthetic dataset of events
which share some properties with terrorism events. They also apply a variety of com-
mon machine-learning analyses to their dataset in an exploratory manner.
Sahito et al. [2011] link streams of Twitter data to other resources through opendata
mechanisms. They apply named entity recognition to the content of Tweets. They
mention the terrorism domain, their aim being to allow for structural links to entities
to be imposed on unstructured Twitter data to better allow law enforcement to parse
and respond to events detected via Twitter. However, the implementation of this is
relegated to future work.
Nizamani et al. [2013] evaluate a number of machine-learning methods (the ID3
decision-tree algorithm, logistic regression, Naive Bayes and SVM) for the purpose of
detecting suspicious emails. As well as developing a terrorism-related email dataset for
the purposes of this comparison (including real messages gathered from newsgroups),
they develop a feature-selection system that provides consistent improvement on the
results of all of the tested classifiers. They report that, for their application, logistic
regression and ID3 outperformed the Naive Bayes and SVM classifiers.
Shen and Boongoen [2012] use a qualitative formalism as the basis for a fuzzy
analysis, applying this to link analysis and the determination of aliases. They evaluate
their system against unspecialised, unsupervised learning systems on a constructed
terrorism dataset gathered from web articles, an author publication dataset (DBLP)
and an email dataset. Their system appears to outperform a number of similar link-
based algorithms.
Elovici et al. [2004, 2010] employ web usage data to identify terror-related activities,
training a classifier on the web usage of ordinary users and a collection of known
terrorist websites. The aim is to deploy a system which monitors the web access of users
(at an ISP or organisational access provider level) and raises alerts whenever a user
accesses abnormal content. The civil liberty implications of such a mass-monitoring
system could rightly be challenged, but more practical issues may prevent adoption.
Their detection system reached an AUC of 91% on their experimental dataset, rising
to 99.7% with additional components. Given the large number of normal users and
relatively tiny number of real, detectable terrorist usages of actual networks, even
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:21
such a classifier would produce an unreasonable volume of false alerts for every true
event it captured. This issue is not unique to the work of these authors, but applies to
all systems of this kind. Nonetheless, these two papers consist of a coherent description
of the development of a high-performance classifier for web usage data.
Tinguriya and Kumar [2010] suggest a self-organising map (SOM) approach to clas-
sifying web users from usage data. They provide no evaluation or appraisal of their
proposed system, and minimal description of its proposed operation.
Endy et al. [2010] have developed what they term an intelligent search procedure
for web mining cyberterrorism information, feeding a vector representation of 600
articles, half related to cyberterrorism, into an SOM, the results of which they then
briefly dissect. Their presentation of the SOM as a heat-coloured grid seems ill-suited
for law enforcement analysts.
Yang et al. [2012] focus on identifying extremist content in social media sites, drawing
their design inspiration from biological immune systems. They build a mathematical
representation of lymphocytes which incorporates lexical, sentiment, and syntactic fea-
tures of text as a precursor to a semisupervised classification system. In an evaluation
of this system on violent messages scraped from a white supremacist web forum, their
system outperformed two benchmark labelling systems.
3.4.3. Machine Learning and Harassment. Machine learning can be deployed to detect
threatening textual communications, the aim in most cases being to produce a classifier
which separates threatening messages from normal communication.
Appavu alias Balamurugan and Rajaram [2008] compare a decision-tree classifier
with SVM and Naive Bayes classifiers, using two email corpora and two different fea-
ture selection mechanisms (information gain and term frequency variance). They find
decision trees to outperform SVM and Naive Bayes in detecting examples of threaten-
ing email. A follow-up paper [Appavu et al. 2009] repeats this analysis, but includes the
Ad Infinitum algorithm, which outperforms the other methods. Banday et al. [2011]
later revisit this work, looking also at the detection of threatening emails. The authors
compare the data of Appavu and Rajaram to their own Naive Bayes approach, which
makes use of different features (single and multiple keywords as well as weighted
keywords with context matching). Measuring the accuracy of results with the F1-
score rather than simple percentage accuracy, they find that their weighted multiple
keyword system with context matching performs in a manner competitive with the
better methods from Appavu and Rajaram’s analysis. They do not make a direct com-
parison due to the different datasets’ underlying results, but a review of F1 scores
indicates that some of the methods presented by Appavu and Rajaram may be better
classifiers.
Xu et al. [2012b] identify emotions common in cyberbullying, and develop a train-
ing procedure to help recognise these emotions from text without reference to a la-
belled training set. They evaluate their zero-label-trained SVM system on a labelled
Wikipedia corpus, finding that it has lower cross-validation error than three baseline
methods. They also apply it to Twitter traces involving bullying, finding that only a
relatively small proportion of these traces showed emotion, and that where emotion
was detected it did not necessarily reflect severity or sincerity. Yin et al. [2009b] in-
stead focus on a supervised learning approach to detecting cyberbullying, using term
frequency as a primary measure, and supplementing it with sentiment and contex-
tual features. Their model performs fairly poorly on their web datasets, with the best
F1-measure accuracy being less than 50%.
Wang et al. [2006] take inspiration from biological immune systems in much the same
manner as Yang et al. [2012], also integrating term frequency into their mathematical
adaptation of it. Though they claim ‘good results’, the paper contains no evaluation.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:22 M. Edwards et al.
Shekar and Imambi [2008] turn to a more conventional Naive Bayes classifier, testing
it on a small corpus and a bag-of-words feature set which appears to be extended
with some user-level attributes. The presentation is somewhat ambiguous, describing
classification rules for detecting a ‘threat’ class of message, but presenting classification
results for ‘movie’, ‘food’, and ‘travel’ topic classes, none of which are alluded to a priori.
3.4.4. Machine Learning and Crimes Against Children. A small number of rule-based sys-
tems have been generated to help with detecting predators in textual exchanges.
Hidalgo and Dı́az [2012] present a knowledge-based system for detecting sexual
predators, with a Naive Bayes subsystem with reasonable classification accuracy. In-
terestingly, their hand-coded rules for predator characterization were originally written
in and for Spanish, but were automatically translated to apply to English, and appear
to still be effective in identifying the main predation phases.
McGhee et al. [2011] compare previously developed rule-based classifiers to decision-
tree and a k-nearest neighbours classifiers. They find that the machine-learning sys-
tems improve classification of predation when working with specific transcripts, but fail
to reject the null hypothesis in a more general case comparison against their rule-based
system. The average accuracy of their rule-based classifier is 68%.
Peersman et al. [2012] move away from rule-based systems, applying and combining
two separately trained SVM classifiers in a weighted manner. They achieve an F1
score of 0.9 for the task of classifying authors as predators, but much lower accuracy
for detecting specific grooming posts.
3.4.5. Machine Learning and Financial Crime. Modupe et al. [2011] use SVMs and Random
Forests to detect advanced fee fraud scams in an email dataset. They report high
classification accuracy on a synthetic dataset in which roughly a third of all mail was
advanced-fee fraud messages, and find that their SVM classifier outperformed the
Random Forests classifier. An evaluation more comparable to real deployment base
rates would be preferred.
Walgampaya et al. [2010] focus on click fraud prevention using web usage data. They
detail a multilevel data-fusion mechanism which takes input from a click map module,
an outlier detection module, and a knowledge-based rule module, and stores levels
of suspicion regarding specific IP addresses, referrers, and countries. They provide a
detailed analysis of the results of their system as applied to publicly available click-
through data.
Bernard et al. [2011] track online financial services through web mining, gathering
textual features to reach conclusions about the probability of a site being an online fi-
nancial transaction site. Their evaluation against human subjects shows demonstrable
benefits in terms of speed, and generally high precision.
3.4.6. Machine Learning and Police Intelligence. Chung [2012] studies appropriate
machine-learning systems for categorising temporal events collected from web data.
Using a case study involving web articles related to an incident of domestic terrorism,
the performance of Naive Bayes, SVM, and neural-network methods at applying tem-
poral group labels across a range of feature set sizes is demonstrated. The results show
that while all three systems performed in a satisfactory manner, SVM and Naive Bayes
increased in accuracy as the number of features increased, while the neural network
peaked at 70 features.
Stolfo et al. [2006b] describe the application of a general-purpose email-mining toolkit
to behavioural analysis, with a case study in detecting viral emails in an archive of
the emails provided by 15 users. The system performs well when introduced to sudden
and abnormal flows, but struggles to detect slow campaigns for the delivery of email.
The degree to which virality can sensibly be detected from such a small user corpus is
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:23
debatable. The paper also provides a lengthy demonstration of the overall capabilities
of the email-mining toolset.
3.4.7. Other Machine Learning Applications. Do et al. [2004] approach the problem of
pornographic webpage identification with two classifier components. One component
classifies webpages into various predefined categories, which can then be used to filter
these webpages from access. The other component analyses the behaviour of users with
respect to the category of sites accessed. They test their system – with a variety of clas-
sifiers – against commercially available web filters, and find that their best classifier
outperforms them.
Tian et al. [2010] focus on the effect of pornography on young people as their moti-
vation. They note failures of strict rule-based and keyword-based systems for filtering
undesirable information, and propose a system which gathers a broader range of fea-
tures from a page to assist in classification. They do not evaluate the performance of
this proposed system.
Lim et al. [2007] attempt to detect abnormal patterns of email traffic using a hierar-
chical fuzzy system. They develop three different system architectures, and trial these
systems on a selection of threads from the Enron email dataset, finding that all three
agree with each other in the ranking of abnormality of communication links. Whether
such a test holds external validity is hard to determine.
Benjamin and Chen [2012] apply machine learning to recognise the traits of key
actors in hacker communities. Their regression analysis of the social structure of hacker
fora from the United States and China determines that involvement in a number of
threads, total message volume, and number of attachments uploaded are the major
factors which explain the reputation score of members of the community. While the
paper focuses on cybercrime as a domain, its results could be said to apply more to
certain online forum communities of a criminal nature or otherwise.
3.5. Natural Language Processing
Due to the size of this category, subcategories of papers using similar NLP methods
have been defined.
—Authorship Analysis: The identification of texts as belonging to a particular author.
—Author Profiling: The identification of qualities of a text’s author.
—Sentiment Analysis: The analysis of opinion or emotion markers in text.
—Text Classification: Classification of a text into one of a range of categories.
—Other: NLP-based methods which do not fall under the other categories.
Authorship Attribution.
3.5.1. Authorship Attribution and Online Identification. Authorship attribution is naturally
tied closely to the problem domain of online identification; a wide range of techniques
have been applied on a number of datasets. Typical problems for such studies include
deciding upon the most appropriate feature set to use in classification, and finding
appropriate methods for different data sources. Other for or highly related to this
field include authorship verification, authorship similarity detection, and stylometric
comparison, with different clusters focusing on either the conflation of author identities
or the assignment of specific texts to an author, but the technical challenges of both
tasks are expressible within the same framework.
Ma et al. [2009b] apply authorship attribution specifically to phishing emails, aiming
to cluster messages based on orthographic features using an adapted form of the K-
means algorithm. They reason that the semantics of phishing emails are often too
similar to be useful for disambiguation. They provide an evaluation on a collection
of 2048 known phishing emails, with several differing initial parameters for their
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:24 M. Edwards et al.
clustering algorithm and gradually refined feature sets. While their method appears to
produce reliable clusters, a validated dataset would be useful for verification purposes.
De Vel et al. [2001] make use of both structural and linguistic features and an
SVM classifier. They validate their approach on a collection of emails to particular
newsgroups, finding high accuracy in most cases. They additionally investigate the
use of word collocation and the dimensionality of function words in a bid to improve
classification accuracy. However, this does not improve performance.
Zheng et al. [2003] compare decision trees, neural networks and support vector ma-
chines on a corpus drawn from English email messages and both English and Chinese
BBS postings. The best results are for SVM classification of the English newsgroup
postings, with neural network performance lagging slightly behind. They note a drop
in performance in their Chinese dataset, which they ascribe to fewer style features
for that language. A follow-up paper [Zheng et al. 2005] makes use of an extended
set of features and the same set of classifiers, again finding that the SVM classifier
outperforms the C4.5 decision trees and the neural network.
Corney [2003] also covers the reduction of authorship attribution to a pattern of
certain writing features, applying this approach with an SVM classifier to public-
domain books, theses, and the author’s own email collection, with good results in each
case. The results show that function words appear to make the best features.
Teng et al. [2004] suggest the use of an SVM classifier for authorship attribution on
emails, explaining the operation of the classifier and listing some structural features of
email which might be useful, but providing no evaluation. Given the prior existence of
work such as De Vel et al. [2001], this would appear to be of at best explanatory value.
Stamatatos [2006] explores authorship attribution via an ensemble of SVM classifiers
and a feature set subspacing approach. Exhaustive disjoint subspacing is compared
with the k-random classifiers method of ensemble construction, finding that the former
outperforms the latter and also outperforms an SVM classifier when small subset sizes
are chosen.
Stamatatos [2008] covers the class imbalance problem in authorship attribution,
where the volume of available training text for some candidate authors is extremely
low. A new method for handling imbalanced datasets through variable-length sampling
of training data is presented. The method is compared against a resampling variant to
the existing under- and oversampling methods, making use of both English and Arabic
datasets. The results show that the method resulting in the best net improvement to
the accuracy of an SVM classifier trained on the resulting training set is the random
resampling of text from the available training data.
Abbasi and Chen [2008] provide a useful review of the state-of-the-art and go on to
demonstrate a classification method which makes use of individual author-level feature
subsets from a large feature space. They compare this method to an SVM classifier with
a feature set drawn from previous literature and to an ensemble of SVM classifiers with
an extended feature set, using a range of online text forms (the Enron email dataset,
eBay comments, posts from an online forum and chat logs). Their system outperform
both competitive methods on the email, comment, and chat datasets, but not on the
forum messages, for which the ensemble of SVM classifiers performed best. Alongside
the identification experiment, they also distinguish the task of detecting similarity,
and perform a similar evaluation for that purpose, finding their method outperforms
the competitive baseline methods.
Dardick et al. [2007] focus particularly on blogs, covering the ethical debate over
why bloggers may legitimately seek anonymity, and why law enforcement may wish
to circumvent this barrier of anonymity. The paper covers technical approaches to
stylometry only briefly and at a high level. Dreier [2009] explores the same topic
with more technical detail, creating a baseline model of authors based on frequency of
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:25
characters and words, and using individual deviation from this baseline as the features
for classification. Both Naive Bayes and SVM classifiers are evaluated, finding low
average accuracy across all authors, but that certain authors were extremely well
predicted.
Ma et al. [2008, 2009a] focus on applying authorship attribution to Chinese online
texts. The first paper focuses on authorship attribution in email, covering issues such
as the lack of explicit word boundaries in Chinese text and the selection of sequential
patterns from texts, passing these patterns to an SVM classifier. In their evaluation,
they provided 30 training examples for three authors, and had 20 further emails classi-
fied as belonging to one of these three authors, with a classification rate of 90%. In the
second paper, the authors also apply their classifier to blog and BBS messages, drawing
a comparison between three classifiers, one of which uses linguistic features, another
which uses structural features, and one which uses both. They find that the classifier
using the combined feature set outperformed the others, though they all performed at
above 65% accuracy. They also examine the effect of varying the number of authors to
classify texts, finding that larger numbers of authors caused accuracy to drop.
Iqbal et al. [2008, 2010, 2013] and Iqbal [2011] all address authorship attribution
through frequent pattern mining. The first of the publications focuses on the notion
of frequent patterns as a means of ensuring the forensic worth of authorship attri-
bution techniques, objecting to the lack of intuitive explanation in an SVM classifier.
They use a combination of lexical, syntactic, structural, and content-specific features
in their method, detecting frequent writing patterns in an author’s text and filtering
out frequent patterns which are common to a large number of authors. They validate
the viability of their method in an evaluation of the Enron email dataset. In the second
publication, the authors use standard clustering algorithms to group texts together
as a prerequisite to mining frequent patterns for author identification. They examine
the accuracy of the resulting output as a means of evaluating which clustering mech-
anism is best suited to the task, again using the Enron email dataset as a source.
The third publication presents frequent-pattern writeprints as a ‘unified’ solution to
authorship analysis. The authors describe use cases involving small and large training
samples, and also extend their system to discovering characteristics of an author. The
evaluations on the Enron email dataset are repeated; alongside these results, a trial
of the characterisation application is carried out. The results show that, for gender
prediction, the approach performs slightly better than random assignment; for loca-
tion prediction, with three classes, it again performs with accuracy slightly above that
which one would expect for random assignment. Finally, Iqbal [2011] combines this
research into one paper, providing greater detail on the difference in approach between
two versions of the classifier, with extensions covering somewhat separate problems of
extracting cliques and topics from chat logs.
Orebaugh [2006] and Orebaugh and Allnutt [2009, 2010] cover authorship analysis
on instant-messaging communications. Orebaugh [2006] focuses on examining char-
acter frequency as a stylometric feature, examining the frequencies of characters in a
small four-author dataset and testing for whether frequency of characters is distinct.
The results show that uppercase characters, numbers, and special characters are dis-
tinguishing and may be used as a form of intrusion detection system. Orebaugh and
Allnutt [2009] analyse what appears to be the same dataset, but with an extended
range of features, including sentence structure and predefined sets of special charac-
ters. They apply three classifiers – the J48 decision tree, the IBk nearest-neighbour
classifier, and a Naive Bayesian classifier – to these features, and find a high accuracy
in each case, though given the sample size, this would not be unexpected. They analyse
the distinguishing features and find that abbreviations are the best discriminators,
followed by the use of special characters. Orebaugh and Allnut [2010] expand their
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:26 M. Edwards et al.
evaluation to include two larger datasets, examining the useful features for accurate
classification in each system, and using different classifiers. They find high accuracy
with an SVM classifier trained on a range of 356 features, including lexical and syn-
tactic features as well as the previously used structural and frequency attributes. On
a dataset of 105 authors, they achieve 84.44% accuracy.
Layton et al. [2010] cover a particularly constrained form of authorship attribution
which is particular to online discourse – attribution of Tweets to their authors. They
detail the structural properties of Tweets and present a preliminary analysis of the
viability of attribution using Tweets. They find classification accuracy of approximately
60% for 20 training examples, and highlight that adding training Tweets increased
accuracy up to 120 examples, after which increases appear not to be significant.
Chen et al. [2011] apply a frequent-pattern mining approach on the Enron email
dataset. Writeprints, consisting of numeric representations of the relative frequency of
stylistic features extracted from an author’s text, are constructed and then compared
in order to determine whether authors are similar enough to be the same. They com-
pare SVM, PCA, K-NN, DT, and K-means approaches, finding SVM to have superior
classification accuracy.
Khan [2012] uses a bag-of-words model of email bodies and applies a Naive Bayes
ensemble method to attribute emails drawn from the Enron email corpus. The method
achieves a respectable classification accuracy, outperforming previous work on the
same dataset, but it does perform best when given messages over 100 words, which
slightly limits application to online texts.
Pearl and Steyvers [2012] cover the detection of ‘authorship deception’, which in-
cludes both a normal attribution use case and an imitation attack whereby authors
attempt to imitate the writing style of a victim. Their method involves building a
writeprint of stylometric and content features, and applying logistic regression as a
classifier. Evaluation on a blog dataset shows good performance in the classic attribu-
tion case, and a small evaluation of the imitation case shows highly positive results.
Liu et al. [2012] attempt to address issues with the difficulty of writeprint comparison
through a novel semirandom subspace method, which also aims to overcome redun-
dancy in feature sets. A detailed description and theoretical analysis of the method
is provided, followed by an empirical evaluation on a subset of a large English cor-
pus, displaying accuracy results with regard to both the number of authors and the
number of texts available per author. In all cases, they compare their method to other
well-performing classifier ensembles, with a positive result.
Given that the aims and methodologies of many authorship attribution papers tar-
geting identification are comparable, results and methods from various studies may
be contrasted with each other. Table III gives an overview of some of the best results
from each paper, noting the dataset and number of classes being attempted. Important
additional information including length of texts used, texts per author, and features
used in classification are all left to the original texts. Items are sorted chronologically.
3.5.2. Authorship Attribution and Cybercrime. Gray et al. [1997] cover the application of
authorship analysis techniques to software source code, demonstrating how the means
of expression can vary even when programmers are solving the same problem. Their
motivation is the attribution of malicious code, just as in natural language analyses
the application is attribution of malicious or incriminating messages. They identify a
number of features which could be useful for authorship attribution, and present two
short case studies of events in which malicious code has been examined for attribution
to its owner.
A number of other papers focusing on online identification of authors cited cybercrime
in a general sense, but made no specific link to the domain as defined in this study,
hence have not been included in our analysis.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:27
Table III. Summary Comparison of Authorship Attribution Approaches
Source Classifier Dataset (#Messages) Authors Accuracy (%)
[De Vel et al. 2001] SVM Newsgroup (1,259) 4 -
[Corney 2003] SVM Email (253) 4 85.2
[Zheng et al. 2003] SVM Newsgroup (153) 9 96.08
[Zheng et al. 2003] SVM Email (70) 3 91.43
[Zheng et al. 2003] SVM BBS (70) 3 82.58
[Zheng et al. 2005] SVM Newsgroup (c.960) 20 97.69
[Zheng et al. 2005] SVM BBS (532) 20 88.33
[Stamatatos 2006] EDS Ensemble Web news (200) 10 99
[Iqbal et al. 2008] AuthorMiner Enron email (120) 6 90
[Iqbal et al. 2008] AuthorMiner Enron email (100) 10 90
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint Enron email 25 92
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint Enron email 50 90.4
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint Enron email 100 83.1
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Ensemble eBay comments 25 96
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint eBay comments 25 96
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint eBay comments 50 95.2
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint eBay comments 100 91.3
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] SVM Java forum 25 94
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] SVM Java forum 50 86.6
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Ensemble Java forum 100 53.5
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint CyberWatch chat 25 50.4
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint CyberWatch chat 50 42.6
[Abbasi and Chen 2008] Writeprint CyberWatch chat 100 31.7
[Ma et al. 2008] SVM Email (150) 3 90
[Ma et al. 2009a] SVM Blog (1,379) 7 89.49
[Ma et al. 2009a] SVM BBS (410) 5 73.97
[Ma et al. 2009a] SVM Email (95) 5 80.61
[Dreier 2009] SVM Blog (c44,000) 100 54.53
[Orebaugh and Allnutt 2009] NB IM (?) 4 99.29
[Orebaugh and Allnutt 2010] SVM IM (950) 19 88.42
[Orebaugh and Allnutt 2010] SVM CyberWatch chat (1,250) 25 84.44
[Layton et al. 2010] SCAP Tweets (100,000) 50 72.9
[Iqbal et al. 2010] EM Enron email (200) 5 80
[Iqbal et al. 2010] K-m Enron email (200) 5 88
[Iqbal et al. 2010] Bisecting K-m Enron email (200) 5 83
[Iqbal et al. 2013] AuthorMiner2 Enron email (160) 4 x ≈ 90
[Iqbal et al. 2013] AuthorMiner2 Enron email (800) 20 x ≈ 70
[Chen et al. 2011] SVM Enron email (750) 25 88.31
[Khan 2012] NB Enron email (6,109) 10 86.92
[Khan 2012] NB Enron email (5,799) 9 87.05
[Liu et al. 2012] PSemi-RS Text corpus (2,500) 50 77.04
3.5.3. Authorship Attribution and Terrorism and Extremism. Abbasi and Chen [2005] discuss
authorship attribution with particular application to the forum postings of extremist
organisations, with a focus on selecting an appropriate feature set for classifying Arabic
text. They describe a study using SVM and C4.5 classifiers, applied to both English text
from a Klu Klux Klan forum and Arabic text from posts associated with the Palestinian
Al-Aqsa Martyrs group. They find slightly better performance at classifying English
text authors than Arabic authors, and note that SVM significantly outperformed C4.5,
going on to dissect the important features in classification for both languages.
Author Profiling.
3.5.4. Author Profiling and Crimes Against Children. Author profiling is widely deployed
in the detection of sexual predators from chat transcripts. The typical classification
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:28 M. Edwards et al.
is between text written by a child and text written by an adult. Some problems arise
from attempting to parse net-speak with traditional linguistic tools, although there are
indications that use of such language can itself be a useful age-determining feature.
Pendar [2007] applies SVM and k-nearest-neighbour classifiers to binary classifica-
tion of predator and victim in chat logs from a vigilante website. They make use of word
n-grams, with minimal preprocessing, as their input to a feature extraction function.
They find their best classification rate (94.3%) comes from the k-NN classifier with a k
of 30 and 10,000 features, both inputs being the largest of various levels tried.
Tam [2009] details a method for distinguishing between teen and adult conversations,
with application to detecting sexual predators. Using a chat corpus, the author attempts
to distinguish between teens and chat users of different age brackets, using word and
character n-grams in a Naive Bayes classifier and then an SVM classifier, finding that
the SVM classifier outperformed Naive Bayes. Unsurprisingly, the most difficult-to-
distinguish age group were the authors in their 20s.
Kontostathis et al. [2009] compare a rule-based approach to log classification to a
human analysis. They describe how a new iteration in a rule-based analysis of chat
logs differs from a previous version of the tool in more appropriately identifying combi-
nations of keywords in chat lines. The intercoder reliability between their new tool and
human analysis is reported as much improved. A follow-up work by the same authors
[Kontostathis et al. 2010] surveys the literature regarding both sexual predation and
cyberbullying, and as such covers some work on profiling sexual predators.
Michalopoulos and Mavridis [2011] focus on detecting a grooming author by clas-
sifying messages into one of three attack categories and then combining classifica-
tion probabilities. They perform a comparative evaluation with a number of different
classification algorithms, finding SVM to perform poorly next to k-NN, Naive Bayes,
Maximum Entropy, and Expectation Maximisation. They consider their Naive Bayes
approach the most suitable.
Peersman et al. [2011] aims at predicting both age and gender of chat authors,
with application to checking the truthfulness of reported profiles on social media sites.
Working with a corpus drawn from a Belgian social network, they discuss several issues
particular to online chat corpora, including shortness of texts and the variability of
Dutch net-speak. They avoid issues of stemming and more involved linguistic analysis
by utilising word and character n-grams. They find that word unigrams are the features
best used for distinguishing between age and sex categories, achieving good accuracy
in both cases.
The work of Inches and Crestani [2011] is notable in covering both author characteri-
sation and topic detection, addressing general text-based surveillance. They describe a
short characterisation experiment wherein Twitter users who are informative for a par-
ticular topic are identified, using a broad feature set and the expectation maximisation
clustering algorithm.
Bogdanova et al. [2012a, 2012b] focus on two different subproblems in the identifi-
cation of sexual predators. The first draws on the concept of fixated discourse – that
predators will return to the subject of sex throughout grooming conversations. The
authors apply a sentiment similarity measure to lexical chains identified from text.
They hypothesise that long lexical chains related to sex are indicative of authors being
sexual predators. They find some evidence for this in a comparison of the length of
sex-fixated lexical chains in both a sexual predator corpus and a cybersex corpus. The
second publication turns to the use of sentiment and emotion features in conversations
involving sexual predators. The authors identify from related work that several sen-
timent features are linked to sexual predation, and construct a feature set based on
sentiment markers. This feature set is compared to a number of simple character and
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:29
Table IV. Summary Comparison of Author Profiling Approaches Applied to Crimes Against Children
Source Classifier Dataset (#Documents) Task Accuracy (%)
[Pendar 2007] SVM PervertedJustice (1,402) Victim/predator 90.8
[Pendar 2007] k-NN PervertedJustice (1,402) Victim/predator 94.3
[Tam 2009] SVM Lin2006 (2,161) Author age 78.6
[Tam 2009] NB Lin2006 (2,161) Author age 69.8
[Peersman et al. 2011] SVM Netlog (1,537,283) Author age 66.3
[Villatoro-Tello et al. 2012] SVM+NN PervertedJustice Victim/predator 93.5
word-based feature sets in a Naive Bayes classifier running over a corpus of chat logs
from a vigilante website combined with ordinary cybersex logs.
Inches and Crestani [2012] cover the 2012 International Sexual Predator Identifica-
tion Competition, detailing a common evaluation framework against which 16 methods
for identification of sexual predators could be evaluated in a comparable manner. The
competitors were provided with a sample of 30% of a synthetic dataset constructed
from a vigilante site and publiclyavailable IRC logs, and evaluated based on the F-
score of their method’s performance on the remainder of the set. The paper provides an
overview of participants’ approaches as well as their results. A more detailed account of
the method used by the winning competitor [Villatoro-Tello et al. 2012] is also included
in our review, as are the methods used by two other competitors [Morris and Hirst
2012; Peersman et al. 2012] who were placed 4th and 6th, respectively. A master’s the-
sis [Morris 2013] by the author of the 4th-ranked paper provides additional detail on
their method’s unsuccessful behavioural analysis addition to an SVM classifier using
unigram and bigram features.
Some of the approaches taken in author profiling in this domain can be broadly
compared to each other, thus we provide a summary comparison in Table IV. The two
types of task attempted are distinguishing predators from their textual contributions
and determining the age of authors as part of such a system. Note that many important
details on the precise features and processes used in classification are best explained in
the original publications. Note also that the figures given for author-age classification
are figures focused on general child-versus-adult classification, and the results for
more specific age groups vary from this figure within publications – the general effect
being that older adults are easier to distinguish from teens and children. Additional
comparable approaches can be seen in the results reported by Inches and Crestani
[2012], our figure for Villatoro-Tello et al. [2012] being their (the topmost-ranked)
performance on that evaluation.
3.5.5. Author Profiling in Terrorism and Extremism. Gawron et al. [2012] use a vocabulary
of group membership markers to rank documents by the degree of militancy of the
author, with the aim of building more efficient search tools for such material. Working
with a corpus of white extremist websites, they find that these hand-selected features,
when weighted by TF-IDF, correlate more closely with human rankings of militancy
than full feature sets or feature sets selected from those words with the highest mutual
information. They also outperform a variant using weights based on a cosine similarity
measure. They also find that an SVM using TF-IDF and the full vocabulary performs
best at classifying texts as militant.
3.5.6. Author Profiling in Threats and Harassment. Chen et al. [2012] aim to profile users
who are likely to send out abusive messages. They do this through a combination of
lexical and syntactic features and independent sentence offensiveness measures which
draw upon a form of sentiment analysis. They distinguish the degree to which profanity
determines offensiveness and produce some tailored rules for identifying name-calling.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:30 M. Edwards et al.
Their evaluation against manual markup of 249 YouTube users’ comments shows high
abusiveness classification accuracy.
3.5.7. Other Author Profiling Applications. Pham et al. [2009] do not make specific reference
to a particular type of crime beyond a generic formulation of ‘cybercrime’, but undertake
a range of author profiling, ambitiously attempting to derive not only age and gender
information, but also the occupation of the author. They gather a corpus of well-used
Vietnamese blogs, and run a large number of classifiers in a comparative evaluation
for each classification task. They find, for the most part, that an IBk decision-tree
algorithm is best performing, with the exception of the occupation classification, which
is best served by a random forests classifier.
Sentiment Analysis.
3.5.8. Sentiment Analysis and Terrorism and Extremism. Abbasi [2007] and Abbasi et al.
[2008] explore sentiment analysis on US and Middle Eastern web forum postings.
Abbasi [2007] focuses on the detection of emotions or affects in web-based discourse.
The author manually constructs a lexicon mapping terms to a score of intensity in
a particular category of sentiment and proceeds to a case study comparing the US
and Middle Eastern extremist groups based on the intensity of the hate and violence
intensity of their postings, finding a linear relationship in both cases and a strong one
in the case of the Middle Eastern groups. Abbasi et al. [2008] move towards automated
sentiment classification of English and Arabic content. They use a range of stylistic
and syntactic features and make use of a genetic algorithm to aid in feature selection.
SVM classification using this system performed well at classification on a benchmark
movie review dataset and on manually tagged English and Arabic forum postings.
Yang et al. [2011] study detection of radical opinions in web forum postings. They
particularly focus on detecting the features which are most relevant to such a specific
form of classification task, working with a full range of lexical, structural, syntactic
and content features. They validate their method on two US-based hate group fora,
and find that a choice of lexicon for context is highly important. Their experimentation
with a number of classifiers found SVM to outperform Naive Bayes and Adaboost.
Rohn and Erez [2012] provide a very high-level description of mining of online
information about agro-terrorism, providing no detailed implementation steps or
evaluation.
3.5.9. Sentiment Analysis and Threats and Harassment. Sentiment analysis has a particular
role to play in detecting threats and harassment in text due to its ability to detect the
tone of conversation. It has been applied with some success to posts in both online fora
and social media.
Sobkowicz and Sobkowicz [2010] study the dynamics of political discussions on Polish
Internet fora, drawing on them as a source of strongly bipolar exchanges. They perform
a topological assessment of the discussion network, and undertake a detailed analysis
of the nature of user interactions and thread popularity based on political affiliation of
participants. They note a connection to analyses of hate groups, and contradict existing
understanding of contrasting views leading to averaging of opinion.
Warner and Hirschberg [2012] focus on detecting hate speech on the web, discussing
issues with clearly defining hate speech—such as distinguishing reclamation or dis-
cussion of racial slurs from their offensive deployment. They perform a manual coding
of hate speech related to Jews, and compare an SVM classifier using a number of fea-
ture sets to this ground truth, finding acceptable classification accuracy on a unigram
feature set.
Ptaszynski et al. [2010] cover cyberbullying, detailing the design of a tool to help
assist parents and school personnel in spotting malicious online posts. Drawing on
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:31
a dataset of manually gathered cyberbullying instances, they perform a comparative
affect analysis to distinguish the degree of emotion associated with cyberbullying texts,
drawing on an existing affect analysis framework with emoticon support. They found
that there were not notably more emotive items in the positively labelled set, but that
there were significantly more vulgarities. Interestingly, they also found evidence of
sarcasm in their bullying dataset, with the category of ‘fondness’ ranking unexpectedly
high. Based on this analysis, they build a machine-learning system to be integrated
into a web crawler for classifying malicious posts.
Xu et al. [2012a] present social media as a valuable resource for facilitating academic
study of bullying, and highlight a number of key challenges for the NLP community
to overcome, using Twitter as a source for example data and a number of exploratory
analyses. Their detailed exploration of the topic is a broad starting point for researchers
to expand on.
Text Classification.
3.5.10. Text Classification in Crimes against Children. A number of publications focus on
estimating the volume of child-abuse media in filesharing networks, identifying files
which may contain child abuse based on their filenames. A critical component behind
many of these approaches is the collection of appropriate keywords to identify in file-
names, these terms being drawn from a specialised vocabulary used by sharers of this
media.
Steel [2009] focuses on evaluating the volume of child-abuse material on the Gnutella
network based on a keyword-based evaluation of filenames and search queries, also
investigating a number of common claims regarding characteristics of such material
on peer-to-peer networks. They find that just under 1% of queries and 1.45% of files
were related to child-abuse material.
Prichard et al. [2011] specifically attempt to identify the path to the use of child-
abuse material, presenting results drawn from a three-month study of the isoHunt
filesharing network’s top 300 search terms, where 3 of 162 terms were linked to child-
abuse material.
Panchenko et al. [2013] aim at building an automatic classifier for child-abuse ma-
terial based on filenames. As an early step, their SVM-based and logistic regression-
based classifiers are trained and evaluated on pornographic filenames as a proxy, with
promising initial results. Other work by the same authors [Panchenko et al. 2012]
presents more detail on the implementation of the filename normalisation and clas-
sification procedure, but no new results evaluating the viability of their classifier in
distinguishing child-abuse material filenames from adult pornography.
Fournier et al. [2014] perform a comparison of paedophile activity in KAD and eDon-
key, two distinct filesharing networks. Using an existing classification tool to label
queries, they find that eDonkey contained more child-abuse-related queries (0.25%)
than KAD (0.09%).
This collection of studies, though working on different networks, tend to arrive at
similar results regarding the extent of sharing of child-abuse material, with a small
but significant percentage of a number of filesharing platforms appearing to contain
child-abuse material.
Penna et al. [2010] focus on detecting predation – rather than predators – in chat
logs taken from online games such as World of Warcraft. Their method uses a keyword-
lookup system whereby suspicious messages are those which reveal personal infor-
mation. A small trial evaluation found that their system highlighted two synthetic
suspicious messages inserted into ordinary chat logs, though it would also appear that
a large false-positive rate is inherent to their approach.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:32 M. Edwards et al.
3.5.11. Text Classification in Terrorism and Extremism. Skillicorn [2004] focuses on detect-
ing related messages, using a form of term-frequency analysis to correlate and cluster
messages using certain unusual words. Their focus is on detecting groups, such as
terrorists, that are aware of being monitored by keyword systems and are thus un-
naturally altering their word usage. They demonstrate their approach on a synthetic
dataset. Stronger demonstration that the word usage behaviour expected exists in com-
munication traces would help validate the approach. Fong et al. [2008] similarly aim
to detect word substitutions in messages, a measure which might be adopted by those
seeking to avoid keyword-based surveillance. They draw upon a range of weak sentence
oddity indicators which, combined in a decision-tree classifier, achieve good classifica-
tion accuracy for sentences drawn from the Brown and Enron corpora, in which a noun
has been replaced with another noun with a similar frequency.
Skillicorn [2010] applies a number of word-usage models to posts on an English-
language forum, drawing on measures of radicalisation and deception to rank forum
posts and providing some analysis of the distribution of posts. The author finds that
highly radical posts are ranked low for deception, signalling sincerity.
3.5.12. Text Classification in Police Intelligence. Sun and Ng [2011] focus on the prevention
of drug abuse through monitoring social media. Their framework is designed to identify
the popularity of posts within specified topics. Specifically, they focus on the prediction
of comment arrival as a proxy for popularity, finding good results in an evaluation on
Twitter and the Hong Kong Discussion forum.
3.5.13. Text Classification in Threats and Harassment. Appavu alias Balamurugan and
Rajaram [2008], Appavu et al. [2009], Wang et al. [2006], Banday et al. [2011], and
Shekar and Imambi [2008] cover building classifiers to detect threatening emails, all
having been covered together under machine-learning applications to harassment as
covered earlier.
3.5.14. Text Classification in Cybercrime. Chang et al. [2012] appear to address cyber-
crime – though not clearly in the sense we use the term in this review – applying
Naive Bayes, C4.5, and SVM classifiers to the somewhat ambiguous question of decid-
ing whether or not texts are useful to cybercrime investigations. A trial on manually
coded case descriptions from a US Department of Justice website suggests that all
three classifiers have acceptable performance, with Naive Bayes the best performing.
3.5.15. Text Classification in Finance. Watters et al. [2011] focus on copyright infringe-
ment, sampling the BitTorrent network to gather information on the number of shared
files, assigning files individual categories, and then checking a random sample of file-
names manually to determine how many files appeared to contain copyright-infringing
material. They find that the vast majority of shared files contain infringing content.
Other NLP methods for general application. Wong and Xia [2008] deal with the normalisa-
tion of Chinese net-speak, a task which falls somewhere between automated spellcheck-
ing and automated translation. They delve into the issue of chat normalisation in some
depth, and construct a normalisation system based on a source-channel model and pho-
netic mapping. Their system performs well compared to the ordinary source-channel
model.
Kramer [2010] presents an anomaly detection framework for time-dependant
datasets, applying this to a collection of forum posts from the Dark Web Portal as
a trial application. The approach detects significant shifts in forum posting trends,
drawing out some of its potential applications.
Appavu et al. [2007] turn to an association rule-mining approach for detecting de-
ception, which uses a keyword-based feature selection trained on existing data to learn
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:33
rules for classification. A synthetic, unspecified dataset is used to generate a single
rule, which is reported, but its utility at classification is not reported.
Keila and Skillicorn [2005] cover deception detection from linguistic cues in the
Enron email dataset. There is a detailed explanation of the application of singular
value decomposition, but no in-depth analysis of the approach is provided.
Shukur et al. [2011] focus on NLP means of detecting deception in online chat soft-
ware, speculating that an ontology-driven approach may be best, though no implemen-
tation is carried out. The paper consists mostly of a discussion of possible approaches
and an outline of an ontology.
3.6. Other Methods
Additional publications using a variety of hard-to-categorise methods are described in
Supplementary Material C.
4. ANALYSIS
In this section, we summarise key information which can be inferred from the corpus
of publications included in our study.
4.1. Research Questions
The first questions which may be answered are the guiding research questions outlined
in Section 2.
4.1.1. What Are the Problems (Crimes, Investigative Requirements) being Addressed in
the Literature? As can be seen in Figure 1(a), a number of high-impact crimes such as
terrorism and the sexual predation of children are prominent topics, alongside more
broadly applicable aims such as identification of offenders using online data.
In addition, Figure 1(a) shows the most common problem topics over time. It can be
seen that topics such as the identification of Internet users and the investigation of
terrorism or extremism remain relatively stable (as a percentage of research output)
over time, while the attention to crimes against children appears to have increased
since around 2009.
The problem of online identification was most often associated with NLP approaches
to uncovering the author of a given written text, an aim relevant to legal debates about
incriminating texts such as emails or blog posts. The authorship attribution literature
connected to this aim appears to be rich and mature, with a number of comparable
studies. This topic is extended somewhat in combined NLP and ML work – sometimes
including computer vision techniques – which aims to cluster spam or phishing email
campaigns to identify common origins. Similar aims motivate more traditional IP-
lookup approaches. A very much distinct body of research by A. A. Mohamed and
R. V. Yampolskiy [2012a, 2012b] also addresses identification, their focus being on
approaches to identifying people via online avatars in virtual games.
Papers addressing extremist or terrorist problems almost uniformly apply them-
selves to investigating and monitoring online communities as part of information-
gathering efforts. Several studies look at the links between different sites and commu-
nities, while others look at means of identifying the most radical members of groups
where discussion is visible. The two key demographics targeted are groups linked to
jihadist terrorism and far-right extremist groups in the United States, suggesting a
US-centered publication bias. The predominant trend in the cybercrime publications
was also investigating and monitoring online communities, which suggests that there
may be a binding theme of investigating online criminal communities.
There are two main categories of crimes against children visible in the reviewed
publications. The first, and most common, is the detection of sexual predators engaged
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:34 M. Edwards et al.
Fig. 1. Problems, techniques, and data types over publication years.
in online conversation with children, the aim being to detect attempts at grooming
children for contact, a problem which draws heavily on NLP approaches by its nature.
The second is the detection of child-abuse material, which includes both CV attempts to
discern such content from images and videos and filename-based attempts to quantify
the volume of such content on a number of P2P filesharing networks.
Financial crime publications either address copyright infringement on P2P networks
or the detection of fraud, usually from auction sites. Intelligence tools are most often
concerned with either mining criminal social networks from open sources or providing
alerts about potential criminal activity, often with respect to certain geographic or
temporal limits.
Those papers whose focus was least obviously a criminal matter often made reference
to pornography, which may be indicative of different legal frameworks and cultural
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:35
backgrounds. Such results in this review might be considered to address parental
control systems rather than strictly handle criminal content.
It is worth noting that ‘terrorism’ and ‘cybercrime’ were both often used as general
motivations, not necessarily specific to the paper’s focus, with 74 papers containing a
reference to ‘terrorism’ and 50 papers referencing ‘cybercrime’ compared to 47 and 12
papers actually labelled as addressing these topics.
4.1.2. What are the Methods which are being Employed to Provide Solutions? NLP is
highly dominant in our results, with around half of all collected papers making some
use of NLP techniques in some way. The presentation in Figure 1(b) breaks down
this category along closer lines. The heavily textual nature of most electronic commu-
nications makes this a somewhat unsurprising result. Machine-learning techniques
are also well represented, with common classifiers like SVMs and Naive Bayes being
applied to a variety of problems.
There are 21 papers in the review (10.2% of the corpus) which make some use of
computer-vision or image-processing techniques. The low proportion of such papers
may be linked to the choice of search terms in the discovery phase of the review—there
was no CV-linked term included, but there were NLP and SNA terms. Of these 21, 16
papers made use of only CV techniques. As is to be expected, most of the data sources
used in this area were forms of image and video, with only a couple of exceptions in
which web and email data was processed visually.
Twenty-two papers in the review (10.7%) made use of some form of SNA. This number
appears relatively low given a search term specifically selected for these methods, per-
haps indicating a research area which requires further exploration. Of these 22 papers,
13 were labelled as using only SNA methods, the others overlapping with techniques
from the domains of information extraction and natural language processing. The data
used in these papers were primarily web data, including blogs and fora, but email data
also formed a sizeable proportion of the study.
Thirty-nine papers in the review (18.9%) focused on helping combat crime by mining
information from public resources. Of these 39, 24 were labelled as solely oriented
towards information extraction, while the remainder also used methods involving NLP
and SNA. The vast majority of information extraction studies made use of web-based
data, including online fora and social networking services such as Twitter.
There are 43 papers (20.9%) which make use of machine-learning techniques, only
20 of which make exclusive use of such techniques. Of the other 23, 18 use some
form of NLP technique, indicating a significant overlap between those papers labelled
as using machine learning and those labelled as using NLP. Such a relationship is
retrospectively unsurprising given the close relationship between these fields. The
43 papers were fairly evenly divided with respect to the data types studied, with email
and web data each featured in nearly half of all studies. Four studies handled chat data
and two studies—one overlapping with CV techniques—made use of image data.
Ninety-two studies from the review (44.7% of the total) used some form of NLP,
making this by far the largest category of methods. Of these 92, 65 used only NLP
techniques, making this also the category with least overlap with other methods (closely
followed by the much smaller group of computer vision). The large number of NLP-
related studies collected may be linked to the inclusion of two terms in the search
procedure which link to NLP.
There were 27 papers which did not fit within any of the broader technique categories.
Chat data and network trace data were more prominent amongst these papers than in
the main categories. Often, these papers described frameworks or abstract processes
for combating a threat.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:36 M. Edwards et al.
4.1.3. Which Online Data Sources are being Used? A breakdown of the different broad
categories of data is provided in Figure 1(c). Most commonly examined was web data,
with nearly half of all publications making some use of textual or semistructured web
data. Within this category, simple web pages are most favoured, with social media –
particularly Twitter – second and online fora third most popular. Behind web data
comes the other significant data source, email, which has the advantage of being both
long established and well used. Chat data from instant-messaging applications forms
the third key data type under analysis, with comparatively few papers making use of
images or videos.
With regard to specific data sources, a few common elements were observed across
papers.
—The Enron email dataset is a dataset of roughly half a million email messages
from roughly 150 users. It was originally made public as a result of Federal Energy
Regulation Commission’s investigation into the Enron corporation. A full explanation
of the dataset is provided by Klimt and Yang [2004]. As a labelled dataset of authors
and a large volume of messages produced by them, this corpus was often a standard
reference for studies attempting authorship attribution, but also used in some studies
based on SNA. A total of 22 papers make reference to the Enron dataset.
—PervertedJustice3 is a vigilante website where volunteers run sting operations by
posing as minors and luring paedophiles into volunteering identifying and incrimi-
nating information. They publish a large and growing corpus of chat logs involving
attempted grooming, which have been used frequently in studies attempting to iden-
tify sexual predators or analyse stages of grooming attacks. The common use of this
resource points to a common issue for researchers working on such topics – the lack
of actual case data to work with means that researchers must work with proxy data.
The degree to which predator–volunteer conversations accurately reflect predator–
child conversations is unclear, in part also due to this lack of real case data to verify
results. Fifteen papers make reference to this resource.
—The Dark Web Forum Portal is a search and summarisation interface to a col-
lection of 28 fora which are linked to extremist or terrorist material. As a standard
collection of online fora, it is of particular interest to researchers studying the organ-
isation of terrorism online. Eleven papers make reference to this resource.
4.1.4. How many Studies are Making use of Multiple Data Sources? Relatively few
papers (21, 10.2% of the total) combine different types of data or present methods
which would apply to different types of data. Among those which did, the approach was
typically either general monitoring of all network traffic, such as in ECHELON and
similar wiretapping, or the use of NLP methods which could apply to online texts of
many kinds. Slightly more papers (24, 11.7%) were marked as ‘partial’ responses for
this question, due to using a variety of data sources of the same type – for instance,
using both English and Arabic text corpora to evaluate a hypothesis.
While in many cases, a paper’s contribution will be limited to one particular subject
area, thus would not be expected to apply to distinct data types, this result hints that
more effort at synthesis of otherwise distinct forms of online data could well prove to
be a fruitful area of research.
4.1.5. How many Studies Validate their Contribution’s Utility to Law Enforcement Practi-
tioners? Very few (10, 4.9%) papers reported a positive evaluation of their tool’s utility
by a law-enforcement practitioner or similar expert authority. It was possible to infer
from the means of evaluation or similar references that a further (14, 6.8%) of papers
3perverted-justice.com.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:37
were written with co-operation of law enforcement, implicitly crediting the work with
some level of practitioner support.
These figures do not necessarily reflect the true rate of interaction between re-
searchers and practitioners, and it is possible that trials with law enforcement are
only conducted after successful publication, or that law enforcement use of tools is
not widely publicised in the name of reducing criminal awareness. Even with such
qualifying scenarios in mind, it seems problematic that papers specifically reporting
themselves as supporting law-enforcement and intelligence applications so rarely re-
port on evaluations by the relevant professionals.
5. DISCUSSION
This article has presented the results of a large and systematic survey of the com-
puter science literature which relates to data-mining methods and tools used in a
law-enforcement scenario.
Online criminality is often linked to the relative anonymity of electronic interac-
tion. In response to this, the reviewed computer-science literature, particularly NLP,
reveals a mature field of authorship analysis for online texts, with many rigorously
evaluated methods for determining the author of a given text building on and referenc-
ing each other, with feature sets and reference corpora being shared between papers.
Consideration has been given to the standards of evidence required for legal use. Other
approaches to identification of online individuals for criminal matters show similar
levels of evaluation.
The detection of sexual predators in online chat transcripts shows similar levels of
interest, with multiple studies applying a range of methods to the same goal, and even
a number of publications recording a specific competition, with methods using the exact
same dataset so as best to be compared. It is notable, however, that the most common
data source for these publications was a form of proxy data – the Perverted Justice
website’s transcripts between people outside of law-enforcement agencies and sexual
predators. This seems to indicate that a willing research community is having to work
around legal or other restrictions on gaining access to actual criminal chat data.
Similar legal obstacles seem to be faced by researchers attempting to develop means
to automatically detect child-abuse media – many forced to use less-helpful forms of
proxy data such as adult pornography – and even studies merely attempting to quantify
the presence of child-abuse media, in which filename-only approaches are dominant.
Publications investigating terrorism or extremism also have access to a common
data source in the form of the Dark Web Forum Portal, though it appears to be less
uniformly drawn upon. With this topic, widely mentioned even in publications not
directly addressing it, scarcity of ground truth information about real-world threats
appears to have diverted many efforts in the open literature into exploration of the
networking and rhetorical properties of self-identified online extremist communities.
As is revealed in the breakdown of the quality analysis in Appendix A, a significant
proportion of publications reviewed had deficiencies in evaluation and a quarter of pub-
lications had no evaluation. While in a minority of cases this may be because the paper
proceeds via theoretical proof, or because the format of the publication does not allow
sufficient space, in others poor adherence to scientific standards are evident. Espe-
cially when designing methods for use in law enforcement or intelligence deployments,
in which lives may directly be ruined by underperforming analysis tools, researchers
must be focused on the best way to identify objective truth regarding their methods.
In some cases, with papers relying on SNA or information extraction methods, and
particularly when the method designed was semiautomated or involved visualisation,
evaluation sections presented only demonstrative case studies as support for their
tool or method’s utility, which is sufficient only for exploratory presentations. If the
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:38 M. Edwards et al.
contribution is increased performance of the analyst interfacing with the software,
sufficiently defensible user trials must be presented. The same might be said for tools
which aim to help an analyst seek resources on the web.
In other cases, laboratory evaluations of classifiers were presented, but insufficiently
comparable to the real-world deployment scenarios. With the exception of copyright
infringement, most fields of study in this review hold an inherent class imbalance
problem: there are far fewer traces of criminals in the online world than there are
traces of innocent netizens, and classifiers operating on a general population must thus
overcome the likelihood of high rates of false alerts. Synthetic, but unrealistic, datasets
may demonstrate a classifier’s theoretical ability, but evaluations should always be
linked to actual deployment scenarios.
A small number of long-term projects and toolsets were referenced in multiple pa-
pers gathered by this review. In some cases, these publications report on significant
incremental improvements on developed approaches, with fresh evaluations (e.g., Bali
[2007] and Mohamed and Yampolskiy [2012a, 2012b]). In more modular systems, such
as the Email Mining Toolkit, the discussion is limited to brief description of individ-
ual components of a larger toolset (e.g., Stolfo et al. [2006a] and Stolfo and Hershkop
[2005]). The lack of detail makes it difficult to ascertain the strengths and weaknesses
of such extensions with respect to each other as well as other comparable approaches.
Further work and more detailed evaluations are needed to fully understand the effec-
tiveness of such extensions.
Impacting and underlying this study’s results is the rapid pace of development in
online media. While certain technologies such as email have remained fundamentally
consistent over the years, the same cannot be said for all online activity which draws
law-enforcement attention. Individual games and social networking platforms can be-
come popular, draw law-enforcement attention, and then become unpopular even as
researchers devise the appropriate tools to analyse this content—some of the data
sources in reviewed papers are from what might now be thought of as essentially dead
communities. Certain methods, such as analysis of written text, can be generalised
across a number of platforms and data sources, and are as such especially valuable.
The current volume of papers making use of multiple data sources is low, with infor-
mation extraction studies being the most likely to attempt this. The community should
put greater focus on tools which generalise to different applications. Many methods
may already be transferable, but studies attempting to replicate the performance of
a method on a new type of data are very rare. The cross-examination of different
datasets might also help standards of evaluation for researchers working in areas in
which accurate ground truth is not readily available.
A number of papers on textual analysis and information extraction subjects demon-
strate that their methods work with multiple languages, the most common being
English and Arabic. English being dominant globally, online and in science, makes
it a clear target for analysis, whereas Arabic is clearly targeted by law-enforcement
and intelligence interest in counter-terrorism applications. The linguistic challenges
behind textual analysis should not be forgotten or assumed solved when dealing with
less-analysed tongues, but law enforcement should be aware that such technology ex-
ists outside of what is collected in this review, even if it does not advertise itself as
applicable to law enforcement.
Finally, the extremely low overall level of engagement with actual law-enforcement
bodies or domain experts appears problematic for a corpus of papers specifically se-
lected for referencing their intended deployment with law enforcement. This is not
necessarily a problem which may be overcome by the research community alone, but
attempts should be made to involve relevant professionals in the evaluation of tools
being designed for their use.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:39
5.1. Further Work
Replication of this work could prove useful to the community, first in the ordinary sense
of validating this study’s results and conclusions and helping shape the method, and
second in identifying ongoing trends in publication which follow from the end of this
corpus. The area of crime informatics appears to be expanding rapidly. A significant
volume of new contributions should be expected over the coming years, which will no
doubt alter the picture presented in this paper’s results. For instance, studies making
use of real case data from law enforcement and live evaluations in law-enforcement
settings (e.g., Hurley et al. [2013], Rashid et al. [2013], and Peersman et al. [2014]) and
use of data from fora exclusively used by criminals (e.g., Afroz et al. [2014]) have started
to appear. It would be interesting to study whether this trend continues and whether
the research community can build shared real-world data sources for both evaluating
the tools and techniques and for pursuing a research agenda on multisource data
synthesis for law-enforcement applications.
Additionally, this study could be used as a basis for deeper systematic exploration
of the literature regarding a particular subgroup of topics or techniques identified in
our results. Researchers with domain knowledge in a particular area may wish to
expand our results through refined keyword selection or deeper following of references
in already-identified work.
5.2. Bibliography and Supplementary Material
Some additional analysis of this dataset – including the results of a quality analysis,
reviews for literature which was not easily classified, a guidance table for reading
the results by problem topic, and a description of some publication patterns – were
excluded from this document due to space considerations. They are made available as
supplementary electronic material.
APPENDIX
A. QUALITY ANALYSIS
The quality analysis outlined in Section 2.2 indicated high variation in the quality
of papers, with an average overall score of 2.15, and a large standard deviation of
0.95. This agrees with reviewer impressions of the highly differing quality of reviewed
publications.
While most studies (85%) outlined their proposed method with appropriate detail
(those which did not nearly always being short position papers) and nearly three-
quarters of all included papers described some form of evaluation, 47% of the studies
included appeared to use neither an appropriate statistical evaluation nor domain
experts in their evaluation. Though it should be acknowledged that this figure includes
many studies for which neither was appropriate, having such a large proportion of
studies lack rigorous evaluation is problematic.
As shown in Table V, individual problem topics differed from the mean, though
few in a manner which can be shown to be statistically significant, due in part to
Table V. Quality Analysis Results by Problem Topic
Topic Average Quality Score SD
Harassment 2.54 0.75
Identification 2.35 0.84
Children 2.24 1.02
Finance 2.21 0.94
Extremism 2.1 0.94
Intelligence 1.91 0.92
Cybercrime 1.5 1.04
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:40 M. Edwards et al.
Table VI. Quality Analysis Results by Field of Technique
Topic Average Quality Score SD
NLP:AP 2.74 0.84
NLP:AA 2.6 0.75
ML 2.52 0.74
NLP:SA 2.46 0.9
NLP 2.4 0.82
NLP:TC 2.37 0.63
CV 2.05 0.8
IE 1.88 0.94
NLP:O 1.69 1.07
SNA 1.55 0.71
the high variance in scores. We can see that, within this review, studies promoting
general intelligence toolkits, tackling cybercrime, and addressing extremism were on
average of lower quality, and that studies exploring harassment and cyberbullying or
attempting to identify individuals were on average of higher quality, but it would be
dangerous to infer much from such summary measures given the continually high
deviation.
Table VI shows a similar breakdown for the different fields of technique. It appears
that NLP and machine-learning studies have generally higher-than-average quality
scores. In the case of NLP subfields such as Author Profiling and Authorship Analysis,
there are enough studies that these deviations can be considered significant at the
5% level. The fields of SNA and Information Extraction appear to suffer from a lack of
means for concrete evaluation of the performance of their methods on criminal datasets,
appearing with below-average scores for paper quality.
B. PUBLICATION PATTERNS
B.0.1. Temporal. Analysis of the publications over time shows a clear bias for the past
decade, the oldest paper with a known publication date being from 1997. Our queries
of academic databases were only limited in date to include publications from 1970
onwards, thus this would appear to be representative of publication trends. It would
also appear that this area of research has been expanding rapidly over the past decade.
B.0.2. Venues. The venue which produced the most papers included in this review is
the Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI) conference, with 15 publications, closely
followed by the Journal of Digital Investigation with 8 publications. Following these
two were three venues with four publications apiece: the Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, the proceedings of the International
Conference on Digital Government Research, and the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on
Intelligence and Security Informatics.
B.0.3. Authors. Of the 473 individual authors, 103 contributed to more than one paper,
35 contributed to more than two papers and 19 contributed to more than three papers
included in our review—these authors are noted in Table VII. The author appearing on
the most papers was Hsinchun Chen, of the University of Arizona, with contributions
to 16 papers, most of which dealt with web and web forum mining for the monitoring
of violent extremists. His co-author Edna Reid also makes the list as the second most
represented author in our review.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:41
Table VII. Authors with Contributions to More Than
3 Papers Included in the Review
Author Number of Papers
Chen, Hsinchun 16
Reid, Edna 7
Iqbal, Farkhund 6
Qin, Jialun 6
Zhou, Yilu 6
Debbabi, Mourad 5
Fung, Benjamin C. M. 5
Skillicorn, D. B. 5
Watters, Paul A. 5
Yampolskiy, Roman V. 5
Abbasi, Ahmed 4
Appavu, S. 4
Edwards, Lynne 4
Kontostathis, April 4
Lai, Guanpi 4
Ma, Jianbin 4
Rajaram, R. 4
Teng, Guifa 4
Yearwood, John L. 4
C. OTHER METHODS
C.1. Other Identification Methods
Dickson [2006a, 2006b] examines the operation of common online chat protocols and
programs to provide aid to online investigations. The focus of these papers leans to-
wards forensics, providing specific details of default directories and operations in which
evidence such as logs and ‘buddy lists’ may be found. Some details could also be rel-
evant to off-the-wire capture and analysis. The work of Van Dongen [2007] is similar
in nature, appearing to primarily act as an update in that it examined Windows Live
Messenger 8.0 rather than MSN Messenger 7.5.
Prusty et al. [2011] describe a vulnerability in the OneSwarm P2P filesharing net-
work which allows law enforcement to identify the source of shared content, with
reference to the sharing of child-exploitation material on that network, but also with
reference to private investigation for copyright infringement. Their attacks require
substantial investment from law enforcement, with a requirement to compromise 25%
of the network.
Stolfo and Hershkop [2005] outline the general framework of the Email Mining
Toolkit (EMT). While the EMT has several intelligent modules detailed in other work
within this review, this particular paper includes only the highest-level overview of
such functionality, and includes no evaluation in itself.
Lalla [2011] proposes a forensic methodology for handling email data, including
consideration of data-mining and classification stages while preserving the legal ad-
missibility of evidence.
C.2. Other Studies on Cybercrime
Morris et al. [2011] cover the prediction of cyberthreats for businesses, describing a
framework which would draw information from a dynamic collection of blogs, social
media, and web news articles using an ontology-driven model. No evaluation of the
benefits of this approach is provided, with performance tests noted as future work.
Roussinov and Robles-Flores [2007] delve into the field of detecting malevolent con-
tent as an application of information retrieval, comparing keyword searches with
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:42 M. Edwards et al.
question-answering technology. They argue that answers to specific questions are more
likely to be of an illegal nature than the results of a keyword-based search. They base
their argument in favour of question-answering technology on both a comparison of
standard algorithms and a well-described blinded empirical study with a small num-
ber of volunteers.
Thorat and Manore [2010] describe a mass-monitoring system to be deployed on
an organisational network explicitly storing a large amount of user information. This
includes a scanned copy of the users’ identification documents alongside web-browsing
information, along with an indicator of the sensitivity of their activities, a measure
whose derivation is not specified. The evaluation seemingly draws upon real-world
deployments, but this only graphs the rate of alerts at different reporting thresholds.
Kalutarage et al. [2012] focus on the analysis of online conflicts by studying network
traffic with a Bayesian reasoning approach to combining information from multiple
sources. They provide an experimental evaluation with simulated attacks, and explore
a number of methods for detecting the attacks, but their classifier has low precision.
Chung and Wang [2007] summarise intended work on profiling the relationships
between cybercriminals, as well as visualising this information to help provide inves-
tigative leads, but provide no further detail.
Tompsett et al. [2005] focus, in a broad sense, on the motivation for a framework for
profiling the activities of cybercriminals, including geographical profiling, while listing
a few potential data sources. The paper identifies only possible areas of exploration,
and does not in itself describe a system.
C.3. Other Studies on Crimes Against Children
Chopra et al. [2006] propose to combat child-abuse material at the network level by
maintaining a time-relative obscenity score for every source IP address. They aim to
derive obscenity measures from feature extraction on images reconstructed from IP
packets. No evaluation of the approach is provided.
Garcia-Ruiz et al. [2009] focus on describing the distribution of child-abuse material
on the online game Second Life, reviewing various ethical issues with monitoring the
game as well as comparing Second Life’s tools with measures which are common in
other social networks.
Latapy et al. [2013] quantify child-abuse material on the eDonkey filesharing net-
work. They base their analysis on two separate network captures of queries sent to two
of the main eDonkey servers, with an expert analysis to aid with their keyword-based
quantification of paedophile queries. They use the combination of IP address and port
to work back from keywords and estimate the number of users of eDonkey issuing
such queries. They report that roughly 0.2% of eDonkey users search for paedophilic
material. While the use of experts in validation strengthens confidence in the results
as presented, this method would appear difficult to replicate.
Gupta et al. [2012] aims to provide a deep understanding of paedophile grooming
conversational strategy, working from a manual analysis of online paedophile chat logs
to identify the different stages of grooming in chat. As with many studies in this area,
their data is drawn from the Perverted Justice vigilante site. As well as a set of six
categories of grooming conversational phase, they define conditional probabilities for
transition between different stages.
C.4. Other Studies on Terrorism and Extremism
Glaser et al. [2002] focus on the advocation of racial violence in online fora, approaching
the issue through semistructured interviews with members of racist Internet chat
rooms. They capitalise on the candour in opinions expressed online to gather close
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:43
perspective on precise conditions leading to the advocation of violence. They provide a
narrative analysis of their results.
Freiburger and Crane [2008] contribute a systemic model of terrorist use of the
Internet, framing evidence from previous studies in terms of social learning theory,
including comment on the power of group membership to the isolated, and the use
of the uncensored Internet for promotion of terrorist aims. They lay out some angles
of approach for counterterrorism online, including the infiltration of planning stages
conducted in public.
Cao [2008] proposes a field of behavior informatics and analysis, including terrorism
and monitoring online communities among its motivations. The proposal motivates a
range of data mining around behaviour, but is a broad appeal rather than a description
of specific technology.
Oh et al. [2011] present a case study covering the Mumbai terrorist attack based on
Twitter data. They provide a deep analysis of the events of the attack as they relate
to the social network, including the use of Twitter for situational awareness by the
attackers’ remote handlers and by mainstream media organisations. While they thus
demonstrate the utility of Twitter as an information source for online data mining
within the intelligence and law-enforcement domain, they only go so far as to provide
a conceptual framework for information control.
Prentice et al. [2011] cover linguistic analysis of a corpus of violence-inciting online
texts related to a specific event. The authors use a semiautomated coding system which
identifies persuasive content, distinguishing between different argument categories.
They then use a semiautomated system for exploring the key concepts captured from
the texts. Among other details, they find a strong tendency for extremist texts to use
moral proof arguments to justify violence.
Zolfaghar et al. [2009] aim somewhat broadly at establishing a framework for inter-
national counterterrorism online through the use of honeypots and web mining. Most of
their suggestions pertain to legislation, but they also suggest rather broad monitoring
of web usage and deployment of honeypots.
C.5. Other Studies on Financial Crime
Bauer et al. [2009] focus on monitoring BitTorrent traffic from the perspective of copy-
right holders attempting to enforce take-down notices. They note that existing policies
of polling trackers for lists of peers and then distributing take-down notices to said IP
addresses can be misled by malicious trackers or by malicious users registering false IP
addresses with the tracker. In response, they propose an active-probing system which
attempts to verify that a particular address is indeed sharing components of a file.
They validate this approach in a comparative experiment.
Ieong et al. [2009] also cover the investigation of P2P networks, but discuss the range
of issues facing investigations in a survey manner rather than addressing a specific
research question.
C.6. Other Studies on Police Intelligence
Suzumura and Oiki [2011] describe a general framework for linking streams of open
data in order to gain real-time information on a variety of topics, listing a number of
application areas, with crime intelligence among them. As a case study, they trial their
system on the contents of the Twitter Streaming API, displaying Twitter messages on
a geographical map of their location.
Monroy-Hernández et al. [2013] analyse the response of Twitter to calamitous events.
They focus on a more prolonged event, the Mexican Drug War, highlighting the use of
Twitter to warn of violence, and discuss the rises and falls in tweets with relation to
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:44 M. Edwards et al.
events in the conflict. They also discuss their observations of certain users arising as
curators of information.
C.7. Other Studies Applied to Ill-Defined Crimes
The works of Nabbali and Perry [2003, 2004] are two parts of a single narrative regard-
ing the Carnivore electronic surveillance system and the ECHELON global interception
run by the United States’ Federal Bureau of Investigation. These publications cover
both details of implementation and deployment and the legal rationale underlying the
programmes’ wide-ranging surveillance capabilities.
D. GUIDANCE TABLE
Section 3 and the related Appendix C orders the literature by the methods used.
Readers interested in particular problems rather than methods may wish to use the
following table to find discussion of relevant studies.
Problem Sections
Financial Crime 3.1.5, 3.2.4, 3.3.5, 3.4.5, 3.5.15, C.5
Cybercrime 3.2.3, 3.3.4, 3.5.2, 3.5.14, C.2
Threats and harassment 3.1.3, 3.4.3, 3.5.6, 3.5.9, 3.5.13
Intelligence 3.2.2, 3.3.2, 3.4.6, 3.5.12, C.6
Crimes against children 3.1.2, 3.2.6, 3.3.3, 3.4.4, 3.5.4, 3.5.10, C.3
Terrorism and extremism 3.1.4, 3.2.1, 3.3.1, 3.4.2, 3.5.3, 3.5.5, 3.5.8, 3.5.11, C.4
Online identification 3.1.1, 3.2.5, 3.3.6, 3.4.1, 3.5.1, C.1
Unclear problems 3.1.6, 3.3.7, 3.4.7, 3.5.7, 3.5.15, C.7
REFERENCES
A. Abbasi. 2007. Affect intensity analysis of dark web forums. In Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2007
IEEE. 282–288.
A. Abbasi and H. Chen. 2005. Applying authorship analysis to extremist-group web forum messages. In
Intelligent Systems, IEEE. 67–75.
Ahmed Abbasi and Hsinchun Chen. 2008. Writeprints: A stylometric approach to identity-level identification
and similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 26, 2, 7.
Ahmed Abbasi, Hsinchun Chen, and Arab Salem. 2008. Sentiment analysis in multiple languages: Feature
selection for opinion classification in web forums. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 26,
3, 12.
ACM. 2013. ACM Digital Library. (2013). Retrieved August 14, 2015 from http://dl.acm.org.
Sadia Afroz, Aylin Caliskan-Islam, Ariel Stolerman, Rachel Greenstadt, and Damon McCoy. 2014. Dop-
pelgänger finder: Taking stylometry to the underground. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
IEEE, 212–226.
S. Aggarwal, J. Bali, Zhenhai Duan, and L. Kermes. 2007. The design and development of an undercover
multipurpose anti-spoofing kit (UnMask). In 23rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
2007 (ACSAC’07). IEEE, 141–150. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=4412984.
Edoardo Airoldi and Bradley Malin. 2004. ScamSlam: An Architecture for Learning the Criminal Relations
Behind Scam Spam. Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science [Institute for Software
Research International], Pittsburgh, PA.
Rabeah Al-Zaidy, Benjamin Fung, Amr M. Youssef, and Francis Fortin. 2012. Mining criminal networks from
unstructured text documents. Digital Investigation 8, 3, 147–160.
S. Appavu, M. Pandian, and R. Rajaram. 2007. Association rule mining for suspicious email detection: A
data mining approach. In Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2007 IEEE. 316–323.
S. Appavu, R. Rajaram, M. Muthupandian, G. Athiappan, and K. S. Kashmeera. 2009. Data mining based
intelligent analysis of threatening e-mail. Knowledge-Based Systems 22, 5, 392–393.
S. Appavu alias Balamurugan, R. Rajaram, G. Athiappan, and M. Muthupandian. 2007. Data mining tech-
niques for suspicious email detection: A comparative study. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Data Mining. Portugal, 213–217.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:45
S. Appavu alias Balamurugan and R. Rajaram. 2008. Learning to classify threaten e-mail. In Modeling &
Simulation, 2008. AICMS 08. Second Asia International Conference on. IEEE. 522–527.
Martin Atkinson, Jenya Belayeva, Vanni Zavarella, Jakub Piskorski, Silja Huttunen, Arto Vihavainen, and
Roman Yangarber. 2010. News mining for border security intelligence. In 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE. 173–173. Retrieved August 14, 2015
from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=5484744.
Stefan Axelsson. 2000. Intrusion detection systems: A survey and taxonomy. Technical Report. Chalmers
University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden.
N. Baili, D. D’Souza, A. A. Mohamed, and R. V. Yampolskiy. 2011. Avatar face recognition using wavelet
transform and hierarchical multi-scale LBP. In 2011 10th International Conference on Machine Learning
and Applications and Workshops (ICMLA). IEEE. 194–199.
Jasbinder Singh Bali. 2007. Automation of Email Analysis Using a Database. Master’s thesis. Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL.
M. Tariq Banday, Jameel A. Qadri, Tariq Jan, Nisar Shah, and others. 2011. Detecting threat e-mails using
Bayesian approach. International Journal of Secure Digital Information Age 1, 2, 10.
G. Barbian. 2011. Detecting hidden friendship in online social network. In 2011 European Intelligence and
Security Informatics Conference (EISIC). IEEE. 269–272.
K. Bauer, D. McCoy, D. Grunwald, and D. Sicker. 2009. BitStalker: Accurately and efficiently monitoring
BitTorrent traffic. In 1st IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security, 2009
(WIFS’09). IEEE. 181–185.
V. Benjamin and Hsinchun Chen. 2012. Securing cyberspace: Identifying key actors in hacker communities.
In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE. 24–29.
K. Bernard, A. Cassidy, M. Clark, K. Liu, K. Lobaton, D. McNeill, and D. Brown. 2011. Identifying and
tracking online financial services through web mining and latent semantic indexing. In Systems and
Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS), 2011 IEEE. IEEE. 158–163. Retrieved August
14, 2015 from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=5876870.
Dasha Bogdanova, Paolo Rosso, and Thamar Solorio. 2012a. Modelling fixated discourse in chats with
cyberpedophiles. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Deception Detection
(EACL’12). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, 86–90.
Dasha Bogdanova, Paolo Rosso, and Thamar Solorio. 2012b. On the impact of sentiment and emotion based
features in detecting online sexual predators. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop in Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis (WASSA’12). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, 110–118.
J. Broadway, B. Turnbull, and J. Slay. 2008. Improving the analysis of lawfully intercepted network packet
data captured for forensic analysis. In 3rd International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security, 2008 (ARES’08). IEEE. 1361–1368.
David Budgen, Mark Turner, Pearl Brereton, and Barbara Kitchenham. 2008. Using mapping studies in
software engineering. In Proceedings of PPIG, Vol. 8. Lancaster University, 195–204.
Longbing Cao. 2008. Behavior informatics and analytics: Let behavior talk. In IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining Workshops, 2008 (ICDMW’08). IEEE. 87–96.
Weiping Chang, Yungchang Ku, Sinru Wu, and Chaochang Chiu. 2012. CybercrimeIR–A technological per-
spective to fight cybercrime. In Intelligence and Security Informatics, Michael Chau, G. Alan Wang,
WeiThoo Yue, and Hsinchun Chen (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 7299. Springer, Berlin,
36–44.
Michael Chau and Jennifer Xu. 2007. Mining communities and their relationships in blogs: A study of online
hate groups. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 65, 1, 57–70.
Nisha Chaurasia, Mradul Dhakar, Astha Chharia, Akhilesh Tiwari, and R. K. Gupta. 2012. Exploring the
current trends and future prospects in terrorist network mining. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Computer Science, Engineering and Applications (CCSEA’12), Delhi, India, Vol. 2. CSCP,
7.
Hsinchun Chen, Wingyan Chung, Jialun Qin, Edna Reid, Marc Sageman, and Gabriel Weimann. 2008. Un-
covering the dark web: A case study of jihad on the web. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology 59, 8, 1347–1359.
Hsinchun Chen, Jialun Qin, Edna Reid, and Yilu Zhou. 2008. Studying global extremist organizations’
Internet presence using the DarkWeb attribute system. Terrorism Informatics 18, 237–266.
Xiaoling Chen, Peng Hao, R. Chandramouli, and K. Subbalakshmi. 2011. Authorship similarity detection
from email messages. In Machine Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition, Petra Perner (Ed.).
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6871. Springer, Berlin, 375–386.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:46 M. Edwards et al.
Ying Chen, Yilu Zhou, Sencun Zhu, and Heng Xu. 2012. Detecting offensive language in social media to
protect adolescent online safety. In 2012 International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust
(PASSAT), and 2012 International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom). IEEE, 71–80.
Hanqiang Cheng, Yu-Li Liang, Xinyu Xing, Xue Liu, Richard Han, Qin Lv, and Shivakant Mishra. 2012.
Efficient misbehaving user detection in online video chat services. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM’12). ACM, New York, NY, 23–32.
Marc Cheong and Vincent C. S. Lee. 2011. A microblogging-based approach to terrorism informatics: Ex-
ploration and chronicling civilian sentiment and response to terrorism events via Twitter. Information
Systems Frontiers 13, 1, 45–59.
Munish Chopra, Miguel Vargas Martin, Luis Rueda, and Patrick C. K. Hung. 2006. A source address repu-
tation system to combating child pornography at the network level. In IADIS International Conference
on Applied Computing. 6.
Wingyan Chung. 2012. Categorizing temporal events: A case study of domestic terrorism. In 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE. 159–161.
Wingyan Chung and G. A. Wang. 2007. Profiling and visualizing cyber-criminal activities: A general
framework. In Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2007 IEEE. IEEE. 376. http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=4258736.
Malcolm Walter Corney. 2003. Analysing E-mail Text Authorship for Forensic Purposes. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Glenn S. Dardick, Claire R. La Roche, and Mary A. Flanigan. 2007. Blogs: Anti-forensics and counter anti-
forensics. In Proceedings of the 5th Australian Digital Forensics Conference. School of Computer and
Information Science, Edith Cowan University, Perth, Western Australia.
Richard Dazeley, John Yearwood, Byeong Kang, and Andrei Kelarev. 2010. Consensus clustering and su-
pervised classification for profiling phishing emails in Internet commerce security. Springer, 235–
246.
Olivier De Vel, Alison Anderson, Malcolm Corney, and George Mohay. 2001. Multi-topic e-mail authorship
attribution forensics. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Computer Security-Workshop on Data Mining
for Security Applications. ACM, New York, NY.
Mike Dickson. 2006a. An examination into AOL instant messenger 5.5 contact identification. Digital Inves-
tigation 3, 4, 227–237.
Mike Dickson. 2006b. An examination into Yahoo messenger 7.0 contact identification. Digital Investigation
3, 3, 159–165.
T. D. Do, K. Chang, and S. C. Hui. 2004. Web mining for cyber monitoring and filtering. In 2004 IEEE
Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems. IEEE. 399–404 vol.1.
David J. Dreier. 2009. Blog Fingerprinting Identifying Anonymous Posts Written by an Author of Interest
Using Word and Character Frequency Analysis. Master’s thesis. Naval Postgraduate School. Monterey,
California.
Patrick M. Dudas. 2013. Cooperative, dynamic Twitter parsing and visualization for dark network analysis.
In Network Science Workshop. IEEE, 172–176.
Y. Elovici, A. Kandel, M. Last, B. Shapira, and O. Zaafrany. 2004. Using data mining techniques for detecting
terror-related activities on the web. Journal of Information Warfare 3, 1, 17–29.
Yuval Elovici, Bracha Shapira, Mark Last, Omer Zaafrany, Menahem Friedman, Moti Schneider, and
Abraham Kandel. 2010. Detection of access to terror-related web sites using an advanced terror de-
tection system (ATDS). Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61, 2,
405–418.
Elsevier. 2013. ScienceDirect. (2013). Retrieved August 14, 2015 from http://sciencedirect.com.
E. Endy, C. Lim, K. I. Eng, and A. S. Nugroho. 2010. Implementation of intelligent searching using self-
organizing map for webmining used in document containing information in relation to cyber terrorism.
In 2010 Second International Conference on Advances in Computing, Control and Telecommunication
Technologies (ACT). IEEE. 195–197.
SzeWang Fong, D. Roussinov, and D. B. Skillicorn. 2008. Detecting word substitutions in text. In IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. IEEE. 1067–1076.
Raphaël Fournier, Thibault Cholez, Matthieu Latapy, Clémence Magnien, Isabelle Chrisment, Ivan Daniloff,
and Olivier Festor. 2014. Comparing paedophile activity in different p2p systems. Social Sciences 3, 3,
314–325.
Richard Frank, Bryce Westlake, and Martin Bouchard. 2010. The structure and content of online child ex-
ploitation networks. In ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI-KDD’10).
ACM, New York, NY, Article 3, 9 pages.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:47
Tina Freiburger and Jeffrey S. Crane. 2008. A systematic examination of terrorist use of the Internet.
International Journal of Cyber Criminology 2, 1, 309–319.
M. A. Garcia-Ruiz, M. V. Martin, A. Ibrahim, A. Edwards, and R. Aquino-Santos. 2009. Combating child
exploitation in second life. In Science and Technology for Humanity (TIC-STH), 2009 IEEE Toronto
International Conference. IEEE. 761–766.
Jean Mark Gawron, Dipak Gupta, Kellen Stephens, Ming-Hsiang Tsou, Brian Spitzberg, and Li An. 2012.
Using group membership markers for group identification in web logs. In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence, 467–470.
A. Ge, W. Mao, and D. Zeng. 2010. Story extraction from the Web: A case study in security informatics. In
2010 IEEE International Conference on Service Operations and Logistics and Informatics (SOLI). IEEE.
306–310.
Phyllis B. Gerstenfeld, Diana R. Grant, and Chau-Pu Chiang. 2003. Hate online: A content analysis of
extremist Internet sites. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy 3, 1, 29–44.
N. A. Giacobe, Hyun-Woo Kim, and A. Faraz. 2010. Mining social media in extreme events: Lessons learned
from the DARPA network challenge. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Home-
land Security (HST). IEEE. 165–171.
Jack Glaser, Jay Dixit, and Donald P. Green. 2002. Studying hate crime with the Internet: What makes
racists advocate racial violence? Journal of Social Issues 58, 1, 177–193.
Andrew Gray, Philip Sallis, and Stephen MacDonell. 1997. Software forensics: Extending authorship analysis
techniques to computer programs. Information Science Discussion Papers Series. University of Otago.
Glen L. Gray and Roger Debreceny. 2007. Data mining of emails to support periodic and continuous as-
surance. College of Business and Economics, California State University at Northridge, Working Paper
(2007).
Glenn Greenwald, Ewen MacAskill, and Laura Poitras. 2013. Edward Snowden: The whistleblower behind
the NSA surveillance revelations. The Guardian 9, 6.
Aditi Gupta, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, and Ashish Sureka. 2012. Characterizing pedophile conversations
on the Internet using online grooming. arXiv preprint arXiv:1208.4324.
Rachid Hadjidj, Mourad Debbabi, Hakim Lounis, Farkhund Iqbal, Adam Szporer, and Djamel Benredjem.
2009. Towards an integrated e-mail forensic analysis framework. Digital Investigation 5, 3, 124–137.
John Haggerty, David Llewellyn-Jones, and Mark Taylor. 2008. FORWEB: File fingerprinting for auto-
mated network forensics investigations. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Forensic
Applications and Techniques in Telecommunications, Information, and Multimedia and Workshop (e-
Forensics’08). Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering
(ICST), Brussels, Belgium, Article 29, 6 pages.
José Marı́a Gómez Hidalgo and Andrés Alfonso Caurcel Dı́az. 2012. Combining predation heuristics and
chat-like features in sexual predator identification. In CLEF (Online Working Notes/Labs/Workshop).
Javad Hosseinkhani, Suriayati Chaprut, and Hamed Taherdoost. 2012. Criminal network mining by web
structure and content mining. In 11th WSEAS International Conference on Information Security and
Privacy. WSEAS, 24–26.
Weiming Hu, Ou Wu, Zhouyao Chen, Zhouyu Fu, and Steve Maybank. 2007. Recognition of pornographic web
pages by classifying texts and images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
29, 6, 1019–1034.
Wen Hui, Hao Yin, and Chuang Lin. 2009. Design and deployment of a digital forensics service platform for
online videos. In Proceedings of the First ACM Workshop on Multimedia in Forensics (MiFor’09). ACM,
New York, NY, 31–36.
Wen Hui, Haiying Zhao, Chuang Lin, and Yang Yang. 2012. ViDeCloud: Efficient support for large-scale
video copy detection. Journal of Computational Information Systems 8, 3, 1055–1062.
Ryan Hurley, Swagatika Prusty, Hamed Soroush, Robert J. Walls, Jeannie Albrecht, Emmanuel Cecchet,
Brian Neil Levine, Marc Liberatore, Brian Lynn, and Janis Wolak. 2013. Measurement and analysis of
child pornography trafficking on p2p networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
World Wide Web. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 631–642.
Amin Abdurahman Ibrahim. 2009. Detecting and Preventing the Electronic Transmission of Illicit Images.
Master’s thesis. University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Oshowa, Ontario, Canada.
IEEE. 2013. IEEExplore. Retrieved August 14, 2015 from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Ricci Ieong, Pierre K. Y. Lai, K. P. Chow, Michael Kwan, Frank Law, H. Tse, and K. Tse. 2009. Forensic
investigation of peer-to-peer networks. Handbook of Research on Computational Forensics, Digital Crime
and Investigation: Methods and Solution 355.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:48 M. Edwards et al.
Giacomo Inches and Fabio Crestani. 2011. Online conversation mining for author characterization and topic
identification. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop for Ph.D. Students in Information and Knowledge
Management (PIKM’11). ACM, New York, NY, 19–26.
Giacomo Inches and Fabio Crestani. 2012. Overview of the international sexual predator identification
competition at PAN-2012. In CLEF 2012 Evaluation Labs and Workshop Working Notes Papers. Rome,
Italy.
U. Inyaem, Phayung Meesad, C. Haruechaiyasak, and Dat Tran. 2009. Ontology-based terrorism event
extraction. In 2009 1st International Conference on Information Science and Engineering (ICISE). IEEE.
912–915.
Farkhund Iqbal. 2011. Messaging Forensic Framework for Cybercrime Investigation. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Concordia University.
Farkhund Iqbal, Hamad Binsalleeh, Benjamin Fung, and Mourad Debbabi. 2010. Mining writeprints from
anonymous e-mails for forensic investigation. Digital Investigation 7, 1, 56–64.
Farkhund Iqbal, Hamad Binsalleeh, Benjamin C. M. Fung, and Mourad Debbabi. 2013. A unified data
mining solution for authorship analysis in anonymous textual communications. Information Sciences
231, 98–112.
Farkhund Iqbal, Rachid Hadjidj, Benjamin Fung, and Mourad Debbabi. 2008. A novel approach of
mining write-prints for authorship attribution in e-mail forensics. Digital Investigation 5, S42–
S51.
Farkhund Iqbal, Liaquat A. Khan, Benjamin C. M. Fung, and Mourad Debbabi. 2010. E-mail authorship
verification for forensic investigation. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing
(SAC’10). ACM, New York, NY, 1591–1598.
Mofakharul Islam, Paul A. Watters, and John Yearwood. 2011. Real-time detection of children’s skin on
social networking sites using Markov random field modelling. Information Security Technical Report 16,
2, 51–58.
S. K. Jayanthi and M. S. Sasikala. 2011. XGraphticsCLUS: Web mining hyperlinks and content of terrorism
websites for homeland security. International Journal of Advanced Networking and Applications 2, 6.
J. R. Johnson, A. Miller, L. Khan, and B. Thuraisingham. 2012. Measuring relatedness and augmentation of
information of interest within free text law enforcement documents. In 2012 European Intelligence and
Security Informatics Conference (EISIC). IEEE. 148–155.
H. K. Kalutarage, S. A. Shaikh, Q. Zhou, and A. E. James. 2012. Sensing for suspicion at scale: A bayesian
approach for cyber conflict attribution and reasoning. In Cyber Conflict (CYCON), 2012 4th Interna-
tional Conference on. IEEE Conference Publications, 1–19. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?
arnumber=6243988.
Alexander John Karran and David Llewellyn-Jones. 2009. A Digital Forensics Analytical Process Model for
the Investigation, Analysis and Visualisation of Social Networks Derived from E-mail. Master’s thesis.
Liverpool John Moores University.
P. S. Keila and D.B. Skillicorn. 2005. Detecting unusual email communication. In Proceedings of the 2005
conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative research (CASCON’05). IBM Press, 117–
125. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1105634.1105643.
AKM Mustafizur Rahman Khan. 2012. A simple but powerful e-mail authorship attribution system. In
International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing.
Brendan Klare, Roman V. Yampolskiy, and Anil K. Jain. 2011. Face recognition in the virtual world: Recog-
nizing avatar faces. In Proceedings of the 2012 11th International Conference on Machine Learning and
Applications (ICMLA’12). IEEE, 40–45.
Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. 2004. Introducing the enron corpus. In CEAS.
April Kontostathis, Lynne Edwards, Jen Bayzick, Amanda Leatherman, and Kristina Moore. 2009. Compar-
ison of rule-based to human analysis of chat logs. Communication Theory 8 (2009), 2.
April Kontostathis, Lynne Edwards, and Amanda Leatherman. 2010. Text mining and cybercrime. Text
Mining: Applications and Theory (2010), 149–164.
Steve Kramer. 2010. Anomaly detection in extremist web forums using a dynamical systems approach. In
ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI-KDD’10). ACM, New York, NY,
Article 8, 10 pages.
Chih Hao Ku, Alicia Iriberri, and Gondy Leroy. 2008. Natural language processing and e-government:
Crime information extraction from heterogeneous data sources. In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Digital Government Research (dg.o’08). Digital Government Society of North America,
162–170.
Himal Lalla. 2011. E mail forensic authorship attribution. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Fort Hare, Alice,
Eastern Cape, South Africa.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:49
Matthieu Latapy, Clmence Magnien, and Raphal Fournier. 2013. Quantifying paedophile activity in a large
p2p system. Information Processing and Management 49, 1, 248–263.
Hady W. Lauw, Ee-Peng Lim, Hwee Hwa Pang, and Teck-Tim Tan. 2005. Social network discovery by
mining spatio-temporal events. Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory 11, 2, 97–
118.
R. Layton, P. Watters, and R. Dazeley. 2010. Authorship attribution for Twitter in 140 characters or less. In
2010 Second Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop (CTC). IEEE. 1–8.
Lucas Lenselink. 2011. Radicalization Online. Patterns of Social Interaction on the Al-Faloja and As-Ansar
Forums. Master’s thesis. Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
M. J.-H. Lim, M. Negnevitsky, and J. Hartnett. 2007. Detecting abnormal changes in e-mail traffic using
hierarchical fuzzy systems. In IEEE International Fuzzy Systems Conference, 2007 (FUZZ-IEEE’07).
IEEE Conference Publications, 1–6.
Zhi Liu, Zongkai Yang, Sanya Liu, and Yinghui Shi. 2012. Semi-random subspace method for writeprint
identification. Neurocomputing 108, 93–102.
Jianbin Ma, Ying Li, Guifa Teng, Fang Wang, and Yang Zhao. 2008. Sequential pattern mining for Chinese
e-mail authorship identification. In 3rd International Conference on Innovative Computing Information
and Control, 2008 (ICICIC’08). IEEE. 73.
Jianbin Ma, Guifa Teng, Shuhui Chang, Xiaoru Zhang, and Ke Xiao. 2011. Social network analysis based
on authorship identification for cybercrime investigation. Intelligence and Security Informatics 27–
35.
Jianbin Ma, Guifa Teng, Yuxin Zhang, Yueli Li, and Ying Li. 2009a. A cybercrime forensic method for chinese
web information authorship analysis. Intelligence and Security Informatics (2009), 14–24.
Liping Ma, J. Yearwood, and P. Watters. 2009b. Establishing phishing provenance using orthographic
features. In eCrime Researchers Summit, 2009. eCRIME’09. IEEE Conference Publications, 1–10.
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=5342604.
S. Marcus. 1998. Dynamic data mining for information exploitation. In IEEE Information Technology Con-
ference, 1998. IEEE. 79–82.
S. H. Marjuni, R. Mahmod, A. Ghani, A. Bin Mohd Zain, and A. Mustapha. 2009. Lexical criminal identifi-
cation for chatting corpus. In 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer Science and Information
Technology, 2009 (ICCSIT’09). IEEE. 360–364.
India McGhee, Jennifer Bayzick, April Kontostathis, Lynne Edwards, Alexandra McBride, and Emma
Jakubowski. 2011. Learning to identify Internet sexual predation. International Journal of Electronic
Commerce 15, 3, 103–122.
D. Michalopoulos and I. Mavridis. 2011. Utilizing document classification for grooming attack recognition.
In 2011 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC). IEEE. 864–869.
A. Modupe, O. O. Olugbara, and S. O. Ojo. 2011. Exploring support vector machines and random forests to
detect advanced fee fraud activities on Internet. In 2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on Data
Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE. 331–335.
A. A. Mohamed and R. V. Yampolskiy. 2012a. Using discrete wavelet transform and eigenfaces for recognizing
avatars faces. In 2012 17th International Conference on Computer Games (CGAMES). IEEE. 143–
147.
Abdallah A. Mohamed and Roman V. Yampolskiy. 2012b. Wavelet based statistical adapted local binary
patterns for recognizing avatar faces. In Advanced Machine Learning Technologies and Applications.
Springer, 92–101.
Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Emre Kiciman, Munmun De Choudhury, Scott Counts, and others. 2013. The
new war correspondents: The rise of civic media curation in urban warfare. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. ACM, New York, NY, 1443–1452.
Colin Morris. 2013. Identifying Online Sexual Predators by SVM Classification with Lexical and Behavioral
Features. Master’s thesis. Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
Colin Morris and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Identifying sexual predators by SVM classification with lexical and
behavioral features. In CLEF (Online Working Notes/Labs/Workshop’12). 29.
T. I. Morris, L. M. Mayron, W. B. Smith, M. M. Knepper, R. Ita, and K. L. Fox. 2011. A perceptually-
relevant model-based cyber threat prediction method for enterprise mission assurance. In 2011 IEEE
First International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and
Decision Support (CogSIMA). IEEE. 60–65.
Talitha Nabbali and Mark Perry. 2003. Going for the throat: Carnivore in an echelon world—part I. Computer
Law and Security Review 19, 6, 456–467.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:50 M. Edwards et al.
Talitha Nabbali and Mark Perry. 2004. Going for the throat: Carnivore in an ECHELON world—part II.
Computer Law and Security Review 20, 2, 84–97.
M. Negnevitsky, M. J.-H. Lim, J. Hartnett, and L. Reznik. 2005. Email communications analysis: How to use
computational intelligence methods and tools? In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
on Computational Intelligence for Homeland Security and Personal Safety, 2005 (CIHSPS’05). IEEE. 16–
23.
S. M. Nirkhi, R. V. Dharaskar, and V. M. Thakre. 2012. Analysis of online messages for identity tracing in
cybercrime investigation. In 2012 International Conference on Cyber Security, Cyber Warfare and Digital
Forensic (CyberSec). IEEE. 300–305. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=6246131.
Sarwat Nizamani, Nasrullah Memon, Uffe Kock Wiil, and Panagiotis Karampelas. 2013. Modeling suspicious
email detection using enhanced feature selection. International Journal of Modeling and Optimization
2, 4, 371–377.
Onook Oh, Manish Agrawal, and H. Raghav Rao. 2011. Information control and terrorism: Tracking the
Mumbai terrorist attack through Twitter. Information Systems Frontiers 13, 1, 33–43.
Chitu Okoli and Kira Schabram. 2010. A guide to conducting a systematic literature review of information
systems research. Sprouts: Working Papers on Information Systems 49.
Angela Orebaugh. 2006. An instant messaging intrusion detection system framework: Using character
frequency analysis for authorship identification and validation. In Proceedings of the 2006 40th Annual
IEEE International Carnahan Conferences on Security Technology. IEEE. 160–172.
Angela Orebaugh and Jeremy Allnutt. 2010. Data mining instant messaging communications to perform
author identification for cybercrime investigations. Digital Forensics and Cyber Crime 99–110.
Angela Orebaugh and Jeremy Allnutt. 2009. Classification of instant messaging communications for forensics
analysis. International Journal of Forensics Computer Science 22–28.
Alexander Panchenko, Richard Beaufort, and Cedrick Fairon. 2012. Detection of child sexual abuse media
on p2p networks: Normalization and classification of associated filenames. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Language Resources for Public Security Applications.
Alexander Panchenko, Richard Beaufort, Hubert Naets, and Cédrick Fairon. 2013. Towards detection of child
sexual abuse media: Categorization of the associated filenames. In Advances in Information Retrieval.
Springer, 776–779.
Shashank Pandit, Duen Horng Chau, Samuel Wang, and Christos Faloutsos. 2007. Netprobe: A fast and
scalable system for fraud detection in online auction networks. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’07). ACM, New York, NY, 201–210.
G. A. Patil, K. B. Manwade, and P. S. Landge. 2012. A novel approach for social network analysis and web
mining for counter terrorism. International Journal 4.
Lisa Pearl and Mark Steyvers. 2012. Detecting authorship deception: A supervised machine learning ap-
proach using author writeprints. Literary and Linguistic Computing 27, 2, 183–196.
Claudia Peersman, Walter Daelemans, and Leona Van Vaerenbergh. 2011. Predicting age and gender in
online social networks. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Search and Mining User-
Generated Contents (SMUC’11). ACM, New York, NY, 37–44.
Claudia Peersman, Christian Schulze, Awais Rashid, Margaret Brennan, and Carl Fischer. 2014. iCOP:
Automatically identifying new child abuse media in p2p networks. In IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy Workshops. 124–131.
Claudia Peersman, Frederik Vaassen, Vincent Van Asch, and Walter Daelemans. 2012. Conversation level
constraints on pedophile detection in chat rooms. PAN.
Nick Pendar. 2007. Toward spotting the pedophile—telling victim from predator in text chats. In International
Conference on Semantic Computing, 2007 (ICSC’07). IEEE. 235–241.
Yi-Ting Peng and Jau-Hwang Wang. 2008. Link analysis based on webpage co-occurrence mining—a case
study on a notorious gang leader in Taiwan. In IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and
Security Informatics, 2008 (ISI’08). IEEE. 31–34.
L. Penna, A. Clark, and G. Mohay. 2010. A framework for improved adolescent and child safety in MMOs. In
2010 International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM). IEEE.
33–40.
Dang Duc Pham, Giang Binh Tran, and Son Bao Pham. 2009. Author profiling for Vietnamese blogs. In
International Conference on Asian Language Processing, 2009 (IALP’09). IEEE. 190–194.
Sheryl Prentice, Paul J. Taylor, Paul Rayson, Andrew Hoskins, and Ben O. Loughlin. 2011. Analyzing the
semantic content and persuasive composition of extremist media: A case study of texts produced during
the Gaza conflict. Information Systems Frontiers 13, 1, 61–73.
Jeremy Prichard, Paul A. Watters, and Caroline Spiranovic. 2011. Internet subcultures and pathways to the
use of child pornography. Computer Law and Security Review 27, 6, 585–600.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:51
Swagatika Prusty, Brian Neil Levine, and Marc Liberatore. 2011. Forensic investigation of the OneSwarm
anonymous filesharing system. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security. ACM, New York, NY, 201–214.
Michal Ptaszynski, Pawel Dybala, Tatsuaki Matsuba, Fumito Masui, Rafal Rzepka, Kenji Araki, and Yoshio
Momouchi. 2010. In the service of online order: Tackling cyber-bullying with machine learning and affect
analysis. International Journal of Computational Linguistics Research 1, 3, 135–154.
Jialun Qin, Yilu Zhou, Edna Reid, Guanpi Lai, and Hsinchun Chen. 2007. Analyzing terror campaigns on
the Internet: Technical sophistication, content richness, and web interactivity. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 65, 1, 71–84.
Awais Rashid, Alistair Baron, Paul Rayson, Corinne May-Chahal, Phil Greenwood, and James Walkerdine.
2013. Who am I? Analysing digital personas in cybercrime investigations. IEEE Computer 46.
Sebastián A. Rı́os and Ricardo Muñoz. 2012. Dark web portal overlapping community detection based on
topic models. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Intelligence and Security Informatics
(ISI-KDD’12). ACM, New York, NY, Article 2, 7 pages.
Eli Rohn and Gil Erez. 2012. Fighting agro-terrorism in cyberspace: A framework for intention detection
using overt electronic data sources. In International ISCRAM Conference.
S. G. Romaniuk. 2000. Using intelligent agents to identify missing and exploited children. In Intelligent
Systems and their Applications, IEEE. IEEE. 27–30.
Dmitri Roussinov and José A Robles-Flores. 2007. Applying question answering technology to locating
malevolent online content. Decision Support Systems 43, 4, (2007), 1404–1418.
F. Sahito, A. Latif, and W. Slany. 2011. Weaving Twitter stream into linked data—a proof of concept frame-
work. In 2011 7th International Conference on Emerging Technologies (ICET). IEEE. 1–6.
Arab Salem, Edna Reid, and Hsinchun Chen. 2006. Content analysis of jihadi extremist groups videos.
Intelligence and Security Informatics 615–620.
Arab Salem, Edna Reid, and Hsinchun Chen. 2008. Multimedia content coding and analysis: Unrav-
eling the content of jihadi extremist groups’ videos. Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 31, 7, 605–
626.
Michael Schmid. 2012. Computer-Aided Writeprint Modelling for Cybercrime Investigations. Master’s thesis.
Concordia University.
D. V. Chandra Shekar and S. Sagar Imambi. 2008. Classifying and identifying of threats in e-mails–using
data mining techniques. In Proceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer
Scientists, Vol. 1. 5.
Qiang Shen and T. Boongoen. 2012. Fuzzy orders-of-magnitude-based link analysis for qualitative alias
detection. In IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. IEEE. 649–664.
Z. Shukur, A. H. Nasution, and A. A. Wibowo. 2011. Approaches to develop oracle for detecting deception in
online chatting software. In 2011 International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics
(ICEEI). IEEE. 1–3.
Asaf Shupo, Miguel Vargas Martin, Luis Rueda, Anasuya Bulkan, Yongming Chen, and Patrick C. K. Hung.
2006. Toward efficient detection of child pornography in the network infrastructure. IADIS International
Journal on Computer Science and Information Systems 1, 2, 15–31.
D. B. Skillicorn. 2004. Detecting related message traffic. In Workshop on Link Analysis, Security and Coun-
terterrorism, SIAM Data Mining Conference. 39–48.
D. B. Skillicorn. 2010. Applying interestingness measures to Ansar forum texts. In ACM SIGKDD Workshop
on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI-KDD’10). ACM, New York, NY, Article 7, 9 pages.
D. B. Skillicorn and N. Vats. 2007. Novel information discovery for intelligence and counterterrorism. Decision
Support Systems 43, 4, 1375–1382.
P. Sobkowicz and A. Sobkowicz. 2010. Dynamics of hate based Internet user networks. The European Physical
Journal B—Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 73, 4, 633–643.
Jonathan F. Spencer. 2008. Using XML to map relationships in hacker forums. In Proceedings of the 46th
Annual Southeast Regional Conference on XX (ACM-SE 46). ACM, New York, NY, 487–489.
Springer. 2013. SpringerLink. Retrieved August 15, 2015 from http://link.springer.com
Tommy Stallings, Brad Wardman, Gary Warner, and Sagar Thapaliya. 2012. WHOIS selling all the pills.
International Journal of Forensic Computer Science.
Efstathios Stamatatos. 2006. Authorship attribution based on feature set subspacing ensembles. Interna-
tional Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools 15, 05, 823–838.
Efstathios Stamatatos. 2008. Author identification: Using text sampling to handle the class imbalance
problem. Information Processing and Management 44, 2, 790–799.
Chad Steel. 2009. Child pornography in peer-to-peer networks. Child Abuse and Neglect 33, 8, 560–568.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:52 M. Edwards et al.
Salvatore J. Stolfo, Germán Creamer, and Shlomo Hershkop. 2006a. A temporal based forensic analysis of
electronic communication. In Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on Digital Government
Research (dg.o’06). Digital Government Society of North America, 23–24.
Salvatore J. Stolfo and Shlomo Hershkop. 2005. Email mining toolkit supporting law enforcement forensic
analyses. In Proceedings of the 2005 National Conference on Digital Government Research (dg.o’05).
Digital Government Society of North America, 221–222.
Salvatore J. Stolfo, Shlomo Hershkop, Chia-Wei Hu, Wei-Jen Li, Olivier Nimeskern, and Ke Wang. 2006b.
Behavior-based modeling and its application to email analysis. ACM Trans. Internet Technol. 6, 2, 187–
221.
Beiming Sun and V. T. Ng. 2011. Lifespan and popularity measurement of online content on social networks.
In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE. 379–383.
Ashish Sureka, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Atul Goyal, and Sidharth Chhabra. 2010. Mining YouTube to
discover extremist videos, users and hidden communities. Information Retrieval Technology 13–24.
T. Suzumura and T. Oiki. 2011. StreamWeb: Real-time web monitoring with stream computing. In 2011
IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS). IEEE. 620–627.
Jenny K. Tam. 2009. Detecting Age in Online Chat. Master’s thesis. Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey,
CA.
Gui-Fa Teng, Mao-Sheng Lai, Jian-Bin Ma, and Ying Li. 2004. E-mail authorship mining based on SVM for
computer forensics. In Proceedings of 2004 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cyber-
netics, 2004. Vol. 2. IEEE. 1204–1207.
Sandeep A. Thorat and Samadhan R. Manore. 2010. Internet usage monitoring for crime detection. Infor-
mation Processing and Management 70, 420–423.
Xiao-Ping Tian, Guang-Gang Geng, and Hong-Tao Li. 2010. A framework for multi-features based web
harmful information identification. In 2010 International Conference on Computer Application and
System Modeling (ICCASM). IEEE. V11–614–V11–618.
Deepak Tinguriya and Binod Kumar. 2010. Detecting terror-related activities on the web using neural
network. Oriental Journal of Computer Science and Technology 3, 2, 6.
B. C. Tompsett, A. M. Marshall, and N. C. Semmens. 2005. Cyberprofiling: Offender profiling and geographic
profiling of crime on the Internet. In Workshop of the 1st International Conference on Security and
Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communication Networks, 2005. IEEE. 21–24.
Yuen-Hsien Tseng, Zih-Ping Ho, Kai-Sheng Yang, and Chun-Cheng Chen. 2012. Mining term networks from
text collections for crime investigation. Expert Systems with Applications 39, 11, 10082–10090.
Nilesh J. Uke and Ravindra C. Thool. 2012. Detecting pornography on web to prevent child abuse–a computer
vision approach. International Journal of Scientific and Engineering Research 3, 4, 1–3.
Wouter S. Van Dongen. 2007. Forensic artefacts left by Windows Live Messenger 8.0. Digital Investigation
4, 2, 73–87.
Esaú Villatoro-Tello, Antonio Juárez-González, Hugo Jair Escalante, Manuel Montes y Gómez, and Luis
Villasenor-Pineda. 2012. A two-step approach for effective detection of misbehaving users in chats. In
CLEF (Online Working Notes/Labs/Workshop).
Chamila Walgampaya, Mehmed Kantardzic, and Roman Yampolskiy. 2010. Real time click fraud prevention
using multi-level data fusion. In Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and Computer
Science, Vol. 1. 20–22.
Hao Wang, Congxing Cai, Andrew Philpot, Mark Latonero, Eduard H. Hovy, and Donald Metzler. 2012b.
Data integration from open Internet sources to combat sex trafficking of minors. In Proceedings of the
13th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research (dg.o’12). ACM, New York, NY,
246–252.
Ke-Jian Wang, Xian-Zhong Han, Xin-Sheng Sun, Shu-Hui Chang, and Hui-Fang Qi. 2006. Research on
forecasting the dangerous level to illegal email based on integrated immune evolution algorithm. In
2006 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics. IEEE. 2112–2116.
Ning Wang, Keyu Jiang, R. Meier, and Hongbiao Zeng. 2012. Information filtering against information
pollution and crime. In 2012 International Conference on Computing, Measurement, Control and Sensor
Network (CMCSN). IEEE. 45–47.
Xiaofeng Wang, D. E. Brown, and M. S. Gerber. 2012a. Spatio-temporal modeling of criminal incidents using
geographic, demographic, and Twitter-derived information. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE. 36–41.
Xiaofeng Wang, Matthew Gerber, and Donald Brown. 2012c. Automatic crime prediction using events ex-
tracted from Twitter posts. Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Prediction 7227, 231–
238.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
A Systematic Survey of Online Data Mining Technology Intended for Law Enforcement 15:53
William Warner and Julia Hirschberg. 2012. Detecting hate speech on the world wide web. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM’12). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, 19–26.
Paul A. Watters, Robert Layton, and Richard Dazeley. 2011. How much material on BitTorrent is infringing
content? A case study. Information Security Technical Report 16, 2, 79–87.
Chun Wei, Alan Sprague, Gary Warner, and Anthony Skjellum. 2008. Mining spam email to identify common
origins for forensic application. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing
(SAC’08). ACM, New York, NY, 1433–1437.
Luo Wenhua and Li Na. 2010. Application of unstructured data processing and analyzing base on Chinese
in digital data evidence collecting. In 2010 2nd International Conference on Computer Engineering and
Technology (ICCET). IEEE. V7–780–V7–783.
Kam-Fai Wong and Yunqing Xia. 2008. Normalization of Chinese chat language. Language Resources and
Evaluation 42, 2, 219–242.
Xinyu Xing, Yu-Li Liang, Hanqiang Cheng, Jianxun Dang, Sui Huang, Richard Han, Xue Liu, Qin Lv, and
Shivakant Mishra. 2011. SafeVchat: Detecting obscene content and misbehaving users in online video
chat services. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’11). ACM,
New York, NY, 685–694.
Jennifer Xu and Michael Chau. 2006. Mining communities of bloggers: A case study on cyber-hate. In
International Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee, WI (December 10-13). 11.
Jun-Ming Xu, Kwang-Sung Jun, Xiaojin Zhu, and Amy Bellmore. 2012a. Learning from bullying traces
in social media. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL HLT’12). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, 656–666.
Jun-Ming Xu, Xiaojin Zhu, and Amy Bellmore. 2012b. Fast learning for sentiment analysis on bullying. In
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining
(WISDOM’12). ACM, New York, NY, Article 10, 6 pages.
C. C. Yang and T. D. Ng. 2008. Analyzing content development and visualizing social interactions in web
forum. In IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2008 (ISI’08). IEEE.
25–30.
C. C. Yang and T. D. Ng. 2009. Web opinions analysis with scalable distance-based clustering. In IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2009 (ISI’09). IEEE. 65–70.
Li Yang, Feiqiong Liu, J. M. Kizza, and R. K. Ege. 2009. Discovering topics from dark websites. In
IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Cyber Security, 2009 (CICS’09). IEEE. 175–
179.
Ming Yang, Melody Kiang, Hsinchun Chen, and Yijun Li. 2012. Artificial immune system for illicit content
identification in social media. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology
63, 2, 256–269.
Ming Yang, Melody Kiang, Yungchang Ku, Chaochang Chiu, and Yijun Li. 2011. Social media analytics
for radical opinion mining in hate group web forums. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management 8, 1.
J. Yearwood, M. Mammadov, and A. Banerjee. 2010. Profiling phishing emails based on hyperlink informa-
tion. In 2010 International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM).
IEEE. 120–127.
Dawei Yin, Zhenzhen Xue, Liangjie Hong, Brian D. Davison, April Kontostathis, and Lynne Edwards. 2009b.
Detection of harassment on WEB 2.0. In Proceedings of the Content Analysis in the WEB 2.0 (CAW2. 0)
Workshop at WWW2009. 20–24.
Hao Yin, Wen Hui, Quan Miao, Zheng Li, and Chuang Lin. 2009a. IVForensic: a digital forensics service
platform for Internet videos. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Multimedia
(MM’09). ACM, New York, NY, 1015–1016.
Chengcui Zhang, Wei-Bang Chen, Xin Chen, and Gary Warner. 2009. Revealing common sources of image
spam by unsupervised clustering with visual features. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM Symposium on
Applied Computing. ACM, New York, NY, 891–892.
Rong Zheng, Jiexun Li, Hsinchun Chen, and Zan Huang. 2005. A framework for authorship identification of
online messages: Writing-style features and classification techniques. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 57, 3, 378–393.
Rong Zheng, Yi Qin, Zan Huang, and Hsinchun Chen. 2003. Authorship analysis in cybercrime investigation.
In Proceedings of the 1st NSF/NIJ Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI’03). Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 59–73.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
15:54 M. Edwards et al.
Yilu Zhou, Jialun Qin, Guanpi Lai, and Hsinchun Chen. 2007. Collection of U.S. Extremist Online Forums:
A Web Mining Approach. In 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2007
(HICSS’07). IEEE. 70.
Yilu Zhou, Jialun Qin, Edna Reid, Guanpi Lai, and Hsinchun Chen. 2005a. Studying the presence of terrorism
on the web: A knowledge portal approach. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries (JCDL’05). ACM, New York, NY, 402–402.
Yilu Zhou, Edna Reid, Jialun Qin, Hsinchun Chen, and Guanpi Lai. 2005b. US domestic extremist groups
on the Web: link and content analysis. Intelligent Systems, IEEE 20, 5, 44–51.
Zhenghui Zhu. 2007. Deconstruction and Analysis of Email Messages. Master’s thesis. Florida State Univer-
sity, Tallahassee, FL.
Jianwei Zhuge, Thorsten Holz, Chengyu Song, Jinpeng Guo, Xinhui Han, and Wei Zou. 2009. Studying
malicious websites and the underground economy on the Chinese web. Managing Information Risk and
the Economics of Security 225–244.
K. Zolfaghar, A. Barfar, and S. Mohammadi. 2009. A framework for online counter terrorism. In International
Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions, 2009 (ICITST’09). IEEE. 1–5.
Received September 2014; revised April 2015; accepted July 2015
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 48, No. 1, Article 15, Publication date: September 2015.
