Reading Research Quarterly
Vol. 39, No. 4
October/November/December 2004
© 2004 International Reading Association
(pp. 438–468)
doi:10.1598/RRQ.39.4.5
The effects of orthographic
depth on learning to read
alphabetic, syllabic, and
logographic scripts
NICK C. ELLIS, MIWA NATSUME, 
KATERINA STAVROPOULOU, LORENC
HOXHALLARI, VICTOR H.P. VAN DAAL, 
NICOLETTA POLYZOE, MARIA-LOUISA TSIPA,
MICHALIS PETALAS
University of Wales, Bangor, United Kingdom
he problem of how to represent spoken language in writing has historically been
solved in different ways (Daniels & Bright, 1996; Gaur, 1992). One distinction is
whether to “write what you mean” or “write what you say.” Logographic systems
such as Chinese and Japanese kanji use symbols to represent meaning directly and
have no or comparatively few cues to pronunciation. Other writing systems repre-
sent speech sounds. The characters of syllabic systems such as the Japanese kana
correspond with spoken syllables, whereas those of alphabetic systems correspond
with separate phonemes. However, alphabetic orthographies vary in the degree to
which they are regular in their representation of sound. The writing systems of
Serbo-Croatian, Finnish, Welsh, Spanish, Dutch, Turkish, and German are on the
whole much more regular in symbol–sound correspondences than those of English
and French. The former are referred to as transparent or shallow orthographies in
which sound–symbol correspondences are highly consistent, while the latter are re-
ferred to as opaque or deep orthographies that are less consistent because each let-
ter or group of letters may represent different sounds in different words. 
Do these different writing systems affect the ways in which children learn to
read? What, if any, are the effects of a written language’s writing system on rate of
literacy acquisition? The orthographic depth hypothesis (Katz & Frost, 1992)
speaks to these questions because it postulates that shallow orthographies should be
easier to read using word-recognition processes that involve the language’s phonology.
T
438
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 438
439
THIS STUDY investigated the effects of orthographic depth on reading acquisition in alphabetic, syllabic, and lo-
gographic scripts. Children between 6 and 15 years old read aloud in transparent syllabic Japanese hiragana, al-
phabets of increasing orthographic depth (Albanian, Greek, English), and orthographically opaque Japanese kanji
ideograms, with items being matched cross-linguistically for word frequency. This study analyzed response accura-
cy, latency, and error types. Accuracy correlated with depth: Hiragana was read more accurately than, in turn,
Albanian, Greek, English, and kanji. The deeper the orthography, the less latency was a function of word length, the
greater the proportion of errors that were no-responses, and the more the substantive errors tended to be whole-word
substitutions rather than nonword mispronunciations. Orthographic depth thus affected both rate and strategy of
reading.
The effects of
orthographic depth
on learning to read
alphabetic, syllabic,
and logographic
scripts
ESTE ESTUDIO investigó los efectos de la profundidad ortográfica en la adquisición de la lectura en sistemas de
escritura alfabético, silábico y logográfico. Niños entre 6 y 15 años leyeron en voz alta en el sistema transparente
silábico japonés hiragana, en sistemas alfabéticos de opacidad creciente (albanés, griego, inglés) y en el sistema or-
tográficamente opaco de los ideogramas japoneses kanji. Los ítem fueron apareados según la frecuencia de las pa-
labras en las lenguas estudiadas. El estudio analizó precisión latencia y tipos de error de las respuestas. La precisión
correlacionó con la profundidad ortográfica: el hiragana se leyó más correctamente que, en orden decreciente, el
albanés, griego, inglés y kanji. A ortografía más profunda correspondieron menor efecto del largo de las palabras
sobre la latencia de las respuestas y mayor la cantidad de errores tendientes a ser sustituciones de palabras comple-
tas, en lugar de no-palabras. En síntesis, la profundidad ortográfica afectó tanto la velocidad como la estrategia de
lectura.  
Los efectos de la
profundidad ortográfica
en el aprendizaje de la
lectura en sistemas de
escritura alfabético,
silábico y logográfico 
DIESE STUDIE untersuchte die Effekte der orthographischen Vertiefung beim Erlernen des Lesens innerhalb al-
phabetischer, syllabischer und logographischer Schriften. Kinder zwischen 6 und 15 Jahren lesen laut vor, im
transparenten syllabischen japanischen Hiragana, in Alphabeten mit steigender orthographischer Tiefe (albanisch,
griechisch, englisch) und orthographisch unscharfen japanischen Kanji-Ideogrammen, mit Einzelheiten kreuzweise-
liguistisch verglichen auf Worthäufigkeit. Diese Studie analysierte die Genauigkeit der Antwort, Latenz und der
Fehlerarten. Genauigkeit verlief korrelativ mit der Vertiefung: Hiragana wurde sorgfältiger gelesen als, umgekehrt,
albanisch, griechisch, englisch und Kanji. Je tiefer die Orthographie, je geringer war die Latenz als eine Funktion der
Wortlänge, desto größer war das Verhältnis an Fehlern aufgrund von Nichtbeantwortungen, und um so mehr
neigten die wesentlichen Fehler Ganzwortsubstitutionen zu sein, anstatt Nichtwort-Falschaussprachen.
Orthographische Vertiefung beeinflusste daher beides, Grad und Strategie des Lesens. 
Die Effekte
orthographischer
Vertiefung beim
Erlernen des Lesens
von alphabetischen,
syllabischen und
logographischen
Schriften
ABSTRACTS
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 439
440
CETTE ÉTUDE s’est intéressée aux effets de la profondeur orthographique sur l’apprentissage de la lecture avec des
écritures alphabétique, syllabique, et logographique. Des enfants de 6 à 15 ans ont lu à haute voix avec le syl-
labique japonais transparent qu’est l’hiragana, avec des alphabets de plus grande profondeur orthographique (al-
banais, grec, anglais), et avec les idéogrammes orthographiquement opaques que sont les kanji japonais, les items
ayant été appariés d’une langue à l’autre quant à la fréquence des mots. L’exactitude des réponses, leur latence et
les types d’erreurs ont été analysés. L’exactitude est corrélée à la profondeur : l’hiragana est lu avec moins d’erreurs
que, dans l’ordre, l’albanais, le grec, l’anglais, et le kanji. Plus l’orthographe est profonde, moins la latence dépend
de la longueur du mot, plus grande est la proportion d’erreurs qui sont des non-réponses, et plus les erreurs sub-
stantielles tendent à être des substitutions de mots entiers plutôt que de mauvaises prononciations de non-mots.
La profondeur orthographique affecte donc aussi bien la vitesse que la façon de lire.
Les effets de la
profondeur
orthographique
sur l’apprentissage
de la lecture
d’écritures
alphabétique,
syllabique, et
logographique
ABSTRACTS
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 440
It further predicts the consequence that children
learning to read a transparent orthography where
sound–symbol mappings are regular and consistent
should learn to read aloud and to spell faster than
those learning an opaque orthography where the
cues to pronunciation are more ambiguous.
There have been some recent demonstrations
that, as predicted by the orthographic depth hypoth-
esis, learning to read a transparent orthography such
as German (Wimmer & Hummer, 1990), Greek
(Goswami, Porpodas, & Wheelwright, 1997), Italian
(Thorstad, 1991), Spanish (Goswami, Gombert, &
De Barrera, 1998), Turkish (Öney & Durgunoglu,
1997), or Welsh (Ellis & Hooper, 2001) is easier
than learning to read an orthographically opaque lan-
guage such as French or English (Goswami et al.,
1998; Landerl, Wimmer, & Frith, 1997). Seymour,
Aro, and Erskine (2003) compared the abilities of
first-grade children to read familiar words and simple
nonwords in English and 12 other European orthog-
raphies. The results showed that children from most
European countries were accurate and fluent in read-
ing before the end of the first school year, with word
reading accuracies exceeding 90% in all except the
more opaque orthographies of Portuguese, French,
Danish, and, particularly, English. Seymour, Aro,
and Erskine attributed these findings to orthographic
depth, which affected both word and nonword read-
ing, and to syllabic complexity, which affected non-
word decoding. These findings suggested that the
rate of learning to read in English was more than
twice as slow as in the other orthographies.
The orthographic depth
hypothesis and strategy of
reading different scripts 
The orthographic depth hypothesis postulates
that there are different routes to fluent reading that
are dependent on the nature of a particular orthogra-
phy. Fluent English readers’ ability to read nonwords
like nabe or sloppendash demonstrates the availability
of a route to reading using decoding, where pronun-
ciation is assembled from known symbol–sound as-
sociations. Their ability to pronounce irregular or
inconsistent words such as island or Wednesday im-
plicates the availability of another reading route, one
where the word cannot be decoded entirely by
matching symbols and sounds. Learners of English
use different strategies of reading at different stages
of development; they move from recognizing whole
words (logographic reading), through a stage where
they begin to apply sound–symbol correspondences
(alphabetic reading), to skilled reading that predomi-
nantly involves direct lexical access by way of the
orthography, at least for high-frequency words (or-
thographic reading) (Ehri, 1999; Frith, 1985; Marsh,
Friedman, Welch, & Desberg, 1981). Readers of
transparent orthographies are more likely to succeed
in reading by means of alphabetic reading strategies
than readers of opaque orthographies, and their dif-
ferential histories of success or failure may determine
their respective strategies, with readers of transparent
scripts being more likely to rely on alphabetic read-
ing strategies. Thus, there are two sides to the ortho-
graphic depth hypothesis: (a) Transparent
orthographies support word recognition involving
phonology, and (b) opaque orthographies encourage
a reader to process words by accessing the lexicon
and meaning via the word’s visual orthographic
structure (Katz & Frost, 1992).
Support for this hypothesis comes from three
types of evidence. First, learners of transparent
orthographies are better able to read nonwords.
Learners of German (Wimmer & Goswami, 1994)
and Spanish (Lopez & Gonzalez, 1999) are more able
to read nonwords than are learners of English (Rack,
Snowling, & Olson, 1992). Second, learners of trans-
parent and opaque orthographies produce different
patterns of reading errors. Adherence to an alphabetic
decoding strategy produces errors that are mispro-
nunciations, whereas orthographic reading strategies
generate visually similar, real-word substitution er-
rors. The majority of the reading errors of German
(Wimmer & Hummer, 1990) and Welsh (Ellis &
Hooper, 2001) children are nonwords, whereas
young English-speaking children make frequent read-
ing errors that are actual words (Seymour & Elder,
1986; Stuart & Coltheart, 1988). Finally, there is a
stronger relationship between word length and read-
ing latency in transparent orthographies. Ellis and
Hooper showed that word length determined 70% of
the difference in times to read words in Welsh, but
only 22% in English, suggesting that Welsh pronun-
ciations were assembled by means of a left-to-right
parse of the written string, with longer words conse-
quently requiring more time to recognize.
Such findings support the hypothesis that
transparent orthographies promote faster rates of
reading acquisition and encourage an alphabetic
reading strategy. The current study aimed to extend
the comparison of effects of orthography on reading
acquisition. Previous research assessed the effects of
orthographic depth within alphabetic languages. The
goal of the present study was to make further com-
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 441
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 441
parisons among alphabetic writing systems and to
compare these with other types of script positioned
more extremely on the dimension of orthographic
depth, a highly transparent syllabic script and a
deeply opaque logographic one. 
Methods of cross-linguistic
reading comparison 
It is difficult to compare literacy development
across different orthographies because the stimuli
must necessarily be different. So, how can assessment
materials across languages be matched? Traditionally,
there have been three main approaches. First, readers
of different languages can be compared for their abil-
ity to read nonwords. For example, Wimmer and
Goswami (1994) showed that children learning to
read German were better able to read nonsense
words derived from number words such as vechs and
zieben from sechs and sieben than were children learn-
ing to read English able to read items such as tix and
feven from six and seven. This method has since been
widely adopted because it provides an index of chil-
dren’s decoding abilities for novel material. Second,
cross-linguistic translation equivalents can be com-
pared for readability. Landerl et al. (1997) showed
that German children were better able to read their
transparent orthography instantiation of pairs of
translation equivalents (e.g., Pflug-plough) than were
matched learners of English. Thorstad (1991) trans-
lated a difficult passage of 56 words, taken from an
Italian journal for adults, into English to be used as a
reading and spelling test. Spencer and Hanley
(2003) showed that Welsh children were better able
than their English peers to read both nonwords and
translation-equivalent words. A third approach has
been to sample high-frequency words from children’s
school reading schemes. Thus, Goswami et al.
(1998) showed that Spanish children were able to
read more of a sample of eight monosyllabic and
eight disyllabic words in their language than were
matched French or English children. Seymour et al.
(2003) had children read 18 familiar high-frequency
content words and 18 function words. The words
were sampled from the reading material used in the
early stage of primary schooling in each language. 
But each of these methods has its limitations as
a comparative measure of reading acquisition in dif-
ferent languages. Nonword reading ability indexes
children’s decoding skill, but nonwords may not be
good indicators of skill at reading real words.
Translations are rarely equivalent either in the rela-
tive frequencies of words or symbols or in their range
of usage in the respective languages. Although the
sampling of test items from typical school textbooks
is a reasonable start at controlling exposure factors,
textbook writers tune their books to their audience
and to the difficulty of the task with which their
readers are faced, so there is no guarantee that a read-
ing text in one language is equivalent for comparable
children in another language. 
The current study, therefore, took an alterna-
tive approach to the issue of whether it is easier to
learn to read in one language than another.
Specifically we developed parallel reading tests for
which the items in the two languages were matched
for word frequency. A longstanding method of as-
sessing an individual’s ability to read aloud has been
to see how many items he or she can read from a
standardized list of approximately 100 words of
increasing difficulty. Illustrative examples are the
Schonell Graded Word Reading Test and the Wide
Range Achievement Tests. We extended this idea to
construct parallel cross-linguistic tests where, for
each language, the items are randomly selected from
100 frequency bands representing the most frequent
to the least frequent words of the language. Thus,
each test is a stratified random sample of the words
of the language, with pairs of test items in the two
languages being matched for frequency of written
occurrence. The matching process should not control
any other factors such as word length, imageability,
utility, morphological complexity, syntactic role,
semantic richness, orthographic complexity,
sound–symbol consistency, or any other intrinsic as-
pects of the languages under study that might affect
how easy or difficult it is to learn the words. Ideally,
everything to do with learning opportunity should
be matched; everything to do with language should
be free to vary. The rationale is based on input-dri-
ven perspectives of language acquisition: The learn-
ability of an item is largely dependent upon the
amount of experience a learner has with it and with
similar items. Thus, if children of two languages start
learning to read at the same time, and they have
roughly equivalent time on task, then, if the two or-
thographies are equally difficult to acquire, learners
of similar experience should be able to read words at
roughly the same frequency level. 
Ellis and Hooper (2001) used this method in
their comparisons of Welsh and English. The word
types that composed a representative million written
words of English (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Van Rijn,
1995) and Welsh (Ellis, O’Dochartaigh, Hicks,
Morgan, & Laporte, 2001) were sorted in decreasing
frequency of occurrence and sampled so that a test
442 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 442
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 443
word was selected at every decreasing step of 10,000
word tokens or its nearest approximation. The two
lists of 100 words were then used as frequency-
matched samples of written English and Welsh. This
method is promising in assessing the acquisition of
literacy in children learning to read in different lan-
guages and in the multiple languages of multiliterate
individuals for several reasons. First, it produces tests
that are matched in a principled fashion for input
frequency. Second, it generates a broad range of fre-
quencies of items, from approximately 60,000 words
per million to just 1 per million, and so it is appro-
priately discriminating for learners at different stages
of proficiency. Third, it is psychophysically scaled.
Psycholinguistic experimentation shows that there is
more of a linear relationship between proficiency
and log exposure than between proficiency and ex-
posure. The method of sampling used by Ellis and
Hooper effectively provided items representing log-
frequency strata. 
Extending the range of
comparison beyond alphabetic
orthographies
In the present study, we therefore used these
methods to develop tests matched cross-linguistically
for frequency of written exposure in order to com-
pare the rate of acquisition of reading in 6- to 15-
year-old children reading a range of different native
orthographies: the orthographically transparent syl-
labic Japanese hiragana system, alphabets of decreas-
ing orthographic transparency (Albanian, Greek, and
English), and the orthographically opaque ideo-
graphic Japanese kanji system. We also investigated
whether these different types of orthography affect
the strategies of lexical access adopted by learners, as
is predicted by the orthographic depth hypothesis. 
The orthographies investigated 
in this study 
Hiragana
Japanese orthography comprises four types of
script: hiragana and katakana (the kana), kanji, and
romaji (Kess & Miyamoto, 1999). Hiragana and
katakana are syllabic scripts. Most Japanese syllables
have the canonical shape of a consonant–vowel (CV)
combination and can be represented by single kana
symbols. There is one-to-one correspondence be-
tween hiragana and katakana symbols, with both sys-
tems containing 46 basic symbols (called seion): 40
unvoiced CV combinations, five vowels, and one
nasal coda. In addition to these, there are other char-
acters, including 25 symbols that are the voiced
equivalents of the basic seion formed by adding a spe-
cial mark for voicing or semivoicing, making a total
of 71 symbols in all. Most kana symbols have a sin-
gle, unique pronunciation, although combinations of
symbols and their use in certain word classes can
modify the pronunciation slightly (Akita & Hatano,
1999). Hiragana is mainly used for function words,
morphological endings, and the rest of the grammati-
cal scaffolding of Japanese sentences. Although
Japanese content words are usually written in kanji, it
is possible to write all native Japanese words in hira-
gana. Katakana is mainly used for foreign loan words
and Japanese interjections. Nomura (1980) estimated
that journals published in Japan contain 50% hira-
gana, 30% kanji, and 10% katakana. 
The regularity of the symbol–sound mappings
makes hiragana an exceptionally transparent orthog-
raphy. Furthermore, because children are better able
to break up speech and identify its syllable parts than
they are to segment it into phonemes (Alegria,
Pignot, & Morais, 1982; Liberman, Shankweiler,
Fischer, & Carter, 1974; Rozin & Gleitman, 1977),
the canonical CV syllable shape of spoken Japanese
allows for easy phonological segmentation. These
two factors should thus combine to promote fast ac-
quisition: The spoken language is easily segmented
into its syllable parts, and each of these individual
phonological units has its unique written symbol.
Learning to read and write in Japanese official-
ly begins at the age of 6, in the first grade of elemen-
tary school. The seion symbols are first introduced,
followed by the rest of hiragana. Katakana is intro-
duced in the latter half of the first grade and is
completed by the end of the second grade. Children
also start learning some easier kanji in the first
grade. Notwithstanding the official syllabus, most
preschoolers are able to read at least the 46 basic
hiragana by the time they start the first grade.
Shimamura and Mikami (1994) reported that 16%
of 3-year-olds, 59% of 4-year-olds, and 89% of 
5-year-olds could read 60 or more of the 71 
hiragana symbols. 
Albanian
Albanian forms a single branch of the Indo-
European family that is spoken by over three million
people in Albania and in parts of the former republic
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 443
of Yugoslavia, Greece, and Italy. The writing system
was not introduced until 1909, hence few languages
are more orthographically transparent than Albanian.
It uses Roman characters and has 36 letters: 29 con-
sonants and 7 vowels. Nine of the consonants are
presented as bigraphs (dh, gj, ll, nj, rr, sh, th, xh, zh).
These bigraphs are explicitly taught to the children as
separate “letters” of the alphabet, and if they appear
together are never considered as separate graphemes
(this rule does not apply to compound words, which
occur rather infrequently). The bidirectional
grapheme–phoneme and phoneme–grapheme map-
ping is consistent for both consonants and vowels.
These symbols do not change their sound according
to their position in the word. 
In Albania there are very few nursery schools,
and only a minority of preschoolers go to kinder-
garten. The consequence is that most first graders in
Albania enter school without letter or written word
awareness. The teaching of reading in Albanian pri-
mary schools is introduced in year 1. The official
teaching method is a whole-word method called the
Global Method. However, many teachers who have
been using phonics approaches for many years prefer
to use mixed methods including both whole-word
and phonics approaches (Hoxhallari, 2000).
Greek
Greek is highly regular in its symbol-to-sound
mappings for reading, though less so in its sound–
symbol mappings for spelling. In spoken Greek there
are only five vowels that sound the same whether
stressed or unstressed (Harris & Giannouli, 1999).
While the majority of Greek words are polysyllabic,
there are fewer than half the syllable types of English,
with the majority of them being open syllables of the
consonant–vowel type (V, CV, VC, CCV, CCCV)
(Magoulas, 1979). As with Japanese, these syllable
characteristics presumably allow children an easier
task of phonological segmentation of their spoken
language. In the written language, each letter’s single
sound remains relatively constant in different con-
texts (Chitiri & Willows, 1994). 
Nevertheless, written Greek is not entirely
transparent. Whereas the written form has remained
essentially intact since its development as an alpha-
betic script, the spoken language has undergone ma-
jor developmental changes in its evolution toward
modern Greek (Babiniotis, 1980; Tombaidis, 1987;
Triantaphyllidis, 1913). As a result, modern spelling
is not entirely phonetic but has a morphophonemic
nature that reflects the etymology of words
(Porpodas, 1991, 1999). Spoken Greek is composed
of 32 phonemes that are represented by the 24
Greek letters (Bakamidis & Carayannis, 1987;
Triantaphyllidis, 1980). Several phoneme–grapheme
inconsistencies occur, including homophone vowels
and vowel and consonant clusters (diphthongs and
dipsipha). The pronunciation of dipsipha varies ac-
cording to their position in the word and the context
in which they occur. In exceptional cases, some let-
ters are almost voiceless (Porpodas, 1991; Tombaidis,
1987; Triantaphyllidis, 1913). Greek has the added
feature whereby the position of prosodic stress is
marked for each written word. Stress, which can
occur on any of the final three syllables of a word
depending on a variety of morphological, phonologi-
cal, and lexical factors, must be properly interpreted
for successful reading because there are many words
that are differentiated only by stress (Tombaidis,
1986). 
Reading instruction is standardized in Greece.
It usually starts at 5.5 to 6 years old, beginning with
letter–sound correspondences. Thereafter, a synthetic
phonics method is used to encourage phonological
recoding of simple CV syllables that form simple
words, and there is an emphasis on rhyming words.
Once children have established good letter–sound
knowledge and have built an initial sight vocabulary,
letter names are taught and a phonics method is used
to teach grapheme–phoneme correspondences that
include more complex syllables like CCV. The stress
mark is also introduced. The basic reading process is
typically well established by the end of the first grade
(Harris & Giannouli, 1999; Porpodas, 1991).
English
The English alphabet consists of 26 letters (5
vowels and 21 consonants) that represent over 40
phonemes. Letters or letter combinations are often
ambiguous in terms of the sounds they represent. As
Venezky (1970) concluded from his analysis of the
structure of English orthography, “a person who at-
tempts to scan left to right, letter by letter, pronounc-
ing as he goes, could not correctly read most English
words” (p. 127). The 5 written vowels are particularly
varied in their mappings to speech, and there are 12
vowel digraphs, 6 of which have alternate pronuncia-
tions according to their position. Consonants are
more consistent in their grapheme–phoneme corre-
spondences, with the exceptions of c and g, which are
read differently according to the vowels that follow.
Nevertheless, only three consonants (n, r, and v) have
only one sound that cannot be produced by other
combinations and are never silent (Venezky). Spoken
English also has a complex syllable structure with
444 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 444
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 445
many different types of syllables, most of them closed
(e.g., CVC, CVCC, CCVC). These characteristics
pose difficulty for children learning to phonologically
segment their spoken language.
Although English is varied in its grapheme–
phoneme correspondences, it has a higher degree of
spelling–sound consistency at the level of the rime.
Treiman, Mullennix, Bijeljac-Babic, and Richmond-
Welty (1995) estimated that the pronunciation of
modern English written vowels is only 51% consis-
tent over different words, whereas initial and final
consonants are much more consistent (96% and
91%, respectively), as are rime units (77%). For ex-
ample, a is pronounced differently in cat, call, car,
cake, and care, but it is pronounced the same in the
rimes cat, hat, and mat. Phonological segmentation
into onset-rime units and the use of orthographic
rime analogies have been shown to be important
processes in learning to read and spell English
(Goswami, 1999, 2000; Goswami et al., 1998;
Treiman et al., 1995).
The majority of English children begin preread-
ing exposure quite early, at 3 or 4 years old. In
Nursery, children are taught the shapes of most letters
of the alphabet and introduced to book use. They are
read to on a daily basis, and there is emphasis on rep-
etition and rhyming. In Reception, there is at least 30
minutes per day dedicated solely to reading. There is
much use of word-building, pattern recognition, and
odd-one-out games. In year 1, the recognition of the
words as a whole is supported with the use of look-
and-say and odd-one-out games. Flash cards are used
to introduce individual words, to build a starting
sight vocabulary, and to form simple sentences.
Children are taught families of word patterns that
share orthographic and phonological resemblance at
onset or rime. Phonics is typically introduced at the
end of year 1, and children are encouraged to practice
sounding out and blending phonemes. Literacy re-
mains a significant part of the national curriculum
right through Upper Key Stage 2, that is 9 to 11 years
old. In sum, much time and effort is put into teach-
ing children to learn to read in English.
Kanji 
The kanji writing system originated in the log-
ographs of Chinese orthography. Content words in
Japanese are usually written in kanji because doing
so resolves the ambiguity of the many homophones
of spoken Japanese. The higher homophony rate in
Japanese than in other languages is due to its simple
CV spoken syllable structure, which restricts the
number of possible spoken syllables that can be used
individually and in combination to form a spoken
word (Akita & Hatano, 1999). In general, there are
two ways to read a given kanji, referred to as kunyo-
mi or onyomi. Kunyomi is the Japanese word corre-
sponding to the logogram; onyomi is a pronunciation
that is similar to the original Chinese. Thus the kanji
(tree) has the kunyomi “ki” and the onyomi
“moku”; the kanji (forest) is pronounced, respec-
tively, “hayashi” and “rin.” According to Kess and
Miyamoto (1999), between 12,000 and 50,000 en-
tries are included in comprehensive kanji dictionar-
ies. The Japanese educational system explicitly
teaches a set of 1,945 Joyo Kanji (kanji for daily
use). However, Kess and Miyamoto argued that most
Japanese know many more than these and that 3,000
or more kanji are required to read a daily newspaper. 
Children start learning 80 of the easier Joyo
Kanji toward the end of the first grade. The sequence
of introduction of kanji in the curriculum is standard-
ized, and by the end of elementary school children are
expected to have mastered 1,006 characters (National
Language Research Institute, 1988). They are expect-
ed to master the complete set of Joyo Kanji by the end
of the third year of junior high school. 
Research questions
This study was designed to compare the rate of
reading acquisition in 6- to 15-year-old children
learning to read in a transparent orthographic system
(the syllabic Japanese hiragana), in alphabets of
decreasing orthographic transparency (Albanian,
Greek, and English), and in the ideographic Japanese
kanji system. 
The orthographic depth hypothesis predicts
that the more transparent the orthography, the faster
children will learn to read aloud. The almost perfect
symbol–sound correspondence of hiragana, its repre-
sentation of psycholinguistically accessible syllables
rather than phonemes, and the simple syllable struc-
ture of Japanese each contributed to the expectation
that learning to read aloud will be easiest in hira-
gana. All of the alphabetic scripts provide cues to
pronunciation, but some of the systems are more
regular and consistent than others. Thus, we expect-
ed the alphabetic systems to be the next most easy to
acquire, but that the ease with which reading is ac-
quired would vary within alphabetic systems with
the more transparent languages (Albanian and
Greek) being easier to learn than the more opaque
language (English). Finally, we believed that the
ideographic kanji system, which contains few or no
cues to assembled pronunciation, would be the most
difficult to acquire.
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 445
The orthographic depth hypothesis also led us
to predict that these different scripts would affect the
strategies of lexical access that were adopted by learn-
ers, with transparent orthographies supporting word
recognition involving phonology, and opaque or-
thographies encouraging readers to process words by
accessing the lexicon and meaning via the word’s
visual appearance. As in Ellis and Hooper (2001),
reading strategy was assessed by examining the rela-
tion between word length and response latency in
each script, and by analyzing and categorizing the
types of errors that children made while reading. It
was predicted that opaque scripts would promote sit-
uations where a child is unable to make any response
at all (nonresponses), along with mistakes where the
child says a wrong word that is visually similar to the
target (whole-word substitutions such as computer
for complete and near for never). Transparent scripts,
in contrast, were expected to be associated with rela-
tively few nonresponses or whole-word substitutions,
but with mistakes that result in mispronunciations
that are nonwords (nonword errors such as polical or
poltac for political).
Method
Summary of design
This study, designed to assess the effects of writ-
ing system upon reading acquisition among 6- to 
15-year-old children, involved the comparison of op-
portunity samples of participants learning to read in
five different native scripts in four countries. These
children had been taught by different teachers, in dif-
ferent classrooms and schools, using potentially differ-
ent methods of instruction in different cultures. It is
impossible to control all of these potential confounds.
However, we tried to ensure that our participants were
matched on verbal and nonverbal abilities, and, when
comparison cell levels were not exactly equated on
these measures after selection, we statistically con-
trolled them. Following Paulesu et al. (2000), we as-
sessed children’s verbal ability using a picture-naming
task measuring accuracy and latency. Nonverbal rea-
soning ability was estimated with use of items from
the Standard Progressive Matrices. Subsequent 
comparisons across language groups could thus be
statistically controlled for any differences in these
background abilities with use of analysis of covariance.
The first wave of testing involved English, Greek, and
Japanese scripts. The Albanian data were collected one
year later in order to triangulate the Greek findings
against another orthographically transparent script.
Limited resources meant that we were only able to test
Albanian children 7 to 9 years old and that we were
unable to assess their ability on control measures relat-
ing to verbal and nonverbal abilities. This abbreviated
testing means that the Albanian accuracy data must be
viewed only as supplemental findings to add perspec-
tive on the more rigorous and extensive results from
the other language groups. Within each language
group we assessed the relation between word length
and latency and performed qualitative analyses of the
children’s reading errors as evidence of their strategies
of lexical access.
Participants 
Children were recruited by opportunity sam-
pling from areas close to the homes of the research-
ers. The parents, guardians, or teachers of each child
received a brief description of the nature and the
goals of the research and were asked to sign a con-
sent form authorizing participation if the children
themselves also agreed to take part. Our goal was to
recruit roughly 15 students of each language at the
following ages: 6 to 7 years, 8 to 9 years, 10 to 11
years, 12 to 13 years, and 14 to 15 years. The age
characteristics of all language groups are shown in
Table 1.  
Greek children were recruited from among the
investigators’ friends and family in Volo, Athens,
Pireaus, Evia, Rodos, and Korinthos. Japanese chil-
dren were recruited from municipal primary and ju-
nior high schools in the Gifu prefecture of Japan.
English children were recruited from four monolin-
gual (English) private primary and secondary schools
situated in North Wales (Colwyn Bay, Bangor, and
Menai Bridge). The large majority came from mono-
lingual English-speaking families, although a few
were able to speak some Welsh. 
The Albanian sample came from a primary
school located in Korçë in southeast Albania. They
were average-achieving pupils on the most recent
math test administered by the classroom teacher. 
Materials
Reading
The reading tests for each language were con-
structed with an adaptation of the method used by
Ellis and Hooper (2001), sampling every decreasing
10,000 word token step from a frequency-sorted 
1-million-word language corpus. This original
446 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 446
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 447
method, although broadly satisfactory in producing
equal strata in terms of log frequency, did cause
some deviation from linearity at lower frequencies
(see Figure 1). To correct for this lack of linearity, we
compiled 100-word reading tests for the different
languages by selecting randomly from the 100 de-
creasing log10-frequency strata bounded by the most
and least frequent words in 1-million-word counts.
This helped to ensure that the reading tests were
matched across the various languages in terms of
word frequency. Word form lists were used, with in-
flected forms (e.g., walked, walks, walking) being
enumerated separately rather than gathered under
the root (walk). The resultant items for each lan-
guage are shown in Appendix A.
The English test was formed by taking the
word types that comprised 1 million token word fre-
quency profiles for English in the CELEX Lexical
Database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1995),
which estimated these written word frequencies from
analysis of the 16.6 million token Cobuild corpus of
samples of written English from hundreds of differ-
ent sources including newspapers, magazines, fiction
and nonfiction books, brochures, leaflets, reports,
letters, and so on, with the majority of texts originat-
ing after 1990. This 1 million token list was made
up of word types ranging in frequencies from 59,739
(the) down to 1 (surveyed). The list was then split
into 100 log-frequency strata with a word being ran-
domly selected from each of these.
The Greek test was formed by taking the word
types that composed approximately 1.5 million token
word frequency profiles for Greek taken from the
weekly newspaper TO BHMA by Stathis Stamatatos
(personal communication, 2000) of University of
Patras. A 1 million token subset was then counted to
produce a word type list ranging in frequencies per
million from 52,887 to 1 .
The list was then split into 100 log-frequency strata
with a word being randomly selected from each. 
The Japanese tests were based on the frequency
lists from Nihongo-no Goitokusei (Lexical properties
of Japanese) (Amano & Kondo, 2000). This database
is the largest electronically provided frequency count
database for Japanese words and characters in kanji, hi-
ragana, and katakana and is taken from a corpus of the
Asahi newspapers published over 14 years, from 1986
to 1998. A 1-million token subset was then counted to
produce a word type list ranging in frequencies from
71,546 ( in both lists) to 1 ( in kana, 
in kanji). The list was then split into 100 log-frequency
strata with a word being randomly selected from each.
Where possible, each of these words was then present-
ed in its hiragana form for the kana test and its kanji
form for the kanji test. This was not possible for the
first 30 or so most frequent words of the language,
which are all usually only written as hiragana. 
The Albanian reading test was designed by
randomly sampling one word from each of 100
successive strata of decreasing log10 written word fre-
quency from an Albanian text corpus, created by the
fourth author, comprising just over 1 million words,
from a novel, the New Testament from the Christian
Bible, one children’s book, one online Albanian news-
paper (dates ranging from early January to late
February 2001), and two short passages from books
advertised on the Internet. The most frequent word
of the list was të (you) with frequency 67,713 in a
million, and one of the last words was lëvdoni
(praise), which occurred only once. 
The resultant frequencies of test items for each
of these reading tests are plotted in Figure 1 along-
side those from the original Ellis and Hooper (2001)
English and Welsh tests. This figure shows the im-
proved linearity of log word frequency sampling that
resulted from the changed sampling procedure. It
also illustrates the tight frequency-matching of the
Age bands (months)
Language 73–102 103–120 121–150 151–183 Total Girls Boys
English 15 14 11 27 67 37 30
Greek 18 26 5 30 79 33 46
Japanese 30 11 30 71 30 41
Albanian 34 26 60 29 31
Total 97 66 27 87 277 129 148
TABLE 1
NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN EACH AGE BAND FOR EACH LANGUAGE GROUP
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 447
items in the current English, Greek, Japanese, and
Albanian tests. That this design produces tests of ad-
equate internal consistency is indicated by the high
reliability of the reading accuracy scores over these
items for the English, kanji, Greek, and hiragana
children, Cronbach’s alpha = 0.976. 
These scripts did differ in terms of the length
in characters of the words sampled, with alphabetic
scripts having most characters per word (English M
= 5.25, SD = 2.65; Greek M = 6.28, SD = 3.25;
Albanian M = 5.36, SD = 2.94), syllabic hiragana
fewer (M = 3.13, SD = 1.64), and logographic kanji
fewest of all (M = 2.04, SD = 0.84).
Picture naming
A picture-naming task was used to assess
general verbal ability in the Greek, Japanese, and
English children. The stimuli were 20 pictures devel-
oped by Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) that were
standardized for such variables as familiarity and
visual complexity. The particular items (objects and
animals), chosen because of their high name agree-
ment and name frequency, were the following:
house, hand, saw, car, eye, book, key, watch, dog,
telephone, television, hat, piano, pencil, guitar, lion,
umbrella, elephant, helicopter, and butterfly. 
Nonverbal reasoning
Items from the Standard Progressive Matrices
were used to assess nonverbal reasoning ability in the
English, Greek, and Japanese samples. Three practice
items were followed by a selection of 15 items in in-
creasing difficulty. The items were presented one at a
time at the top of a page of paper and followed by
six alternative answers.
Procedure 
Children were tested individually by a native
speaker of their respective languages either in a quiet
familiar room within the school (for the English,
Japanese, and Albanian children) or in the child’s or
448 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
FIGURE 1
THE MATCHED WRITTEN FREQUENCY PROFILES OF THE HIRAGANA, GREEK, ALBANIAN,
ENGLISH, AND KANJI READING TESTS, ALONG WITH THOSE OF ELLIS AND HOOPER (2001)
FOR ENGLISH AND WELSH
Reading test word number
lo
g 1
0
w
or
d 
fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
pe
r 
m
ill
io
n
5
4
3
2
1
0
English (Ellis and Hooper)
Welsh (Ellis and Hooper)
Greek
English
Japansese
Albanian
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 448
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 449
experimenter’s home (for the Greek-speaking chil-
dren). The picture-naming task was presented first
because of its ease and simplicity, followed by the
reading test and then the nonverbal reasoning test.
Reading
An Apple Macintosh laptop programmed in
SuperLab (Abboud & Sugar, 1997) presented the
reading items. Accuracy, latency, and reading time
were measured for each word. A microphone was
used to detect the onset of the child’s pronunciation
of a spoken word, with voice onset time being meas-
ured in milliseconds from the visual presentation of
the word midscreen. The experimenter pressed a key
when the child had finished saying each word, thus
allowing a measure of reading time for each word.
The experimenter also keyed in whether each re-
sponse was correct or not. Children’s responses were
tape recorded to allow subsequent analysis of errors. 
The reading test items were presented in order
of decreasing frequency after three high-frequency
animal names had served as practice items in order
to familiarize children with the procedure. Children
were instructed to try to read aloud each word as
quickly as possible after its appearance on screen.
They were encouraged to “have a go” at each one,
even if they did not know it at first sight. Testing
stopped after the child had made five consecutive re-
sponses that were not correct. Each Japanese child
did both the hiragana and then, after a short break,
the kanji versions of the reading test.
The Albanian children were not tested by com-
puter. Instead, the procedure of Ellis and Hooper
(2001) was followed. The word list was printed with
17 words per A4-sized page, double-spaced, centered
on the line, and set in bold lowercase 20-point
Times font. Accuracy and reading latency for correct
answers were measured. A piece of plain card was
used to cover the list, and the child was asked to
move the card down when the first experimenter said
“next” and to read the following word immediately.
A stopwatch was used to record latencies, from the
onset of word presentation to the response onset,
and responses were also tape recorded for further
analysis. Use of a stopwatch in this way provided suf-
ficient reliability of measurement. The interobserver
correlation between the latencies measured by two
separate observers measuring the word readings of
the same child was r = 0.93, p < .01. Nevertheless,
because latency was measured by stopwatch rather
than by computer for the Albanian children, we do
not analyze their latencies here.
Picture naming 
The picture stimuli were presented in a similar
fashion to that in the reading test, with a micro-
phone being used to measure voice onset time and
the experimenter determining whether each verbal
response was appropriate as a name for that picture
in their language. The pictures were presented in a
fixed order as described in the Materials section of
this article after three additional pictures had served
as practice items. Children were instructed to name
each picture as quickly as possible after its appear-
ance on screen. For each child, we computed the
total number of pictures correctly named and the
average latency for these correctly named items.
Nonverbal reasoning
The experimenter showed the Standards
Progressive Matrices items one at a time, and a child
was asked to solve each puzzle by pointing out the
picture alternative that would properly fill in the
missing part of the top diagram. The test ended after
five successive errors. The nonverbal score for each
child was simply the total number correct.
Group matching
We attempted to match the three main lan-
guage groups for age, picture-naming ability, and
nonverbal reasoning. Limited resources meant that
we were only able to recruit 7- to 9-year-old Albanian
children and that we were unable to assess their abili-
ty on control measures relating to verbal and nonver-
bal abilities. The main language groups were fairly
well matched for age in months, English (M = 133.0,
SD = 34.6), Greek (M = 125.1, SD = 32.1), Japanese
(M = 127.3, SD = 42.8), F(2, 214), p < 1, ns.
Nevertheless, with such a large age spread, it is appro-
priate that subsequent analyses of language differ-
ences either include age as an explicit factor or else
control for age with use of ANCOVA. On picture-
naming accuracy, the English, Greek, and Japanese
groups were equally able: English (M = 95.8%, SD =
12.5), Greek (M = 93.0%, SD = 10.0), and Japanese
(M = 95.7%, SD = 4.8), F(2, 212) = 2.05, ns, age
corrected F(2, 211) = 1.80, ns. However, it appeared
that the Greek children were somewhat slower in
their picture-naming RTs (msec): English (M =
869.1, SD = 239.6), Greek (M = 1079.8, SD =
364.1), and Japanese (M = 898.4, SD = 253.3), F(2,
212) = 11.15, p < .001, age corrected F(2, 211) =
10.69, p < .001. The English, Greek, and Japanese
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 449
groups differed significantly in their nonverbal rea-
soning, with the advantage going to the Greek stu-
dents. The number of Ravens problems solved
correctly by each group were English (M = 5.30, SD
= 2.47), Greek (M = 6.82, SD = 3.36), and Japanese
(M = 5.14, SD = 2.76), F(2, 213) = 7.60, p < .001,
age corrected F(2, 212) = 11.29, p < .001. 
Thus the English and Japanese groups were
broadly equivalent in their verbal abilities and non-
verbal reasoning, but, for whatever reasons, the
Greek students showed some advantage in nonverbal
reasoning but a relative slowness in verbal access for
picture naming. For these reasons, we used picture
naming and nonverbal reasoning as covariates in
subsequent analyses.
Results
Results focus on the comparison of English,
Greek, and Japanese orthographies. Because only a
younger sample of Albanian children were assessed,
and then with only a subset of the measures, these
are only described with regard to their reading accu-
racy and the nature of their errors.
Reading accuracy
There were statistically significant differences
in reading accuracy as a function of orthography in
both a by-word ANOVA using test words 1–100 as
repeated measures across orthography, F(3, 97) =
72.20, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.420, and in a by-subjects
ANOVA using children within orthography group as
the error term, F(3, 283) = 21.01, p < .001, ¯2 =
0.182. Japanese children could read on average 91.4
(SD = 12.8) words in their hiragana reading test.
Next came the Greek children who could read 86.8
(SD = 14.9) words. The English children could read
on average 82.0 (SD = 18.8) words. Finally came the
Japanese children reading in kanji who managed just
66.1 (SD = 30.4) words. 
The effect of age was statistically significant,
F(1, 282) = 245.88, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.466. With age
correction, the effect of script increased, F(3, 282) =
40.47, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.301, with means corrected
for an age of 128 months being Japanese hiragana
(M = 91.6, SE = 1.8), Greek (M = 87.9, SE = 1.8),
English (M = 80.2, SE = 1.8), and Japanese kanji (M
= 66.4, SE = 1.8). The effect of orthography also re-
mained significant when controlling statistically for
age, picture-naming accuracy, picture-naming time,
and nonverbal intelligence, F(3, 275) = 37.76, p <
.001, ¯2 = 0.292, with all pairwise comparisons be-
ing statistically significant at p < .05.
These differences are presented in Figure 2,
which plots the proportion of children in each or-
thography group who were able to read each test
word correctly. As log word frequency decreased
from test word 1 to test word 100, so performance
declined for all orthographies. But there were clear
separations between them, particularly on the lower
frequency items 70–100 where the vast majority of
hiragana words were read by more than 80% of the
children; next came the Greek items, typically read
by 60–70% of the children; then the English and
kanji items, which overlapped at these lowest fre-
quencies but separated in the mid-frequencies 40–70
where the advantage is clearly to the English items. 
Table 2 shows the reading accuracy levels as a
function of orthography and age. When these effects
were assessed in a two-factor ANOVA (four scripts
 four age bands, as described in Table 1), the
orthography-by-age interaction was statistically sig-
nificant, F(7, 273) = 33.63, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.463,
thus qualifying the main effects of orthography F(3,
273) = 33.93, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.272, and age band,
F(3, 273) = 147.24, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.618. These ef-
fects remained statistically significant when control-
ling for both verbal fluency (picture-naming time)
and nonverbal reasoning ability: orthography by age
interaction, F(7, 266) = 33.35, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.467;
script, F(3, 266) = 31.65, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.263; and
age band, F(3, 266) = 132.54, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.599.
Bonferroni testing showed that the four orthography
groups were significantly different from one another
in terms of accuracy in the youngest 73–102-month
age band at p < .001; they did not differ significantly
from one another at the two higher age bands span-
ning 121–150 and 151–183 months. Figure 3 illus-
trates this interaction of orthography and age on
reading accuracy using more fine-grained age incre-
ments and including the supplemental accuracy data
for the Albanian children. The Albanian year 1 chil-
dren were able to read 79.5 of their words (SD =
16.4), the year 2 children 86.2 (SD = 10.81), and
the year 3 children 94.7 (SD = 4.73)—a significant
age effect, F(2, 59) = 7.35, p < .01. These levels are
close, although numerically slightly superior, to
those of the readers of Greek, which similarly is an
orthographically transparent alphabet.
Reading onset latency
Analysis of the effect of orthography on latency
using the orthography group mean latency on each
of the test words 1–100 as repeated measures showed
450 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 450
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 451
the effect of orthography to be statistically signifi-
cant, F(3, 97) = 23.46, p < .001, ¯2 = 0.42, with the
mean latencies in milliseconds being Greek (M =
900.5, SD = 11.8), Japanese hiragana (M = 883.9,
SD = 17.1), English (M = 827.1, SD = 19.0), and
Japanese kanji (M = 786.5, SD = 14.3). 
Table 3 shows the mean reading latency for
each orthography and age band. Because the accura-
cy analyses showed that the youngest Japanese
children were unable to read beyond the higher fre-
quency words of Japanese that are written only in
hiragana, the latencies in this cell do not properly
reflect kanji usage, and these are therefore excluded
from subsequent analyses. When latency was assessed
in a two-factor ANOVA (three scripts [Greek,
English, hiragana]  four age bands), there was a
Age bands (months)
Orthography 73–102 103–120 121–150 151–183
Hiragana 89.0 84.0 96.4
(5.8) (29.6) (2.3)
Greek 70.8 87.6 89.6 95.3
(15.9) (12.2) (11.7) (8.0)
English 57.5 80.3 90.9 92.8
(12.1) (15.0) (11.1) (12.4)
Kanji 32.1 82.9 94.5
(6.9) (4.0) (3.5)
TABLE 2
MEAN (SD) NUMBERS OF WORDS READ CORRECTLY BY CHILDREN OF EACH
ORTHOGRAPHY GROUP IN EACH AGE BAND
FIGURE 2
THE PROPORTION OF CHILDREN IN EACH ORTHOGRAPHY GROUP READING EACH TEST
WORD CORRECTLY
Pr
op
or
tio
n 
re
ad
 c
or
re
ct
ly
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Reading test word number
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 451
significant orthography by age interaction, F(5, 187)
= 4.33, p < .001, which qualified the main effects of
age band, F(3, 187) = 28.17, p < .001, and orthogra-
phy, F(2, 187) = 2.71, p = .07. These statistically sig-
nificant effects remained when controlling for verbal
fluency (picture-naming time) and nonverbal reason-
ing ability: orthography by age interaction, F(5, 182)
= 3.54, p < .005, and age band, F(3, 182) = 15.7, p <
.001. When we focused on latencies of the correct
responses in the younger children in the 73–102-
month age band, Bonferroni testing showed a statis-
tically significant contrast between the Greek and
English latencies (p < .001) and between the two
more transparent orthographies, Greek and hiragana,
combined against the more opaque English (p <
.001). The four group latency averages did not differ
significantly from each other at the two higher age
bands spanning 121–150 and 151–183 months.
Figure 4 illustrates the interaction of orthography
and age on reading latency using more fine-grained
age increments.
Latency as a function of word length
As already reported, there were differences in
the average length of the reading test items across
languages, with alphabetic orthographies having
most characters per word (English, M = 5.25; Greek,
M = 6.28; Albanian, M = 5.36), syllabic hiragana
fewer (M = 3.13), and logographic kanji fewest of all
(M = 2.04). 
We analyzed reading onset time for correct
items as a function of word length within each or-
thography. Regression analyses demonstrated that la-
tency of correct responses is more a function of word
length in hiragana (B = 81.29, SE B = 6.63, ∫ =
0.78, F[1, 98] = 150.39, p < .0001) than it is in
Greek (B = 22.52, SE B = 2.87, ∫ = 0.62, F[1, 98] =
61.47, p < .0001), English (B = 43.02, SE B = 5.77,
∫ = 0.60, F[1, 98] = 55.54, p < .0001), or kanji (B =
44.36, SE B = 16.55, ∫ = 0.26, F[1, 98] = 7.19, p <
.01]. The mean response times averaged for each
length are shown in Figure 5 where the relationship
between length and latency is more linear and, as
shown by the tighter standard errors, more pre-
dictable as one moves from ideographic kanji
through orthographically opaque English and ortho-
graphically transparent Greek alphabets, to syllabic
452 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
FIGURE 3
THE PROPORTION OF WORDS CORRECTLY
READ ALOUD IN HIRAGANA, ALBANIAN,
GREEK, ENGLISH, AND KANJI BY
CHILDREN OF EACH AGE
Pr
op
or
tio
n 
of
 w
or
ds
 c
or
re
ct
ly
 r
ea
d 
al
ou
d
Age (months)
FIGURE 4
READING ONSET LATENCY FOR THE TEST
ITEMS CORRECTLY READ ALOUD IN
HIRAGANA, GREEK, ENGLISH, AND KANJI
AT EACH AGE
R
ea
di
ng
 o
ns
et
 la
te
nc
y 
(m
s.
)
Age (months)
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 452
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 453
hiragana. It is clear that reading latency is more
clearly a function of word length in hiragana (R2 =
0.60) than in Greek (R2 = 0.38), English (R2 =
0.36), or kanji (R2 = 0.06).
Reading errors 
The reading test was discontinued after a child
made five consecutive errors, a procedure that result-
ed in a variable number of total errors per child. We
analyzed the tape recorded errors of 72 English chil-
dren (M = 8.05 errors), 69 Japanese readers of hira-
gana (M = 7.03 errors), 72 Japanese readers of kanji
(M = 8.20 errors), and 65 Greek children (M = 8.89
errors). Each error was classified into one of three
categories: no response within 15 seconds, whole-
word substitutions, and responses of nonwords. We
used these categories because they are simple and
clearly distinguishable. The number of items in each
cell can be seen in Table 4 where the scripts are or-
dered in terms of decreasing orthographic trans-
parency. There is a statistically significant association
between orthography and error type, χ2 (8, N =
2,887) = 1127.3, p < .00001. 
The midsection of Table 4 shows these data as
the percentage of the errors made on each orthogra-
phy of these three different types. It also highlights
the cells with the largest residuals, these being the
ones that contributed most to the overall association
between orthography and error type. The no-
response data followed a linear relationship with or-
thographic transparency, with the percentage of
errors of this type increasing from 1% for syllabic
hiragana; through 2%, 14%, and 22%, respectively,
for orthographically transparent Albanian and Greek
and orthographically opaque English alphabets; to
66% for the kanji ideographs.
These large differences in the rate of no-
response errors necessitated a separate analysis in or-
der to determine the relative likelihood of the other
error types. The bottom section of Table 4 shows the
percentage of substantive errors that were whole-
word substitutions or nonwords. There was a statisti-
cally significant association between orthography
and these types of error, χ2 (4, N = 2,273) = 144.3, p
< .001. Whole-word substitutions constituted the
large majority of substantive kanji errors at 69%
(138 word substitutions : 63 nonword responses). In
contrast, whole-word substitutions only constituted
31% of the substantive errors in Albanian (205 word
substitutions : 457 nonword responses), with non-
word errors predominating in Albanian. We had pre-
dicted that orthographically opaque scripts would
tend to generate more whole-word substitution er-
rors, and more transparent scripts would generate
more nonword errors. The whole-word substitution
rates of Albanian (31%), English (50%), and Kanji
(69%) were in accord with this prediction. However,
the proportions of this error type in Greek (53%)
and hiragana (60%) were higher than were expected.
Appendix B lists 30 error responses that are represen-
tative of those made within each orthography. In the
discussion, these errors informed our consideration
of the aspects of the Greek spelling system and of the
Japanese language that helped explain these two un-
expectedly high rates of word-substitution error. 
Age bands (months)
Orthography 73–102 103–120 121–150 151–183
Hiragana 1200.9 801.1 607.9
(327.4) (122.5) (96.7)
Greek 1531.0 852.8 800.5 714.1
(1002.4) (245.9) (103.0) (169.3)
English 941.3 825.4 732.5 783.2
(162.6) (155.5) (174.2) (212.6)
Kanji 1032.3a 877.1 662.7
(271.3) (131.0) (116.7)
aBecause the youngest Japanese children were unable to read beyond the higher frequency words of Japanese that are written only in hiragana, these
latencies do not properly reflect kanji usage.
TABLE 3
MEAN (SD) LATENCY (MILLISECONDS) OF WORDS READ CORRECTLY BY CHILDREN 
OF EACH ORTHOGRAPHY GROUP IN EACH AGE BAND 
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:51 AM  Page 453
Discussion
The orthographic depth hypothesis 
and rate of reading acquisition 
Our first question concerned whether greater
orthographic transparency led children to read aloud
more quickly. The data clearly demonstrated such an
association. All contrasts between the levels of read-
ing accuracy in hiragana, Greek, English, and kanji
by children in the youngest 73–102-month age band
were statistically significant, with hiragana, the most
transparent orthography, being the most successfully
read, followed, in order of decreasing orthographic
transparency, by Greek, then English, and then kan-
ji. Consideration of the children ages 7.5 years old
(90 months) allowed us to broaden the contrast set
454 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
FIGURE 5
READING ONSET LATENCY FOR CORRECT ITEMS AS A FUNCTION OF WORD LENGTH IN
HIRAGANA, GREEK, ENGLISH, AND KANJI
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 454
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 455
with the addition of Albanian, the most transparent
alphabetic orthography tested here. Japanese chil-
dren were successful on 88 of their hiragana test
items, Albanian children on 80 of theirs, Greek chil-
dren on 78, and English children on 60. Japanese
children managed just 31 of their kanji items, but,
because the most frequent Japanese words are writ-
ten only in hiragana, 31 of the items of this test were
actually in hiragana; in other words, Japanese chil-
dren at this age are hardly able to read kanji at all. 
Zipf ’s law (Zipf, 1935) describes how for any
language, when the number of occurrences of words
is plotted as the function of their rank frequency
(e.g., 1st, 2nd, 3rd), the functional form has an ex-
ponential distribution with the higher frequency
word types of a language accounting for a very large
proportion of word tokens. Thus, for example, while
there are more than 114,000 word families in
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
(Merriam-Webster, 1961), just the thousand most
frequent words of English suffice to account for
about 80% of the total language we experience on a
daily basis. One consequence of this law, as was
demonstrated when we used our sampling proce-
dures to work backwards from samples to corpora, is
that, on average, 7.5-year-old Japanese children
could successfully read 99.8% of the word tokens
they might meet in hiragana, Albanian children
87.7% of word tokens that might typically occur in
their written language, Greek children 85%, and
English children just 69.7%. Thus, it is much harder
to learn to read aloud in orthographically opaque
scripts. Children schooled in these writing systems
have greater difficulty and take longer in achieving
this goal. 
Does this ability to read aloud constrain chil-
dren’s comprehension of written words and their lit-
eracy development as a whole? We believe the
literature says it does. First, even learners of ortho-
graphically opaque scripts like English pass through
an alphabetic stage of reading, with phonology
paving the development of the lexical reading path-
Error type
No Whole-word
Orthography response substitution Nonword Total
Raw count data
Hiragana 7 286 189 482
Albanian 13 205 457 675
Greek 78 247 219 544
English 130 235 234 599
Kanji 386 138 63 587
Total 614 1,111 1,162 2,887
Row percentages for all errors analysisa
Hiragana 1 ⇓⇓ 59 ⇑⇑ 39
Albanian 2 ⇓⇓ 30 ⇓ 68 ⇑⇑
Greek 14  ⇓ 45 ⇑ 40
English 22 39 39
Kanji 66 ⇑⇑ 24 ⇓ 11 ⇓⇓
Mean 21 38 40
Row percentages for analysis of substantive errors onlyb
Hiragana 60 ⇑ 40
Albanian 31 ⇓ 69 
Greek 53 47
English 50 50
Kanji 69 ⇑ 31
Mean 49 51
aAll errors analysis χ2 (8, N = 2,887) = 1,127.3, p < .00001. 
bSubstantive errors analysis χ2 (4, N = 2,273) = 144.3, p < .001.
⇓⇓ Haberman standardized residuals < –10.0
⇓ Haberman standardized residuals < –2.0
⇑ Haberman standardized residuals > 2.0
⇑⇑ Haberman standardized residuals > 10.0
TABLE 4
CLASSIFICATION OF THE READING ERRORS MADE BY CHILDREN READING HIRAGANA,
ALBANIAN, GREEK, ENGLISH, AND KANJI
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 455
way (Ehri, 1999; Frith, 1985; Marsh et al., 1981).
Share (1995) dubbed phonological recoding the sine
qua non of reading, since it is by “self-teaching” that
children eventually achieve direct access to meaning.
Share holds that a child’s alphabetic reading
(grapheme–phoneme decoding, blending, and as-
sembled pronunciation), if successful, results in ap-
propriate whole-word pronunciations while the
corresponding orthographic patterns are still avail-
able for scrutiny. In this way larger chunks of or-
thography can become associated with larger chunks
of pronunciation, orthographic rimes with rhymes,
larger spelling patterns with more reliable pronuncia-
tions, and eventually lexical orthographic specifica-
tions with whole-word pronunciations. This process
can succeed only with consistent patterns where an
alphabetic reading strategy generates a “barking at
print” that is approximate enough to allow recogni-
tion of the appropriate word, which implies that self-
teaching might be more difficult in orthographically
opaque scripts than in transparent ones. Second,
phonological impairments in dyslexic (Frith, 1981;
Snowling, 1998) and deaf (Perfetti & Sandak, 2000)
individuals profoundly restrict their acquisition of
literacy. Finally, phonological processing is a neces-
sary component even in Chinese character identifica-
tion (e.g., Perfetti & Tan, 1999; Spinks, Liu, Perfetti,
& Tan, 2000), an observation that prompted
DeFrancis (1989) to observe a “diverse oneness”
whereby all writing systems are in essence “visible
speech,” sharing a common goal of representing
phonetic utterances with written symbols. 
Notwithstanding these arguments relating or-
thographic depth and reading comprehension, the
effect of orthographic transparency on rate of acqui-
sition of reading comprehension is an empirical is-
sue, and the rankings of learnability of scripts may
look different if investigation focuses on reading
comprehension rather than reading aloud.
Symbol–sound consistency covaries with
symbol–meaning consistency. In transparent or-
thographies there are many homographs where the
same written word is associated with a number of
different senses. Evolutionary changes in language
create irregularities in symbol–sound correspon-
dences when a word’s spelling becomes influenced by
its morphemic structure (e.g., heal/health,
signature/sign, and the spelling of the plural mor-
pheme -s despite its varying sound as in ropes, robes,
roses) (Chomsky & Halle, 1968; Ellis, 1993; Nunes,
Bryant, & Bindman, 1997; Rayner & Pollatsek,
1989; Venezky, 1970). Meaning is similarly spelled
out for us in the disambiguation of homophones
(e.g., be/bee, too/two, witch/which). The clearer
marking of morphology in logographic scripts may
therefore provide their readers with a less ambiguous
route to semantic access, and thus it may afford
some consequent advantages for reading comprehen-
sion. Further research is needed therefore to extend
the current comparisons by applying the frequency-
sampling cross-linguistic assessment method to
measure comprehension alongside naming. 
The orthographic depth hypothesis 
and strategy of reading
Another focus of our study concerned the
strategy implications of the orthographic depth hy-
pothesis. Do differences in orthographic transparen-
cy result in different reading strategies? We looked
for evidence from reaction times and from error pat-
terns. There were various confirmations. First, word
length determined 60% of the variance of reading la-
tency in hiragana, 38% in Greek, 36% in English,
and 6% in kanji. Second, readers of transparent or-
thographies had longer reading latencies. Third, the
rate of no-response errors increased from 1% for hi-
ragana, through 2%, 14%, and 22%, respectively,
for Albanian, Greek, and English alphabets, to 66%
for kanji. Finally, readers of opaque orthographies
tended to make whole-word substitution errors
while those of transparent orthographies tended
more to make nonword mispronunciations. We con-
sidered each finding in turn. 
The data demonstrated that the more transpar-
ent the orthography, the much more linear the rela-
tion between successful word-naming time and word
length. This is the pattern that would result if pro-
nunciation were assembled by means of a left-to-
right parsing of the graphemes that constitute each
word, with concomitant decoding of the correspond-
ing phonemes; the more graphemes to process, the
longer is the assembly time. That readers of English
were not so affected by word length suggested that
they are less likely to attempt to construct pronunci-
ations in this way and instead they use partial cues,
with words being discriminated by reference to a
subset of their component letters, particularly those
at the beginnings and ends of words (Ehri, 1997;
Stuart & Coltheart, 1988). The fact that readers of
kanji were little affected by word length represented
the extreme of this process. Kanji provides compara-
tively few cues for pronunciation (Perfetti & Tan,
1999), and what little association there is between
word length and naming latency for kanji probably
reflects the processes of blending kanji symbols and
456 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 456
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 457
hiragana inflections in some of the grammatically
marked words.
The younger children reading the two more
transparent orthographies, Greek and hiragana, evi-
denced significantly longer correct reading onset la-
tencies than did readers of orthographically opaque
English. Ellis and Hooper (2001) reported similarly
that the latencies of children reading orthograph-
ically transparent Welsh were longer than those of
matched English readers. This overall pattern sug-
gests that longer latencies are a natural consequence
of using a phonological route to lexical access be-
cause decoding takes time; the longer the words, the
longer the time.
The different nature of the reading errors in
the five orthographies generally supported the strate-
gy implications of the orthographic depth hypothesis
and the ways these were evidenced in Ellis and
Hooper (2001). First, the greater the proportion of
no-response errors for more opaque orthographies
indicates that children reading these scripts are un-
able to successfully synthesize pronunciations by
means of decoding. Readers of opaque orthographies
also tended to make whole-word substitution errors,
with 69% of substantive kanji errors being of this
type, compared with only 31% for transparent
Albanian. Inspection of the real-word errors in
Appendix B shows that these substitutions are on the
whole visually similar to the targets, a finding that
supports the idea that readers of opaque orthogra-
phies tend to recognize written words on the basis of
partial visual analysis of the reading stimuli. In con-
trast, the 68% nonword mispronunciation error rate
in Albanian confirms the suggestion that children
learning to read transparent orthographies attack
each new word by means of a left-to-right parse of
the graphemes, decoding of the corresponding
phonemes, and subsequent pronunciation assembled
from a blending of these parts. The Albanian non-
word errors in Appendix B tend to be mistakes
whereby correct segments are interspersed with sub-
stitutions, gaps, or misorderings—all processes that
result in nonwords.
However, this pattern whereby transparent or-
thographies promoted more nonwords and opaque
orthographies more real-word substitution errors was
not absolute over all five orthographies in our sam-
ple. Although transparent Albanian produced few
real-word substitutions, the proportions of this error
type in hiragana and Greek were higher than were
expected from previous findings with transparent or-
thographies. What factors might have led to this?
Inspection of the reading errors in Appendix B gives
some pointers. The hiragana errors tended to be very
close to the targets, differing usually in only one
character, which is often visually similar to the origi-
nal (e.g., / / ) or where there is a
single character addition or omission. One factor in
determining the likelihood of real-word reading-er-
ror substitutions is the lexical density of an ortho-
graphic neighborhood. The orthographic
neighborhood of a word is the range of strings that
can be made by changing one letter or character at a
time. Imagine all possible single-letter substitutions
from the word pig: aig, big, ..., zig, pag, pbg, ..., pzg,
pia, pib, ..., piz. Relatively few of these are actual
words, (e.g., big, dig, pit), 21 of them to be precise. A
lexically dense neighborhood is one where many
words are created; a sparse neighborhood is one
where few are generated: scratch has but 4 neighbors.
The simpler syllable structure of Japanese constrains
the possible combinations of spoken sound se-
quences, and this results both in there being relative-
ly high rates of homophony in spoken Japanese and
in the orthographic neighborhoods of written kana
being relatively more lexically dense. Thus, a single
stroke or character substitution is more likely to gen-
erate another real word in hiragana than it is in an
alphabetic orthography representing a syllabically
complex language like English. In order to test this
supposition informally, a computer program was
written to generate random letter strings by choosing
characters from the English alphabet or hiragana
character set at random and then stringing them to-
gether into character sequences. We generated 100
two-letter strings and three-letter strings each for
English and hiragana and then had a native speaker
check how many of these were words. In the 200
random strings for each language, there were 21
Japanese words but only 6 English words. Thus the
Japanese lexicon does seem to make more use of the
possible permutations of written hiragana character
sequences than does English, and this greater lexical
density makes the misreading of a hiragana character
more likely to generate a real-word substitution error
in Japanese.
What of Greek? As described previously, there
are many homonyms that share the same phoneme
sequence but are differentiated by a change in
acoustic stress that causes a shift in meaning and,
usually, a change in spelling. For example, word 73
’, (/kéria/) meaning “vital,” becomes on
change of stress the word ’ (/kerjá/), which is
correctly spelled ’ and means “candles.” Errors
involving changes in the positioning of stress are
shown for Greek in Appendix B. For the corpus,
stress errors resulted in 48.6% of the real-word sub-
stitution errors and 41.6% of the nonword errors
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 457
and were thus responsible for at least some of the
higher-than-expected incidence of real-word errors
in Greek.
Finally, what about the substantive kanji er-
rors? Given the opacity of kanji, how might children
make any substantive errors at all—don’t they either
know it or not? Clues are to be found in the facts
that the majority of words written in kanji comprise
more than one character, that children are likely to
have previously encountered these characters on
their own or in combination with other characters,
and that there is a high degree of homography. Thus,
for example, the pronunciation of the 54th test
word, , is “mikata.” Some children read this as
“kenpou,”an incorrect but logical pronunciation for
that word. Kanji have different pronunciations.
When the word is separated, can be read as
“mi” or “ken” and can be read as “kata,” “gata,”
“hou,” or “pou.” Kanji are first learned singly and
only later as combinations with other kanji. Thus,
when confronted with combinations that they have
not yet seen before, children very sensibly try to syn-
thesize a correct pronunciation from knowledge of
the parts. Ninety-seven of the 201 substantive kanji
errors were of this type (50 of 138 being 36% of the
real-word substitutions and 47 of 63 being 75% of
the nonword errors).
Limitations
There are many factors other than orthograph-
ic depth affecting literacy, with national economic
and social development outstripping orthographic
transparency in determining reading attainment
(Lundberg, 2002; Stevenson, 1984; Stevenson,
Stigler, Lucker, Lee, Hsu, & Kitamura, 1982). In
countries with strong economies and high levels of
health and adult literacy, most students become
competent readers (Elley, 1994). Lack of access to
written materials, lack of parental involvement in
promoting literacy, and lack of educational opportu-
nity can prohibit literacy development before any
modulating effects of orthographic transparency can
take hold. Such international differences in wealth,
health, education, expectation, and educational prac-
tices, as they affect children’s literacy attainments,
point to limitations of this research that must be
borne in mind in its interpretation. The study man-
aged only a relatively small and nonrandom oppor-
tunity sample of participants. These children were
taught by different teachers in different classrooms
and schools using different methods of instruction in
different cultures. We simply could not control these
potential confounds. Further research with larger
samples and better control is clearly warranted.
Other limitations concern the adequacy of lan-
guage corpora as indexes of learners’ language expo-
sure. The method of language sampling has the same
principled advantages as does the survey method in
the description of people and populations (Kidder &
Judd, 1986), hence the continued interest in corpus
linguistics over the last 20 years (McEnery &
Wilson, 1996). Nevertheless, as pollsters and politi-
cians know, there is always scope for sampling error.
The corpora we used were largely drawn from adult
written language rather than from child input.
Although the particularities of a corpus probably
have little effect upon the higher frequency words of
a language, they can have marked influence upon
frequency estimates of less common items, and so,
lack of adequate representation necessarily results in
measurement error. It would be better to sample the
language from literature for children. It would also
be preferable to have individual random sampling
for every test, with computerized sampling of log fre-
quency using psychophysical methods of threshold
detection, rather than just one sample frozen and
duplicated for all children.
In light of these limitations, further research is
required to fully describe and compare the rates and
processes of learning to read in different orthogra-
phies. Then, when different patterns of learnability
and strategy have been firmly identified, there will be
subsequent need for guided experimentation into the
cognitive factors that might underpin these differ-
ences. These experiments would control other factors
while targeting particular facets of the language or
orthography such as the lexical range of the lan-
guage, alphabet size, letter sequence complexity,
phonological structure, phonotactic complexity,
morphological complexity, word length, word fre-
quencies, type–token ratios, accenting, and so forth.  
Meanwhile, the pattern of differences in read-
ing acquisition identified in the present study sug-
gests that it does matter whether an orthography
writes what is meant or writes what is said.
Orthographies that represent pronunciation encour-
age faster learning for reading aloud, and the more
transparently they do this, the faster the learning rate
and the more they encourage lexical access via
phonology. Such results illustrate a more general
principle that, in solving a particular problem, learn-
ers find and exploit the regularities that help them to
achieve their task, and as they practice, so their rep-
resentations and strategies become tuned to that par-
ticular problem space. 
458 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 458
The effects of orthographic depth on learning to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts 459
NICK C. ELLIS is professor of psychology at University of Wales,
Bangor. His research concerns applied psycholinguistics, first- and
second-language acquisition, reading and spelling, and bilingualism
and cognition. He can be contacted at School of Psychology, University
of Wales, Bangor, LL57 2AS, UK, or by e-mail at n.ellis@bangor.ac.uk.
VICTOR H.P. VAN DAAL is Senior Research Fellow in the School of
Psychology at University of Wales, Bangor (UWB) and Director of the
UWB Dyslexia Unit. His research concerns the nature and treatment of
children with developmental dyslexia in different languages. He can be
contacted at School of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor, LL57
2AS, UK, or by e-mail at vhp.van.daal@bangor.ac.uk.
LORENC HOXHALLARI is a final-year Ph.D. student at the University
of Wales, Bangor, UK. His research examines the effect of
orthographic depth on reading and spelling acquisition in Albanian,
English, and Welsh. He can be contacted at School of Psychology,
University of Wales, Bangor, LL57 2AS, UK, or by e-mail at
pss81e@bangor.ac.uk.
MIWA NATSUME, KATERINA STAVROPOULOU, NICOLETTA
POLYZOE, MARIA-LOUISA TSIPA, and MICHALIS PETALAS were
advanced undergraduate students at University of Wales, Bangor, at
the time of the study reported here. Miwa Natsume went on to
postgraduate study in child development, Katerina Stavropoulou in
autism, Nicoletta Polyzoe in consumer psychology, Maria-Louisa Tsipa
in social intervention and health, and Michalis Petalas in cognitive
behavioral therapy. They may be contacted c/o Dr. Nick C. Ellis at the
School of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor, LL57 2AS, UK.
R E F E R E N C E S
ABBOUD, A., & SUGAR, D. (1997). SuperLab (Version 1.03)
[Computer software]. Phoenix, AZ: Cedrus.
AKITA, K., & HATANO, G. (1999). Learning to read and write in
Japanese. In M. Harris & G. Hatano (Eds.), Learning to read and write:
A cross-linguistic perspective (pp. 214–234). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
ALEGRIA, L., PIGNOT, E., & MORAIS, J. (1982). Phonetic analy-
sis of speech and memory codes in beginning readers. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 451–456.
AMANO, N., & KONDO, K. (2000). NTT database series—
Nihongono goitokusei dai 7 kan: Hindo [Lexical properties of Japanese, Vol.
7, Frequency Database 1]. Tokyo: NTT Communication Science
Laboratories Producer 1. 
BAAYEN, R.H., PIEPENBROCK, R., & VAN RIJN, H. (1995).
The Celex Lexical Database (Release 2) [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania [Distributor]. 
BABINIOTIS, G. (1980). Theoritiki glossologia [Linguistics in theo-
ry]. Athens, Greece: University of Athens Press. 
BAKAMIDIS, S., & CARAYANNIS, G. (1987). “Phonemia”: A
phoneme transcription system for speech synthesis in modern Greek.
Speech Communication, 6, 159–169.
CHITIRI, H.F., & WILLOWS, D.M. (1994). Word recognition in
two languages and orthographies: English and Greek. Memory &
Cognition, 22, 313–325.
CHOMSKY, N., & HALLE, M. (1968). The sound pattern of English.
New York: Harper & Row.
DANIELS, P.T., & BRIGHT, W. (Eds.). (1996). The world’s writ-
ing systems. New York: Oxford University Press.
DEFRANCIS, J. (1989). Visible speech: The diverse oneness of writing
systems. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
EHRI, L.C. (1997). Learning to read and learning to spell are one and
the same, almost. In C.A. Perfetti, L. Rieben, & M. Fayol (Eds.), Learning
to spell: Research, theory, and practice across languages (pp. 237–269).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
EHRI, L.C. (1999). Phases of development in learning to read words.
In J. Oakhill & R. Beard (Eds.), Reading development and the teaching of
reading (pp. 79–108). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
ELLEY, W.B. (Ed.). (1994). The IEA study of reading literacy:
Achievement and instruction in thirty-two school systems. Oxford, UK:
Elsevier Science.
ELLIS, A.W. (1993). Reading, writing, and dyslexia: A cognitive analy-
sis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
ELLIS, N.C., & HOOPER, A.M. (2001). It is easier to learn to read
in Welsh than in English: Effects of orthographic transparency demon-
strated using frequency-matched cross-linguistic reading tests. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 22, 571–599.
ELLIS, N.C., O’DOCHARTAIGH, C., HICKS, W., MORGAN,
M., & LAPORTE, N. (2001). Cronfa Electroneg o Gymraeg/A 1 million
word lexical database and frequency count for Welsh. Retrieved August,
2001, from University of Wales, Bangor, website: http://www.bangor.ac.
uk/ar/cb/ceg/ceg_eng.html
FRITH, U. (1981). Experimental approaches to developmental
dyslexia: An introduction. Psychological Research, 43, 97–109.
FRITH, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia.
In K. Patterson, M. Coltheart, & J. Marshall (Eds.), Surface dyslexia:
Neuropsychological and cognitive studies of phonological reading (pp.
301–330). London: Erlbaum. 
GAUR, A. (1992). A history of writing. London: The British Library.
GOSWAMI, U. (1999). Causal connections in beginning reading:
The importance of rhyme. Journal of Research in Reading, 22, 217–240.
GOSWAMI, U. (2000). Phonological representations, reading de-
velopment and dyslexia: Towards a cross-linguistic theoretical framework.
Dyslexia, 6, 133–151.
GOSWAMI, U., GOMBERT, J.E., & DE BARRERA, L.F. (1998).
Children’s orthographic representations and linguistic transparency:
Nonsense word reading in English, French, and Spanish. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 19, 19–52.
GOSWAMI, U., PORPODAS, C., & WHEELWRIGHT, S.
(1997). Children’s orthographic representations in English and Greek.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 12, 273–292.
HARRIS, M., & GIANNOULI, V. (1999). Learning to read and
spell in Greek. In M. Harris & G. Hatano (Eds.), Learning to read and
write: A cross-linguistic perspective (pp. 51–70). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
HOXHALLARI, L. (2000). Teacher’s beliefs about learning to read
Albanian, English, and Welsh: The effect of a regular orthography.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Wales, Bangor, UK.
KATZ, L., & FROST, R. (1992). Reading in different orthographies:
The orthographic depth hypothesis. In R. Frost & L. Katz (Eds.),
Orthography, phonology, morphology, and meaning (pp. 67–84).
Amsterdam: New Holland.
KESS, J.F, & MIYAMOTO, T. (1999). The Japanese mental lexicon:
Psycholinguistic studies of kana and kanji processing. Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
KIDDER, L.H., & JUDD, C.M. (1986). Research methods in social re-
lations (5th ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
LANDERL, K., WIMMER, H., & FRITH, U. (1997). The impact
of orthographic consistency on dyslexia: A German-English comparison.
Cognition, 63, 315–334.
LIBERMAN, I., SHANKWEILER, D., FISCHER, F.W., &
CARTER, B. (1974). Explicit syllable and phoneme segmentation in the
young child. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 18, 201–212.
LOPEZ, M.R., & GONZALEZ, J.E.J. (1999). An analysis of the
word naming errors of normal readers and reading disabled children in
Spanish. Journal of Research in Reading, 22, 180–197.
LUNDBERG, I. (2002, June). Reading in a second language with the
extra load of dyslexia. Keynote presentation at the International Conference
on Multilingual and Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Dyslexia,
Washington, DC.
MAGOULAS, G. (1979). Eisagogi sti neoelliniki phonologia
[Introduction to modern Greek phonology]. Athens, Greece: University
of Athens Press.
MARSH, G., FRIEDMAN, M.P., WELCH, V., & DESBERG, P.
(1981). A cognitive-developmental theory of reading acquisition. In T.G.
Waller & G.E. MacKinnon (Eds.), Reading research: Advances in theory
and practice (Vol. 3, pp. 201–215). New York: Academic Press. 
MCENERY, T., & WILSON, A. (1996). Corpus linguistics.
Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
MERRIAM-WEBSTER, A. (Ed.). (1961). Webster’s third new inter-
national dictionary of the English language. Springfield, MA: G. & C.
Merriam.
NATIONAL LANGUAGE RESEARCH INSTITUTE. (1988). The
acquisition of common kanji by elementary and secondary school children.
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 459
Tokyo: Tokyo Shoseki.
NOMURA, M. (1980). Chinese characters content of weekly’s writ-
ing. Mathematical Linguistics, 12, 215–222.
NUNES, T., BRYANT, P., & BINDMAN, M. (1997).
Morphological spelling strategies: Developmental stages and processes.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 637–649.
ÖNEY, B., & DURGUNOGLU, A.Y. (1997). Beginning to read in
Turkish: A phonologically transparent orthography. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 18, 1–15.
PAULESU, E., MCCRORY, E., FAZIO, F., MENONCELLO, L.,
BRUNSWICK, N., CAPPA, S.F., ET AL. (2000). A cultural effect on
brain function. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 91–96.
PERFETTI, C.A., & SANDAK, R. (2000). Reading optimally builds
on spoken language: Implications for deaf readers. Journal of Deaf Studies
& Deaf Education, 5, 32–50.
PERFETTI, C.A., & TAN, L.H. (1999). The constituency model of
Chinese word identification. In J. Wang, A.W. Inhoff, & H.-C. Chen
(Eds.), Reading Chinese script: A cognitive analysis (pp. 115–134). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
PORPODAS, C.D. (1991). The relation between phonemic aware-
ness and reading and spelling of Greek words in the first school years. In
M. Carretero & M.L. Pope (Eds.), Learning and instruction: European re-
search in an international context (Vol. 3, pp. 203–217). Oxford, UK:
Pergamon Press.
PORPODAS, C.D. (1999). Patterns of phonological and memory
processing in beginning readers and spellers of Greek. Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 32, 406–416.
RACK, J.P., SNOWLING, M.J., & OLSON, R.K. (1992). The non-
word reading deficit in developmental dyslexia: A review. Reading Research
Quarterly, 27, 28–53.
RAYNER, K., & POLLATSEK, A. (1989). Psychology of reading.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
ROZIN, P., & GLEITMAN, L.R. (1977). The structure and acqui-
sition of reading II: The reading process and the acquisition of the alpha-
betic principle. In A.S. Reber & D.L. Scarborough (Eds.), Toward a psy-
chology of reading (pp. 55–141). New York: Erlbaum.
SEYMOUR, P.H.K., ARO, M., & ERSKINE, J.M. (2003).
Foundation literacy acquisition in European orthographies. British Journal
of Psychology, 94, 143–174.
SEYMOUR, P.H.K., & ELDER, E. (1986). Beginning reading with-
out phonology. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 3, 1–36.
SHARE, D.L. (1995). Phonological recoding and self-teaching: Sine
qua non of reading acquisition. Cognition, 55, 151–218.
SHIMAMURA, N., & MIKAMI, H. (1994). Acquisition of hiragana
letters by preschool children: In comparison with the investigation by the
National Language Research Institute [In Japanese with English summa-
ry]. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 42, 70–76.
SNODGRASS, J.G., & VANDERWART, M. (1980). A standard-
ized set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image agreement, fa-
miliarity, and visual complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6, 174–215. 
SNOWLING, M. (1998). Dyslexia as a phonological deficit:
Evidence and implications. Child Psychology & Psychiatry Review, 3, 4–11.
SPENCER, L.H., & HANLEY, J.R. (2003). Effects of orthographic
transparency on reading and phoneme awareness in children learning to
read in Wales. British Journal of Psychology, 94, 1–28.
SPINKS, J.A., LIU, Y., PERFETTI, C.A., & TAN, L.H. (2000).
Reading Chinese characters for meaning: The role of phonological infor-
mation. Cognition, 76, B1–B11.
STEVENSON, H.W. (1984). Orthography and reading disabilities.
Journal of Reading Disabilities, 17, 296–301.
STEVENSON, H.W., STIGLER, J.W., LUCKER, G.W., LEE, S.-
Y., HSU, C.-C., & KITAMURA, S. (1982). Reading disabilities: The case
of Chinese, Japanese and English. Child Development, 53, 1164–1181.
STUART, M., & COLTHEART, M.C. (1988). Does reading de-
velop in a sequence of stages? Cognition, 30, 139–181.
THORSTAD, G. (1991). The effect of orthography on the acquisi-
tion of literacy skills. British Journal of Psychology, 82, 527–537.
TOMBAIDIS, D.E. (1986). Epitomi tis historias tis Ellinikis glossas
[Compendium of the history of the Greek language]. Athens, Greece:
OEDB (Organization of Textbooks Publishing). 
TOMBAIDIS, D.E. (1987). Synoptiki historia tis Ellinikis glossas
[Concise history of the Greek language]. Athens, Greece: OEDB. 
TREIMAN, R., MULLENNIX, J., BIJELJAC-BABIC, R., & 
RICHMOND-WELTY, E.D. (1995). The special role of rimes in the de-
scription, use, and acquisition of English orthography. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 107–136.
TRIANTAPHYLLIDIS, M. (1913). Horthographia mas [Our orthog-
raphy]. Athens, Greece: Estia. 
TRIANTAPHYLLIDIS, M. (1980). Neoelliniki grammatiki [Modern
Greek grammar]. Athens, Greece: Estia. 
VENEZKY, R. (1970). The structure of English orthography. The
Hague, the Netherlands: Mouton.
WIMMER, H., & GOSWAMI, U. (1994). The influence of ortho-
graphic consistency on reading development: Word recognition in English
and German children. Cognition, 51, 91–103.
WIMMER, H., & HUMMER, P. (1990). How German speaking
first graders read and spell: Doubts on the importance of the logographic
stage. Applied Psycholinguistics, 11, 349–368.
ZIPF, G.K. (1935). The psycho-biology of language: An introduction to
dynamic philology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Received July 10, 2003
Final revision received March 8, 2004
Accepted March 17, 2004
A U T H O R S ’  N O T E S
We thank the children and their parents and the head teachers, teach-
ers, and schools that took part in this study. Thanks to Elaine Miles and
Satsuki Nakai for constructive comments on an earlier draft.
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC award H474 25 4101) and by a grant from the Daiwa
Anglo-Japanese Foundation.
460 Reading Research Quarterly OCTOBER/NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2004 39/4
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 460
461
APPENDIX ?
THE ITEMS OF THE SINGLE WORD READING TESTS
FOR THE FIVE SCRIPTS
A
(continued)
Word
number English Greek Hiragana Kanji Albanian
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 461
462
APPENDIX ?
THE ITEMS OF THE SINGLE WORD READING TESTS 
FOR THE FIVE SCRIPTS (continued)
A
(continued)
Word
number English Greek Hiragana Kanji Albanian
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:52 AM  Page 462
463
APPENDIX ?
THE ITEMS OF THE SINGLE WORD READING TESTS
FOR THE FIVE SCRIPTS (continued)
A
Word
number English Greek Hiragana Kanji Albanian
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:53 AM  Page 463
464
APPENDIX ?
THIRTY EXAMPLES OF READING ERRORS FROM FIVE SCRIPTS
I  B
(continued)
Hiragana reading errors
Real-word Nonword
Correct word Error response substitution error
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:53 AM  Page 464
465
APPENDIX ?
THIRTY EXAMPLES OF READING ERRORS FROM FIVE SCRIPTS (continued)
B
(continued)
Kanji reading errors
Kanji
Real-word Nonword Structural
Correct word Error response substitution error error
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:54 AM  Page 465
466
APPENDIX ?
THIRTY EXAMPLES OF READING ERRORS FROM FIVE SCRIPTS (continued)
I  B
Greek reading errors
Greek
Real-word Nonword Stress
Correct word Error response substitution error error
(continued)
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:54 AM  Page 466
467
APPENDIX ?
THIRTY EXAMPLES OF READING ERRORS FROM FIVE SCRIPTS (CONTINUED)
B
English reading errors
Real-word Nonword
Correct word Error response substitution error
case ce---- *
know now *
think stink *
parents presents *
areas ar---- *
various va--- *
through thu *
theatre th-e-tree *
prices prince *
transport train *
criticism cristian *
crucial circkle *
adequate adik *
awareness aya *
crucial cruksal *
adequate adequacy *
really rally *
child chill *
parents presents *
city sixty *
various varies *
through though *
growing going *
normal normally *
area are-as *
through though *
theatre there *
criticism cartisms *
crucial crukial *
(continued)
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:54 AM  Page 467
468
APPENDIX ?
THIRTY EXAMPLES OF READING ERRORS FROM FIVE SCRIPTS (continued)
I  B
Albanian reading errors
Real-word Nonword
Correct word Error response substitution error
dhe dhë *
nga nxha *
duke buke *
janë lajnë *
disa dëshia *
para pata *
policisë përlisë *
ose poste *
mënyrë mynynë *
tjerë tjetër *
lidhur litur *
deklaruar dikur *
ditët dritën *
vrarë vrar *
gjithnjë ngjithë *
komisariatit komisatia *
prokurori prakuri *
njihet njeht *
lashtë keshtë *
personale presonëte *
paguajë pakuja *
flasim fitsim *
prodhimit prodhimeit *
varrit vend *
verifikuar verikuar *
ndan mban *
liderit lidrit *
servilizmi filizmi *
parakalimin kalimin *
imperialiste impraliste *
RRQ4-04 Ellis  9/22/04  11:54 AM  Page 468
