Explaining Delta, or: 
How do distance measures for 
authorship attribution work? 
Stefan Evert, Thomas Proisl 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany 
{stefan.evert,thomas.proisl}@fau.de 
 
Christof Schöch, Fotis Jannidis, 
Steffen Pielström, Thorsten Vitt 
University of Würzburg, Germany 
{christof.schoech,fotis.jannidis, 
thorsten.vitt}@uni-wuerzburg.de 
pielstroem@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de 
 
1 Introduction 
Authorship Attribution is a research area in 
quantitative text analysis concerned with attributing 
texts of unknown or disputed authorship to their 
actual author based on quantitatively measured 
linguistic evidence (see Juola 2006; Stamatatos 
2009; Koppel et al. 2009). Authorship attribution has 
applications in literary studies, history, forensics and 
many other fields, e.g. corpus stylistics (Oakes 
2009). The fundamental assumption in authorship 
attribution is that individuals have idiosyncratic 
habits of language use, leading to a stylistic 
similarity of texts written by the same person. Many 
of these stylistic habits can be measured by 
assessing the relative frequencies of function words 
or parts of speech, vocabulary richness, and many 
other linguistic features. Distance metrics between 
the resulting feature vectors indicate the overall 
similarity of texts to each other, and can be used for 
attributing a text of unknown authorship to the most 
similar of a (usually closed) set of candidate authors.  
The aim of this paper is to present findings from a 
larger investigation of authorship attribution 
methods which centres around the following 
questions: (a) How and why exactly does authorship 
attribution based on distance measures work? (b) 
Why do different distance measures and 
normalization strategies perform differently? (c) 
Specifically, why do they perform differently for 
different languages and language families, and (d) 
How can such knowledge be used to improve 
authorship attribution methods? 
First, we describe current issues in authorship 
attribution and contextualize our own work. Second, 
we report some of our earlier research into the 
question. Then, we present our most recent 
investigation, which pertains to the effects of 
normalization methods and distance measures in 
different languages, describing our aims, data and 
methods. We conclude with a summary of our 
results. 
2 Current issues in authorship attribution 
There are several key elements to any authorship 
attribution study: the nature and extent of textual 
material available, the richness of metadata about 
the texts, the number and types of linguistic features 
used, the strategy used to normalize the resulting 
feature vectors, an optional dimensionality reduction 
step (often by principal component analysis), the 
measure used to assess distances between feature 
vectors, and the method for classification or 
clustering of the texts based on feature vectors and 
inter-text distances. All of these aspects are currently 
topics of investigation and debate in the authorship 
attribution community (e.g. Argamon 2008; Eder 
and Rybicki 2013). This paper is mainly concerned 
with the role of standardization and normalization of 
feature vectors, the choice of suitable features, and 
the impact of different distance metrics. 
The current state of the art is to consider 
normalization and metric as one joint step in the 
process of authorship attribution. One ground-
breaking measure, Burrows's Delta (Burrows 2002), 
can in fact be understood as a combination of 
standardization (i.e. z-transformation) of frequency 
counts combined with the well-known “Manhattan” 
(or “city block”) metric. Many other measures 
proposed in the literature also amalgamate the two 
steps (e.g. Hoover 2004a, 2004b; Smith and 
Aldridge 2011). In this paper, we follow Argamon's 
(2008) lead and consider normalization strategy and 
distance measure separately from each other. This 
allows us to investigate the influence of each 
parameter on authorship attribution results as well as 
the interaction of these two parameters. 
3 Previous work 
In recent previous work, we describe an empirical 
investigation of the performance of 15 different text 
distance measures available for authorship 
attribution. For evaluating their performance, we 
compiled three collections of novels (English, 
French, German), each consisting of 75 complete 
texts of known authorship (three novels each by 25 
authors), and ranging from the early nineteenth 
century to the first half of the twentieth century. The 
texts come from Project Gutenberg, the TextGrid 
collection and Ebooks libres et gratuits.  
We compared the performance of the different 
text distance measures for feature vectors of 100–
5000 most frequent words (mfw) and for all three 
corpora. We used two quantitative measures to 
evaluate performance: (a) the accuracy of the 
clustering results relative to the gold standard if each 
cluster is labelled with the appropriate author; (b) a 
comparison of the average distance between works 
of the same author with the average distance 
between works by different authors. 
As a result, we were able to demonstrate that most 
modifications of Burrows’s original Delta suggested 
in the recent literature do not yield better results, 
even though they have better mathematical 
justification. Our results indicate that Eder’s Delta, a 
measure specifically designed for highly inflected 
languages, does perform slightly better on French 
texts. The best distance measure for authorship 
attribution is the cosine-based Delta measure 
recently suggested by Smith and Aldridge (2011). 
Also, most text distance measures work best if 
between 1000 and 2000 of the most frequent words 
are used (Jannidis et al. 2015).  
4 Current research 
This work has lead us to several further questions: 
First, how do the effects of normalization and 
distance measure interact with each other? Second, 
why does the performance of a given combination of 
normalization and distance measure vary across 
different languages? And can this variation be 
explained by looking at the frequency distributions 
of individual, highly frequent words across texts in 
different languages? Finally, how can we identify 
the words (or features) that contribute most to the 
overall distance between texts? Are there linguistic 
or distributional explanations why these words are 
particularly indicative of the authorship of a text? 
We approach this set of problems from two 
perspectives. First, we look at some mathematical 
properties of the authorship classification problem, 
based on geometric and probabilistic interpretations 
of the text distance measures. Argamon (2008) 
suggests two versions of Delta that can be 
interpreted in terms of statistical significance tests. 
However, our previous empirical results show that 
they are inferior to other measures that lack a 
similarly well-founded mathematical motivation. We 
are currently investigating the reasons for this 
discrepancy, with a particular focus on the role of 
different normalization strategies and their 
interaction with various distance measures. The 
results will show which aspects of the word 
frequency profiles of text samples are exploited by 
successful authorship classification methods. They 
may also help to identify salient lexical features that 
distinguish the individual writing styles of different 
authors. 
Second, we explore another strategy for obtaining 
the set of features. Instead of relying on a specified 
number of most frequent words (mfw), we 
systematically identify a set of discriminant words 
by using the method of recursive feature elimination. 
We repeatedly train a support vector classifier and 
prune the least important features until we obtain a 
minimal set of features that gives optimal 
performance. The resulting feature set is much 
smaller than the number of mfw typically required 
by Delta measures. It contains not only function 
words but also common and not so common content 
words. The features work well on unseen data from 
the same and from different authors, not only 
yielding superior classification results, but also 
outperforming the mfw approach for clustering texts. 
This preliminary finding stands in contrast to 
accepted stylometric lore that function words are the 
most useful feature for discriminating texts from 
different authors. 
References 
Argamon, S. 2008. “Interpreting Burrows’ Delta: 
Geometric and probabilistic foundations.” Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 23(2), 131–147. 
Burrows, J. 2002. “‘Delta’ – A measure of stylistic 
difference and a guide to likely authorship.” Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 17(3), 267–287. 
Eder, M. and Rybicki, J. 2013. “Do birds of a feather 
really flock together, or how to choose training 
samples for authorship attribution.” Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 28(2), 229–236. 
Juola, P. 2006. “Authorship Attribution.” Foundations 
and Trends in Information Retrieval 1(3), 233–334. 
Jannidis, F; Pielström, S.; Schöch, C.; Vitt, Th. 2015 (to 
appear). “Improving Burrows’ Delta. An empirical 
evaluation of text distance measures.” In: Digital 
Humanities Conference 2015.   
Hoover, D. 2004a. “Testing Burrows’ Delta.” Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 19(4), 453–475. 
Hoover, D. 2004b. “Delta Prime?” Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 19(4), 477–495. 
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. 2009. 
“Computational methods in authorship attribution.” 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology 60(1), 9–26. 
Oakes, M. P. 2009. “Corpus linguistics and stylometry.” 
In A. Lüdeling & M. Kytö (eds.) Corpus Linguistics: 
An International Handbook, Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 1070–1090. 
Smith, P. and Aldridge W. 2011. “Improving authorship 
attribution. Optimizing Burrows’ Delta method.” 
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 18(1), 63–88. 
Stamatatos, E. 2009. “A survey of modern authorship 
attribution methods.” Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology 60(3), 538–
556. 
