International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
DOI: 10.5121/ijnlc.2016.5103                                                                                                                        31 
  
A COMPARISON OF TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
METHODS 
 
Ahmed Faraz  
 
Department of Computer & Software Engineering, Bahria University Karachi Campus,  
13 National Stadium Road, Karachi -75260, Pakistan 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this paper firstly I have compared Single Label Text Categorization with Multi Label Text 
Categorization in detail then I have compared Document Pivoted Categorization with Category Pivoted 
Categorization in detail. For this purpose I have given the general definition of Text Categorization with its 
mathematical notation for the purpose of its frugality and cost effectiveness. Then with the help of 
mathematical notation and set theory ,I have converted the general definitions of Single Label Text 
Categorization and Multi Label Text Categorization into their respective mathematical representation 
.Then I discussed Binary Text Categorization as a special case of Single Label Text Categorization. After 
comparison of Single Label Text Categorization with Multi Label Text Categorization, I found that Single 
Label Text Categorization or Binary Text Categorization is more general than Multi Label Text 
Categorization. Thereafter I discussed an algorithm for transformation of Multi Label Classification into 
Binary Classification and explained the conditions of transformation of Multi Label Classification into 
Binary Classification. In the second step I compared Document Pivoted Categorization with Category 
Pivoted Categorization in detail. After comparison we found that Category Pivoted Categorization is more 
typical and complex than Document Pivoted Categorization. The Category Pivoted Categorization becomes 
more complicated when new category is added to predefined set of categories and the recurrent 
classification of documents takes place. Finally I compared Hard Categorization with Ranking 
Categorization. After comparing them I found that Hard Categorization incorporates ‘Hard Decisions’ 
about the relevance or belonging of a document to a category. This hard decision is either completely true 
or completely false. Whereas the Ranking Categorization creates a belonging of a document to a category 
according to the estimated appropriateness to the document. The final Ranked List is developed in the 
Ranking Categorization which is used by the human expert for final decision of Text Categorization.    
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Text Mining, Text Categorization, Automatic Text Classification, Single Label Classification, Multi Label 
Classification, Binary Classification, Document Pivoted Categorization, Category Pivoted Categorization, 
Hard Categorization, Ranking Categorization, Ranked List, Semi Automated Classification  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
When we discuss Text Categorization, we elaborate it with the general context and we do not 
consider Text Categorization with reference to application or development point of view. 
Theoretically we define or give general definitions of Text Categorization because of the fact that 
it is more frugal and cost effective and it may be applied to any application in a specific domain. 
It is apparent that we do not have any need to verify these suppositions in a particular 
environment in which Text Categorization is implemented. It may be possible that when Text 
Categorization is implemented in a particular domain, any other source of information may be 
required to be available at the time of implementation of Text Categorization as component.  
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
32 
The essential condition for Text Categorization is that at the first stage, the source of text or the 
document on which Text Categorization is applied should be available. The availability of the 
document at the first stage is indispensable. Let us suppose that Text Categorization is applied on 
the text of a newspaper, and then the text of newspaper should be available at the first time. 
Similarly if Text Categorization is applied on the text of an e-book, then the text of e-book should 
be available at the first time. The second important point to discuss is that Text Categorization is 
purely a field of Text Mining and the Text Mining is a sub-field of Data Mining. The Text 
Categorization techniques and methods as discussed mainly in [3], [5], [9], [10] and other referred 
papers are applied on pure text and it does not apply on other types of data like audio, video, 
MPEG, MP3, audio streams from a source, video streams from a source etc. In order to compare 
different Text Categorization techniques, we define Text Categorization first of all. Text 
Categorization is the task of assigning a Boolean value to each pair [3]. 
 
 
 
Where D is domain of documents and C is a set of predefined categories 
 
 
 
2. SINGLE LABEL VERSUS MULTI LABEL TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
 
When Text Categorization is implemented different constraints may be applied on the Text 
Categorization task [2]. I have given the general definition of Text Categorization in the above 
paragraph. Consider general definition of Text Categorization for a particular case where  is a 
given integer. The term “exactly k” means either  is considered. From the general 
definition of Text Categorization we know that: 
 
 
 
This implies that two memberships of documents and categories are derived: 
 
 
 
 
 
Consider the first case in which exactly k elements of C will be assigned to each . 
This means that either will be assigned to each  or 
 will be assigned to each . 
 
The case in which exactly one category must be assigned to each is called 
Single Label Text Categorization .The Single Label Text Categorization is also called Non 
Overlapping Categories case. 
 
The case in which any number of categories from 0 to |C| may be assigned to the same  is 
called Multi Label Text Categorization as defined and discussed in [8] .The Multi Label Text 
Categorization is also called Overlapping Categories Case as discussed in [1] and [8]. 
 
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
33 
2.1. Binary Text Categorization  
 
We define Binary Text Categorization as a special case of Single Label Text Categorization as 
discussed in [11].In Binary Text Categorization each   must be assigned either to the 
category  or its complement . 
 
We can represent Binary Text Categorization mathematically as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2. First Comparison Result 
 
When we compare Single Label Text Categorization with Multi Label Text Categorization we see 
that Single Label Text Categorization is more general than Multi Label Text Categorization 
theoretically. Since Binary Text Categorization is a special case of Single Label Text 
Categorization as illustrated in [1] , [8] and [11].We can state that Binary Text Categorization is 
more general than the Multi Label Text Categorization theoretically.  
 
2.3. Use of Algorithm for Transformation of Multi Label Classification into Binary 
Classification  
 
References [1] ,[8] and[11] illustrates that when we write an algorithm for Binary Classification, 
this algorithm can also be used for Multi Label Classification as follows:- 
 
2.3.1. First Given Condition 
 
It is given that we have a problem of Multi Label Classification under 
 
 
Where  
 
  : predefined set of categories 
 
2.3.2. Transformation 
 
Transform the problem of Multi Label Classification under  
into |C| independent problems of Binary Classification under the following set:  
for  
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
34 
 
 
Figure 1. Transformation of Multi Label Classification into Binary Classification 
 
After this transformation we will have a new set of transformed Binary Classification. This new 
set is following: 
 
 
 
2.4. Conditions for Transformation of Multi Label Classification into Binary 
Classification 
 
For transformation of Multi Label Classification into Binary Classification as discussed in [8] and 
[11], the following conditions should be met:  
 
-Categories  should be stochastically independent of each other. 
-For any  the value of  does not depend on the value of . 
-For any  the value of  does not depend on the value of . 
 
Since we have stated that an algorithm for Binary Classification can also be used for Multi Label 
Classification but its contrary is not true. An algorithm for Multi Label Classification cannot be 
used for Binary Classification. Similarly an algorithm for Multi Label Classification cannot be 
used Single Label Classification.   
 
2.5. Possibilities of Classification of a document : 
 
The Document Classification is discussed in detail in [12]. It is given that there is a document   
to classify. There are two possibilities of classification of a document : 
 
-The classifier might ascribe k > 1 categories to .When k > 1 categories are ascribed to , the 
question is raised for the selection of “most suitable category” from them. An algorithm for the 
selection of most appropriate category should be written which should encompass all 
dependencies of these categories on pertinent factors for document  classification. 
 
 
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
35 
-The classifier might ascribe no category to .When no category among a set of categories  
  is ascribed to ,the question is raised for the selection of “least 
unsuitable category” from them. When no category is attributed to document , the least 
inappropriate category from C should be selected. The question is raised how to select 
“inappropriate category” from C.    
 
 2.6. Significance of Binary Classification 
 
Binary Classification is more useful and significant than Multi Label Classification as illustrated 
in [9]. The Binary Classification is discussed in more detail in [13].There are various reasons for 
this significance of Binary Classification. 
 
-There are a number of Text Categorization applications which consists of Binary Classification 
problems. In fact Binary Classification involves bifurcation of a problem into two sub problems. 
Each sub problem includes the original sub problem and the complement of original sub problem 
as constituents of the set. An important Text Categorization application is Filtering. Filtering also 
comprises of Binary Classification problem which has the fundamental functionality of decision 
making as illustrated in [9] .For example deciding whether is about “Indian political affairs” or 
not. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Demonstration of filtering which may include decision making 
 
-The most important feature of Text Categorization applications is that most Binary Classification 
problems include “unevenly populated categories”. That is it is always not possible to divide a 
Binary Classification problem into evenly partitioned categories. Most of the time, Text 
Categorization problems divide Binary Classification problem into two categories of different 
population size. For example when we categorize the news about Indian political affairs 
according to Binary Classification, much fewer documents may be in the class “ is about Indian 
political affairs” and more documents may be in the class “ is not about Indian political affairs”. 
 
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
36 
 
 
Figure 3. Division of Binary Classification Problem into unevenly populated categories. 
 
-In the same manner, most Binary Classification problem may include “unevenly characterized 
categories”. This means that “what is about Indian political affairs” is characterized better than 
“what is not about Indian political affairs”. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.Division of Binary Classification problem into unevenly characterized categories 
 
-In my opinion, division of Binary Classification problem into unevenly populated categories is 
according to quantitative evaluation where as division of Binary Classification problem into 
unevenly characterized categories is according to qualitative evaluation. 
 
-A most common observation in Text Categorization applications is that Binary case is more 
general than Multi Label case, therefore due to the generalization of Binary case ,when we solve 
the Binary case this means we solve the Multi Label case. This generalization is implemented in 
automated indexing for Boolean systems. 
 
-Most of the Text Categorization applications are implemented in binary case. 
 
-It is very easier to understand Binary Classification because most of the techniques for binary 
classification are just special cases of existing techniques for the single label case.  
    
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
37 
2.7. Limitations of Single Label and Multi Label Text Categorization 
 
Different scientists had worked on Text Categorization but their work on Text Categorization is 
limited by certain constraints. For example , consider the case of Single Label and Multi Label 
Text Categorization .Single Label and Multi Label Text Categorization is implemented for ‘k’ 
categories that is either  less than or equal to ‘k’ or greater than or equal to ‘k’ where ‘k’ is an 
integer. If the value of integer ‘k’ increases to very larger value, the complexity of the algorithm 
for implementing Text Categorization will become larger. The interested researchers may work 
on the complexity of algorithms for implementation of Text Categorization. 
 
3. DOCUMENT PIVOTED VERSUS CATEGORY PIVOTED TEXT 
CATEGORIZATION 
 
A Text Classifier can be used into two ways. The first one is Document Pivoted Categorization 
(DPC) and the second one is Category Pivoted Categorization (CPC) as discussed in [14].The 
basic difference between Document Pivoted Categorization and Category Pivoted Categorization 
is that document is given in Document Pivoted Categorization and category  is 
given in Category Pivoted Categorization. First of all I will define Text Classifier which is also 
known as Classifier. 
 
 3.1. Definition of Text Classifier  
 
The concept of Text Classifier is that there is a document D and we have to classify the document 
D under a specific given category as discussed in [15]. In totality we have |C| categories and the 
document D may belong to any one category at a time. If the document D belongs to the specific 
category then the Text Classifier will be true and if the document D does not belong to the 
specific category then the Text Classifier will be false. Therefore the Text Classifier is a function 
which is denoted by a set of two logical values which are true and false.  
 
The mathematical definition of “Text Classifier” is given in the paper referred as [15] below:  
 The classification of text under  as consisting of |C| 
independent problems of classifying the documents in D under a given category  for 
.A classifier for  is then a function : that approximates an unknown 
target function : . 
  
3.2. Document Pivoted Categorization (DPC) 
 
It is given that , we have to find all under which it should be filed. This means that 
document  is searched under all categories and the required corresponding category will be 
found which contain given document .  
 
3.3. Category Pivoted Categorization (CPC) 
 
It is given that , we have to find all under which it should filed. This means that a 
category is searched under all documents and the required corresponding document will be 
found which contain given category .  
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
38 
3.4. Availability of information in sets C and D  
 
When the software or tool incorporating Text Mining principles and techniques is implemented 
then the theoretical principles cannot be implemented in entirety and certain practical 
considerations become obvious at the time of implementation which were not considered by Text 
Mining scientists during hypothesis development. In order to implement Document Pivoted 
Categorization and Category Pivoted Categorization, two sets are important: set C and set D. It 
may be possible that these sets C and D may be available at the beginning in entirety or not. It 
may happen that sets C and D may contain incomplete categories and incomplete documents.  
 
3.5. Effect of Classifier Building Method 
 
The other significant effect is of the Classifier Building Method. We are talking about the Text 
Classifier Building Method. We have two choices for building Text Classifier. The first choice is 
Document Pivoted Categorization style and the second choice is Category Pivoted Categorization 
style. Building text classifiers using either the first style or the second style will have their own 
effects as illustrated in [16]. From the point of view of ease of use, Document Pivoted 
Categorization is simpler to implement than Category Pivoted Categorization. 
 
Document Pivoted Categorization is more pertinent when documents are available at different 
time instants for example filtering an email. The emails related to the social networking are 
alienated from the official emails. In my opinion web search engines like Yahoo, Google, and 
Alta vista return the results of their search on the basis of Category Pivoted Categorization. The 
search engines generate their browsing results by comparing the text typed by the user among a 
huge collection of categories and finally return results narrowed down by Category Pivoted 
Categorization. 
 
3.6. When Category Pivoted Categorization should be used? 
 
There are two particular conditions during which Category Pivoted Categorization is used. 
-Suppose that we have a set of categories represented as C and a number of documents have been 
classified under the set of categories C. 
 
 
 
It is required that a new category has to be added among the set of categories C then the 
new set of categories will be following: 
 
 
 
It is obvious that the addition of new category will have an impact on the documents which 
have already been classified under the set of categories C. 
 
-When the new category is added among the set of categories C, the documents should be 
reconsidered for classification among the new set of categories: 
 
 
 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
39 
Therefore we can say that Category Pivoted Categorization is more typical and complex than 
Document Pivoted Categorization. Category Pivoted Categorization has more burden of work for 
recurrent classification of documents when a new category is added in the given set of categories. 
Document Pivoted Categorization is more commonly used than Category Pivoted Categorization 
because of the simplicity and applicability of the approach.  
 
4. HARD CATEGORIZATION VERSUS RANKING CATEGORIZATION 
 
When we talk about Text Categorization, it necessarily involves the automation of Text 
Categorization. The automation of Text Categorization is either complete or partial. When Text 
Categorization is fully automated then a decision of either true or false is taken for each pair of 
the following tuple: 
 
 
 
The term automation means involvement of human expert is minimized and the software which 
performs Text Categorization operation is intelligent enough to take decision about each pair  
.The Full Automation of Text Categorization requires True, False decision on each pair of 
document and category as illustrated in [18]. Let us consider an example. Suppose that there is a 
document belongs to the category    then for the pair of .Full Automation will 
yield True decision. Consider another example, if a document does not belong to the  
category , then for the pair of , Full Automation will yield false decision. When we 
talk about the actual implementation of Full Automation of Text Categorization, we need specific 
tables on Data Servers containing three fields: Documents, Category and Belonging. Consider the 
table below:       
 
 Table 1.  Full Automation of Text Categorization. 
 
Document Category Belonging 
  True 
  False 
  True 
  False 
  True 
  True 
  True 
 
If partial automation of Text Categorization is performed then the requirements and needs will be 
very different. For example if it is given that , we have a set of given categories  
 
.In the given set of categories C, the system can do the ranking 
among categories as illustrated in [19]. The method to perform ranking among categories is that 
the system calculates the “estimated appropriateness” of .No hard decision is taken on any 
category. It is obvious that after ranking is performed the final list will be very changed. The final 
list obtained from ranking will be in a specific order. This final list will be called Ranked List. 
Therefore, we can define Ranked List as a list of categories which is sorted according to 
estimated appropriateness of .The finally obtained Ranked List is very important and helpful 
from the point of view of human expert. The reason is that the human expert is the key person 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
40 
responsible for taking the final categorization decision. The human expert will sort the categories 
from the top of the list only because he will restrict the choices at the top of the list only to the 
categories. The advantage obtained from the automated ranked list is that there is no need to 
examine the entire list; only top of the list will be used by the human expert to find categories 
with estimated appropriateness to . 
 
For example suppose that the set of categories initially available for ranking is: 
 
 
Suppose that  has the higher rank in terms of estimated appropriateness to  as compared to  
.Then the final ranked list  will be following: 
 
 
 
Further investigation into the Partial Automation of Text Categorization tasks introduces the 
concept of Fuzzy Logic along with estimated appropriateness to . We can use Fuzzy Logic and 
Fuzzy sub set values that is semi true, semi false decisions on each pair of  along with 
estimated appropriateness to  which may produce better belonging of a document to category 
 and it will give very good results as compared to the techniques discussed and illustrated in 
[7].The technical justification of using Fuzzy Sub Set Values is that during the Text 
Categorization Task we may deal with a document   containing text which partially belongs to 
a category .Again there is a role of human expert who will take the decision about the partial 
truth or partial falseness of the belonging of document  to a category .The future research 
direction can be the development of an algorithm for finding Fuzzy Sub Set Values for 
representing the belonging of document  to a category  in Partial Automation of Text 
Categorization. 
 
4.1. Some Examples of Partial Automation of Text Categorization 
 
Let us consider the following text from the Daily Dawn News Paper of Pakistan. 
“With a gap of over 17 years, the government on Saturday gave final touches to arrangements for 
carrying out population and housing census in March this year. Preliminary results will be 
compiled within three months. The governing council of Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) 
Headed by Finance Minister Ishaq Dar approved a revised time line for the census. The 
preliminary results will have to be completed by June this year, while other aspects including 
district wise data reports will have to be completed by December 2017.An official source privy to 
the meeting told Dawn that although compilation of population reports after census normally took 
around three years, the government wanted to be completed it before the next general elections 
due in 2018.The compilation of all reports by December 2017 will give enough time to political 
parties and the Election Commission to use data for electioneering purposes. At the moment there 
are a number of bills pending before both houses of parliament seeking increase in the number of 
seats for minorities as well as representation of provinces, especially Baluchistan in the National 
Assembly. While taking up those bills, the committees of the two houses had already decided to 
defer consideration of the bill until the finalisation of the census data. The population census will 
yield statistics about internal migration, urbanisation as well as urban and rural population across 
the country. The population data will be used for delimitation of the constituencies of the national 
and provincial assemblies, a requirement under the constitution. According to the source, the 
exact dates have not yet been finalised .However; it has been decided to hold census at the end of 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
41 
March .The budget approved for the census is Rupees 4.5 billion, which will be shared by the 
provinces. The population census will be conducted; the first three days for a house listing 
operation and the following 15 days for the main count which include filing of census forms on 
house to house level and a day for homeless people. The PBS says that the census will be held 
with the full support of armed forces at a man to man level as was done in 1998.An official 
statement issued after the meeting by the finance minister said that Finance Minister Ishaq Dar at 
the outset welcomed the newly appointed PBS members and mentioned that they had joined the 
organisation at the crucial time, just a couple of months before the sixth population and housing 
census. They would have to shoulder the responsibility of making the census successful, he said. 
Chief Statistician Asif Bajwa informed the meeting that as per the decision of the governing 
council, PBS has adjusted the target dates for preparation of census reports by December 2017.He 
said that the PBS had initiated all preparations and held meetings with provincial authorities to 
brief them about their responsibility in making the census successful and transparent. Mr. Dar 
said it is the prime responsibility of PBS to conduct credible census. He said that utmost care 
should be taken to complete the task in a transparent manner for a credible data. Such data he said 
could then form the basis for the future planning. During the meeting it was agreed that qualified 
and highly reputed statisticians would be co-opted as members of the technical committee to 
benefit from their expertise. Mr. Dar directed that frequent meetings of the technical committee 
be held until the census was held and suggestions of experts be brought to the governing council 
for consideration.” 
 
This article was published on 3
rd
 of January 2016 under the heading “Population census to be held 
in March” by Mubarak Zeb Khan. We will perform Partial Automation of Text Categorization for 
this article published in the Daily Dawn. 
 
The idea was discussed in [7].Let us suppose that  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2.  Partial Automation of Text Categorization. 
 
Document Category Estimated Appropriateness to 
Document  
  0.6 
  0.4 
  1.0 
  0.5 
  0.2 
 
The final Ranked List for the above example according to estimated appropriateness to  will be 
following: 
 
 
 
The final Ranked List will be used by the human expert for Text Categorization using Partial 
Automation of Text Categorization method. 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
42 
 
4.2. Semi Automated Classification Systems 
 
Semi Automated Classification System is also known as “Interactive” Classification System. 
Semi Automated Classification Systems are discussed in detail in [20]. When we compare human 
expert with fully automated system then the effectiveness of human expert is very larger than the 
fully automated system, therefore semi automated systems are very useful and effective. The 
reason for effectiveness of semi automated systems is that they incorporate advice of human 
expert in addition with the results generated by automated systems. When we design Automated 
Systems or Semi Automated Systems, we cannot deny the significance of training data and 
training documents. Training documents are used when actual documents needed for 
classification are not available and Training data is used when actual data needed for 
classification is not available. Semi automated systems are useful when the following conditions 
are fulfilled:     
 
-When quality of training data is less. 
 
-When the documents that have to come for automated classification systems are not known and 
not seen then the training documents are used for semi automated classification system but the 
training documents cannot be trusted to be representative sample document of the unseen 
documents that have to be classified using automated classification system. 
 
Therefore we can conclude that semi automated classifiers are more effective and useful than 
fully automated classifier and the results of a fully automated classifier cannot be trusted 
completely.     
 
4.3. Future Research Directions 
 
In Text Categorization it is quite obvious from the mathematical definitions of Text 
Categorization that categories are assigned to the documents. For example we have a paragraph 
containing the text from the political affairs of Pakistan, and then this paragraph of text will be 
covered under the category of ‘Politics’. If we have a paragraph containing text from the sports 
news of Pakistan, then this paragraph of text will be covered under the category of ‘Sports’. 
Suppose that we have three paragraphs of texts, the first paragraph of text is covered under the 
category ‘Pakistani Politics’, the second paragraph of text is covered under the category ‘Indian 
Politics’ and the third paragraph of text is covered under the category ‘Bangladeshi Politics’, then 
the whole three paragraphs will be categorized under single category ‘Politics’. In this example 
we have three Multi Label Text Categorizations and one Single Label Text Categorization. In 
other words we have three Multi Label Text Categorizations under one Single Label Text 
Categorization. When we move from one Single Label Text Categorization to three or more Multi 
Label Text Categorizations, we need proper mathematical models and algorithms for grouping 
many Multi Label Text Categorizations under one Single Label Text Categorization. Also we can 
calculate complexity of algorithm for grouping many Multi Label Text Categorizations under one 
Single Label Text Categorization.      
 
The next future research direction is obtained from the above discussion of possibilities of 
classification of document . The research direction is that we have found that the set of 
categories  should be partitioned into subset of categories according 
to their appropriateness. An interested researcher on Text Mining may work on this problem for 
finding an algorithm which will partition predefined set of categories  
 into subsets according to appropriateness. 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
43 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this paper our main focus is to classify a document into a range of categories. We have given a 
set of categories and the document may belong to any one category at a time. The relation and 
association of the document to a specific category is defined by a logical function which is a 
Boolean function here .This Boolean function is called Text Classifier and the purpose of Text 
Classifier is to define the logical state of the belonging or relation of the document to a specific 
category. In this paper we have compared the Semi-Automated Classifiers with Fully-Automated 
Classifiers. After comparison of Semi-Automated Classifiers with Fully-Automated Classifiers 
we found that Semi-Automated Classifiers are quite better than Fully-Automated Classifiers. 
Fully-Automated Classifiers should not be used and are not trustworthy. 
    
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I would like to thank the ex- Director General of Bahria University Karachi campus, Vice 
Admiral Khalid Amin HI(M) (Retired)and the Director of Bahria University Karachi Campus, 
Captain Mohsin H. Malik TI(M) PN for motivating me to be involved in research work in my 
field of interest. They have always persuaded the faculty to do research work for the sake of 
serving the humanity, science and engineering. Also I would like to thank Dr. Farah Naz Lakhani 
for motivating me to contribute towards research in the field of Computer Systems Engineering 
and Computing.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Uğuz, "A two-stage feature selection method for text categorization by using information gain, 
principal component analysis and genetic algorithm," Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 24, pp. 1024-
1032, 2011. 
[2] W. Zhang, T. Yoshida, and X. Tang, "A comparative study of TF* IDF, LSI and multi-words for text 
classification," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 38, pp. 2758-2765, 2011. 
[3] S. Jiang, G. Pang, M. Wu, and L. Kuang, "An improved K-nearest-neighbor algorithm for text 
categorization," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, pp. 1503-1509, 2012. 
[4] S. Wang, D. Li, X. Song, Y. Wei, and H. Li, "A feature selection method based on improved fisher’s 
discriminant ratio for text sentiment classification," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 38, pp. 
8696-8702, 2011. 
[5] A. K. Uysal and S. Gunal, "A novel probabilistic feature selection method for text classification," 
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 36, pp. 226-235, 2012. 
[6] M. L. Jockers and D. M. Witten, "A comparative study of machine learning methods for authorship 
attribution," Literary and Linguistic Computing, p. fqq001, 2010. 
[7] J. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, Z. Liu, and X. Zhang, "A new feature selection based on comprehensive 
measurement both in inter-category and intra-category for text categorization," Information 
Processing & Management, vol. 48, pp. 741-754, 2012. 
[8] J.-Y. Jiang, S.-C. Tsai, and S.-J. Lee, "FSKNN: multi-label text categorization based on fuzzy 
similarity and k nearest neighbors," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, pp. 2813-2821, 2012. 
[9] C. Jiang, F. Coenen, R. Sanderson, and M. Zito, "Text classification using graph mining-based feature 
extraction," Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 23, pp. 302-308, 2010. 
[10] Z. Li, Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, and K. Li, "Fast text categorization using concise semantic 
analysis," Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 32, pp. 441-448, 2011. 
[11] Z. Kalal, J. Matas, and K. Mikolajczyk, "Pn learning: Bootstrapping binary classifiers by structural 
constraints," in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2010 IEEE Conference on, 2010, 
pp. 49-56. 
[12] V. Srikumar and C. D. Manning, "Learning distributed representations for structured output 
prediction," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014, pp. 3266-3274. 
International Journal on Natural Language Computing (IJNLC) Vol. 5, No.1, February 2016 
 
44 
[13] A. Sarker and G. Gonzalez, "Portable automatic text classification for adverse drug reaction detection 
via multi-corpus training," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 53, pp. 196-207, 2015. 
[14] B. Mitra, E. Nalisnick, N. Craswell, and R. Caruana, "A Dual Embedding Space Model for Document 
Ranking," arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.01137, 2016. 
[15] S. T. Dumais, D. Heckerman, E. Horvitz, J. C. Platt, and M. Sahami, "Methods and apparatus for 
classifying text and for building a text classifier," ed: Google Patents, 2001. 
[16] E. Cambria and B. White, "Jumping NLP curves: a review of natural language processing research 
[review article]," Computational Intelligence Magazine, IEEE, vol. 9, pp. 48-57, 2014. 
[17] Y. Aphinyanaphongs, L. D. Fu, Z. Li, E. R. Peskin, E. Efstathiadis, C. F. Aliferis, et al., "A 
comprehensive empirical comparison of modern supervised classification and feature selection 
methods for text categorization," Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 
vol. 65, pp. 1964-1987, 2014. 
[18] E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis, "Automatic text categorization in terms of genre and 
author," Computational linguistics, vol. 26, pp. 471-495, 2000. 
[19] G. Chandrashekar and F. Sahin, "A survey on feature selection methods," Computers & Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 40, pp. 16-28, 2014. 
[20] G. Berardi, "Semi-automated text classification," in ACM SIGIR Forum, 2014, pp. 42-42. 
 
 
 
AUTHOR
 
Mr. Ahmed Faraz holds Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Systems and Masters of 
Engineering in Computer Systems from N.E.D University of Engineering and 
Technology, Karachi Pakistan .He has taught various core courses of computer science 
and engineering at undergraduate and postgraduate level at Sir Syed University, N.E.D 
University and Bahria University Karachi for more than ten years. His research 
interests include AI, Data Mining, Text Mining,  Parallel Processing, CAO, and 
Statistical Learning. 
             
 
 
 
 
