Harvesting Multiple Sources for User Profile Learning: a
Big Data Study
Aleksandr Farseev, Liqiang Nie, Mohammad Akbari and Tat-Seng Chua
farseev@u.nus.edu; nieliqiang@gmail.com; {akbari, chuats}@nus.edu.sg
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
ABSTRACT
User profile learning, such as mobility and demographic
profile learning, is of great importance to various appli-
cations. Meanwhile, the rapid growth of multiple social
platforms makes it possible to perform a comprehensive user
profile learning from different views. However, the research
efforts on user profile learning from multiple data sources
are still relatively sparse, and there is no large-scale dataset
released towards user profile learning. In our study, we
contribute such benchmark and perform an initial study on
user mobility and demographic profile learning. First, we
constructed and released a large-scale multi-source multi-
modal dataset from three geographical areas. We then
applied our proposed ensemble model on this dataset to
learn user profile. Based on our experimental results, we
observed that multiple data sources mutually complement
each other and their appropriate fusion boosts the user
profiling performance.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content
Analysis and Indexing
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance
Keywords
Multiple Source Integration; User Profile Learning; Mobility
Profile; Demographic Profile
1. INTRODUCTION
Regarded initially as a hub for teenagers and college
students, social media in recent years has increased its
impact on the way people live and communicate all around
the world. Moreover, some popular social networks like
Facebook and Twitter are constantly growing by involving
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICMR ’15 Jun 23 - 26 2015, Shanghai, China
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ACM 978-1-4503-3274-3/15/06 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2671188.2749381
more and more people of different genders, ages and lifestyles
[6]. The rapid growth and interconnections between online
social services are somehow related to the popularity of
smartphones, which enable users to communicate while on
the move. Furthermore, it is well known that more than
half of online adults use more than one social network in
their daily life1. These social services are often connected
to each other by deploying the so-called cross-linking
functionality [4]. With multi-source and mobility-related
data, understanding user behaviours via user profile learning
is promising and possible [13][15][17][25][26].
In this work, we define user profile as comprising of
user mobility profile and user demographic profile, as
shown in Figure 1. Mobility is a contemporary paradigm,
which involves various types of people movement. It can
be a physical movement in space, the movement from
one social group to another or even a virtual movement
between web pages while surfing the Internet [22]. The
user mobility profile describes users’ behavioural habits
and interests. It is useful in many application scenarios,
such as transport routes planning [11][20] or the control
of spread of diseases [19]. On the other hand, the user
demographic profile2 typically includes age, gender and
social class. These demographic attributes were also studied
in a popular evaluations named PAN [18][21]. In general,
the demographic profile is often used in marketing to
describe a demographic grouping or a market segment.
By considering users’ demographic aspects, we are able
to gain deep insights into users’ behaviour and interests
understanding. For example, in advertisement domain,
age and gender significantly affect the list of potential
products that can be routed to a given consumer: cars
may be advertised mostly to adult males; while toys to
kids and their parents. At the same time, it can also
be used to support recommendation [13] and personalized
question answering [12]. The combination of mobility
and demographic profile opens the possibility of urban
facility planning according to demographic properties of city
areas: government organizations may consider building more
kindergartens and schools in areas with high concentration
of young families; while more food courts near professionals’
work places.
User profile learning by jointly considering multiple
sources is, however, non-trivial, due to following reasons:
• Multiple data sources: Users frequently enroll in
multiple on-line social forums, which captures the
1www.pewinternet.org
2en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographic_profile
Figure 1: User profile and its compositions.
same users from different views. For example, Linkedin
conveys users’ formal career path; while Twitter
casually uncovers users’ daily activities. Effective
integration of multi-view data from different sources
is a tough challenge.
• Multi-modal data: Beyond texts, other modalities
often appear in users’ messages. Users may take
and share pictures in photo-sharing services like
Instagram, upload videos to Youtube and perform
Foursquare/Swarm (Foursquare) check-ins. Users’
messages on social media platform such as Twitter
also include more multimedia. User profile learning on
these heterogeneous information requires new theories
that can seamlessly integrate such heterogeneous data
in a complementary way.
• Benchmark Dataset: As far as we know, there is no
a publicly accepted benchmark dataset towards user
profile learning with multi-source multi-modal data.
Due to the sensitivity of privacy, only a limited amount
of data can be collected for internet active users. Even
worse, after the collection of necessary data, it is a
big challenge to align various social network accounts
to the same user. Another problem is the lack of
ground truth, which greatly hinders the development
of learning algorithms.
To facilitate user profile learning via multi-source multi-
modal data, we build a representative data collection
from three prevailing social resources, namely, Twitter,
Foursquare and Instagram. The ground truth is obtained by
crawling publicly available information from users’ Facebook
pages. Based upon the constructed dataset, we conduct
the preliminary study of profile learning. In particular,
user mobility is modelled as a location-topic distribution
and reflects user’s location category preferences. We also
perform first-order data analysis by calculating mobility-
related statistics that describe users’ activities for different
social sources. In addition, we infer some attributes of the
demographic profile, such as the age and gender. We regard
the demographic profile learning as an ensemble learning
task by fusing multiple and heterogeneous information cues.
We claim and verify that multi-source multi-modal data
fusion is able to boost the results of the demographic profile
learning, as compared to the use of a mono source.
Several prior research efforts have already been dedicated
to user profile learning. Some prior works were devoted to
urban user mobility analysis [8][13][14]; while others focused
mostly on location-based user community detection and
profiling [27] or market trade area analysis [17]. The user
demographic profiling task gained popularity following the
works in [18][21], where participants were asked to build
a model to predict user’s age and gender based on users’
textual posts. Users’ occupation prediction from a large
Twitter text corpora was also explored in [1]. However,
most of these works are either based on a single-source or a
single-modality dataset. Few of them explored and leveraged
multi-source multi-modal data.
In this work, we constructed and released [7] a multi-
source dataset, provided users demographics and mobility
ground truth, and performed preliminary studies in these
two directions.
2. MULTI-SOURCE BIG DATA
This section details the dataset construction. In order
to cover the most popular modalities (visual, textual
and location data), we incorporate following social media
sources:
• Foursquare as a location data source;
• Twitter as a textual data source;
• Instagram as a visual data source;
• Facebook as a demographics-related ground truth
source.
The data was obtained from three geographical regions
with high Foursquare user activity, namely: Singapore
London and New York. It can be used for research
on user profile learning and other contemporary problems
such as venue recommendation [27], user identification
across multiple social networks [23], and cross-region user
community detection [28]. Considering the sensitivity of
users’ private information, we release the extracted features
instead of the original data.
We first collected a set of active users, who have recently
posted tweets through the cross-linking functionality of
Instagram or Swarm mobile apps. We utilized Twitter
REST API3 to perform the location-dependent tweets search
in Singapore, London and New York regions. This crawling
method offers the possibility to map Twitter user IDs to
Foursquare and Instagram user IDs, which allows us to
overcome the multi-source user identification problem [23].
Based upon the active user list, we crawled user generated
contents for those users, who posted their activities on
Twitter. Tweet streams can be monitored with the key
words specified as “swarmapp.com” and “instagram.com” to
receive tweets posted from Swarm and Instagram mobile
applications, respectively. For example, each sampled check-
in message contains a short link to the original check-in page,
where the check-in details are available. By following this,
we performed check-ins and media crawling for previously
identified active users. Noticeably, this crawling strategy
can be applied to crawl other social networks as well.
2.1 Statistics of the Dataset
The dataset crawling process started on 10 July 2014
in Singapore, London and New York regions, and ended
on 20 Dec 2014. The number of data records for each
city is summarized in Table 1. In our current work, we
perform data analysis and user profile learning for users
from Singapore region only. It means that all our following
statements refer only to users in Singapore, while cross-
region profile learning could be addressed in future work.
Figure 2(a) presents the percentage of users with respect
to the number of posts. It can be seen that the users’
3dev.twitter.com/rest/public
Number of tweets
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 18000
%
 o
f 
u
s
e
rs
 
0
20
40
60
80
100 male
female
(a)
Number of shared media contents
0 100 200 300 400 500
%
 o
f 
u
s
e
rs
 
0
20
40
60
80
100 male
female
(b)
Number of checkins
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
%
 o
f 
u
se
rs
 p
e
rf
o
rm
e
d
 c
h
e
ck
in
s
0
20
40
60
80
100 male
female
(c)
Number of tweets
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 18000
%
 o
f 
u
s
e
rs
 
0
20
40
60
80
100  <20
20-30
30-40
 >40
(d)
Number of shared media contents
0 100 200 300 400 500
%
 o
f 
u
s
e
rs
 
0
20
40
60
80
100  <20
20-30
30-40
 >40
(e)
Number of checkins
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
%
 o
f 
u
s
e
rs
 
0
20
40
60
80
100  <20
20-30
30-40
 >40
(f)
Figure 2: The statistics of Singapore dataset: (a) illustrates the percentage of users with respect to the number
of posted tweets based on gender; (b) and (c) respectively show users posted multimedia on Instagram and
checkins in Foursquare. (d) illustrates the percentage of users with respect to the number of posted tweets
based on their age group; (e) and (f) respectively show users posted multimedia on Instagram and checkins
in Foursquare.
Table 1: Number of data records in our constructed
dataset from Singapore, London and New York.
City #users #tweets #ch-ins #images
Singapore 7, 023 11, 732, 489 366, 268 263, 530
London 5, 503 2, 973, 162 127, 276 65, 088
NY 7, 957 5, 263, 630 304, 493 230, 752
microblog activity is not very correlated to their gender.
Figure 2(b) shows the percentage of users with respect to the
amount of multimedia contents which they shared through
Twitter. It shows that female users in general share more
media content than male users. Figure 2(c) shows the
analysis results of user check-in behaviors. It can be seen
that males tent to perform more check-ins than females.
We also analyzed users’ posting behavior with respect to
users’ age. Figure 2(d), 2(e) and 2(f) respectively show
user behavior distributions in terms of writing microblog
messages, sharing media contents, and posting check-ins. It
is interesting but surprising to notice that, users from 30 -
40 age group are less active in microblog than younger users
(< 20 y.o; 20 - 30 y.o); while in image and location sharing
services, older users in average (30 - 40 y.o; >40 y.o) more
active.
In order to visualize the semantic component of data, we
plot the distributions of users among popular Foursquare
venue categories and Instagram image concepts for users
of different age and gender. Figure 3(a) shows the most
popular venue categories in our dataset with respect to users’
gender. As it can be seen, there is a meaningful difference
in venue preference between male and female users. In
particular, men are more interested to visit night clubs
and food courts, while female users often perform check-
ins from home or cafe. Figure 3(c), in contrast, visualizes
user mobility with respect to age. It shows that adult users
(older than 20 y.o) often perform check - ins in malls, while
children and teenagers (<20 y.o.) often stay at home.
Besides, we analyzed users’ media sharing behaviours
on Instagram. Figures 3(b) and 3(d) demonstrate the
distribution of the extracted image concepts for users’
gender and age groups, respectively. From Figure 3(b),
we can see that images posted by woman often include
hairs and dresses, which are represented by “Wig” and
“Pajama” concepts, while men mostly shared images with
cloth-related ( “Ski mask”, “Bulletproof vest”) and daily life
(“Comic book”, “Chocolate sauce”) concepts. Figure 3(d)
explicitly reflects that distinct age groups are interested in
different concepts. For example, food-related concepts such
as “Plate”, “Pot-pie”, and “Burrito” are frequently shared by
senior age group, while “Comic book” and “Toy shop” are
often shared by users of between 30-40 years old4.
2.2 Ground Truth
The ground truth was crawled from the publicly available
Facebook pages. The Facebook-Foursquare-Twitter account
ID mapping was obtained via Foursquare REST API5. The
significant part of users in Singapore (3, 849 records) have
mentioned their gender, while only a few have provided
their actual age (305 records). In order to complement age-
related ground truth, we estimated the missing age from
their education path. To encourage other broad research,
we have also released [7] ground truth records about
user’s Education, Employment, Demography, Location and
Family.
4Image concepts were extracted from ImageNet [5].
5developer.foursquare.com
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3: Illustration of the distributions of venue categories and image concepts over genders and ages for
the Singapore dataset. (a) and (b) respectively illustrate the distribution of categories and image concepts for
different genders; while (c) and (d) illustrate the distribution of categories and image concepts for different
age groups, respectively.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4: The personal mobility statistics for the Singapore dataset: (a) shows a category-based user mobility
profiles for three users; (b) and (c) show the distribution of users among mobility categories based on gender
and age respectively
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 5: Visualization of user check-ins. (a) and (b) illustrate the spatial distribution of check-ins for
different gender on Singapore and regional map respectively; (c) and (d) illustrate the spatial distribution of
check-ins for different age groups on Singapore and regional map respectively.
3. USER PROFILE LEARNING
3.1 User Mobility Profiling
3.1.1 Individual User Mobility
One way to create category-based user mobility profile is
by counting the check-ins frequency for each venue category.
As can be seen from previous sections, most of the time users
preferred to visit venues that belong to popular categories
such as “Mall”, “Home”, or “Nightclub”. However, the
dimension of such user profile would be the same as the
number of categories in Foursquare category hierarchy (i.e.
592 in Singapore), and thus cannot be easily interpreted or
visualized. Moreover, it is more useful to extract individual
users’ interests that are represented by the tail of user-
category distribution.
To address these problems, we apply LDA [2] on venue
category and their descriptions, which has been found to
be a good approach for location-based user profiling [17]. In
LDA terminology, each user is modelled as a LDA document,
while each venue category is considered as a LDA word.
We empirically found the number of LDA topics equals to
6, since it gives more human-interpretable category-topic
distribution results. The venue category distribution for
different LDA topics is presented in Table 2.
We label each topic by considering the corresponding
top 5 most popular venue categories. As a result, we can
clearly define 6 interest groups, namely, “Food Lovers”,
“Travellers (Business)”, “Party Goers”, “Family Guys”,
“Students” and “Teenagers (Youth)”. It is worth noting that
in most of the obtained mobility groups (LDA topics), users
are represented by the popular categories that obviously
reflect personal user mobility profile. Such user mobility
profiling tackles the human interpretability and visualization
problems as well. Each user profile can be visualized based
on the mobility groups learned such as that based on 3 users
described in Figure 4(a), where “User 1” often performed
business trips, while “User 2” and “User 3” are Student and
Teenager respectively. Next, we compare the obtained users’
profiles for different demographic categories. Specifically, we
draw the distribution of users among mobility“topics”based
on users’ gender (Figure 4(b)) and age group (Figure 4(c))).
From Figure 4(b), it can be seen that males often manifest
their professional side, while female users often demonstrate
student’s lifestyle. Regarding the age differences, most of the
“Party-goers” belong to 10-20 age group, while people > 40
tend to make business trips and spend time with family.
Therefore, the obtained mobility patterns clearly separate
users from different age groups and gender, and can thus
be considered as a powerful approach for individual user
mobility profiling.
3.1.2 Group Mobility
To make deeper insights into user group mobility, we
visualize users’ check - ins on Singapore map for different
age groups and genders. We also provide smaller scaled map
to visualize inter - city user mobility. From Figure 5(a),
it can be seen that the city population is concentrated
in several dense regions, which represent peoples’ housing
(Regions 2 and 3) and working (Region 3) areas. Generally,
male and female users are evenly distributed in these
areas. However, there are some regions where male (Blue
markers) user check-in density is much higher than that
of female (Pink markers). It can be explained by the
special purposes of the land usage, which includes military
objects and army polygons (Regions 1 and 5). From the
inter-city perspective (Figure 5(b)), it can be seen that
both female and male users often perform trips to nearby
cities for shopping and leisure purposes (Regions 1, 2, 4,
5). However, there are some geographical areas that are
popular only by female users (Regions 2, 3). It can be
explained by attractiveness of these regions to users who
travel with family. For example, Region 2 is the city of
“Malacca”which is famous by it’s resorts, while Region 3, the
“Segamat Distinct”, is the leisure area with natural waterfall
and national park, which could be popular among family
groups. From the user age distribution map (Figure 5(c)),
we can see that people of different ages perform check-ins
in different city areas, i.e. teenagers and children (Brown
markers) mostly perform check-ins in housing city areas
and around schools (Regions 1,2,3,5), while students (Green
markers) and working professionals (Blue and Red markers)
are concentrated in city center (Region 4). this clearly shows
the places where these users spend most of their time; for
example, young people spend most of their time studying
in school or at home with their parents, while students
and working professionals tend to make longer trips from
home to office or university. From the small scale map
(Figure 5(d)), it can be seen that young users (brown circles)
are rarely travel to nearby cities due to their age (Region
3), while young adults (green circles) often make such trips
(Regions 1 and 2). These users may be students or young
professionals who visit their families during weekends. The
temporal aspect of user movement is not considered in our
work. However, it is an important factor for user mobility
study, thus need to be analyzed in future. In summary, user
behaviour patterns are tightly knit to users’ demographic
profiles, such as gender and age.
3.2 User Demographic Profiling
This section describes the feature extraction from multi-
source multi-modal data, and the ensemble learning model
we proposed for demographic profiling.
3.2.1 Location Features
We obtained 592 venue categories from Foursquare6. Take
a user as an example. The user has performed three check-
ins in two restaurants and airport, but did not perform any
check-in in other venues; then the user’s venue category
feature vector will consist of 592 real values with cr (the
feature representing restaurant) equals to 2/3 and another
ca (the feature representing airport) equals to 1/3. All the
other values of feature vector will be equal to 0.
3.2.2 Text Features
We extracted the following textual features:
• LDA-based Features. We merged all the tweets of
each user into a document. All documents were
projected into a latent topic space using Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [2]. All users’ tweets can
be represented as a mixture of different topics. We
empirically set α = 0.5, β = 0.1 and utilized KNIME7
to train the topic model with T = 50 topics for 1, 000
6developer.foursquare.com/categorytree
7www.knime.org
Table 2: Category distribution among LDA topics
ID Categories LDA Topics
T1 Malay Res-t, Mall, University, Indian
Res-t, Aisian Res-t
Food Lovers
T2 Cafe, Airport, Hotel, Coffee Shop,
Chinese Res-t
Travelers
(Business)
T3 Nightclub, Mall, Food Court, Trade
School, Res-t, Coffee Shop
Party Goers
T4 Home, Office, Build., Neighbor-d,
Gov. Build., Factory
Family Guys
(Youth)
T5 University (Collage), Gym, Airport,
Hotel, Fitness Club
Students
T6 Train St., Apartment, Mall, High
School, Bus St.
Teenagers
(Youth)
iterations. We ultimately built the topic-based user
feature vectors.
• Linguistic Features. We extracted LIWC linguistic
features [16], which were founded to be a powerful
mechanism for age and gender prediction purposes
[21]. For each user tweet list, we extracted 71 LIWC
features.
• Heuristically-inferred Features. We extracted some
heuristically inferred features. First, we counted the
number of URLs, number of hash tags and number
of user mentions, since these features are correlated
with user’s social network activity level and can, thus,
indicate user’s age. Second, we counted the number
slang words, number of emotion words8, number of
emoticons and computed an average sentiment score.
These features can be good signals of user personality
traits, which in turn are gender and age dependent
[21]. Third, we computed the linguistic style features:
“Number of repeated characters” in words, “number
of misspellings”, and “number of unknown to the spell
checker words”, which are often reflected by user’s age.
3.2.3 Visual Features
We mapped each Instagram photo to the pre-defined
image concept dictionary. The concept dictionary,
comprising of 1000 daily life concepts (such as ball, flower,
and chair), is constructed from ImageNet. We trained
the concept classifiers based on the concatenation of “Bag-
of-visual-words”, “Local Binary Patterns”(LBP) and “64-
D Color Histogram”(CH) features [5]. For the bag-
of-visual-words, we used the difference of Gaussians to
detect keypoints in each image and extracted their SIFT
descriptors. By building a visual codebook of size 1000 based
on K-means, we obtained a 1000-dimensional bag-of-visual-
words histogram for each image. We then applied Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimension of
image feature space [10] to 50 condensed features.
3.2.4 Age and Gender Prediction
Two most popular approaches for multi-source fusion are
early and late fusion. In early fusion strategy, features are
concentrated in one long feature vector to feed into the
classifier, while late fusion incorporates the independently
learned results from each modality [24]. In our work,
we have evaluated both approaches. First, we performed
an early fusion and trained a Random forest classifier
with 145 random trees (the number of random trees was
8sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it
Figure 6: Demographic profiling ensemble.
estimated empirically). However, as it can be seen from
the experimental results (Table 3), most of the introduced
approaches outperform the early fusion models. Inspired
by the previously reported results [1, 18] and considering
the comparably high performance of single source features
(See Table 3), we employed the late fusion approach to
train models from different combinations of feature sets.
The structure of the demographic profiling framework is
presented in Figure 6. It can be seen that our framework
consists of multi-label Random Forest classifiers trained on
five feature types described earlier. The Random Forest
classification model was selected due to its well-known
ability to perform classification on high dimensional space
by randomized feature selection approach. Moreover it
was noticed [21] that the Random Forest classifier often
outperforms other machine learning approaches, like SVM
or Naive Bayes for Age and Gender prediction tasks.
The optimal number of random trees for each classifier is
found by 10-fold cross-validation. The number of random
trees for “Location”, “LIWC”, “Heuristic”, “LDA 50”, and
“Image concepts” features are set to 140, 120, 75, 70, 130
respectively. To obtain balanced label distribution in the
training set, we performed the “SMOTE” data oversampling
technique [3].
The five Random Forest classifiers were integrated into the
ensemble learning model; with the final classification score
for each label computed as:
Score(l) =
k∑
i=0
P (l)i × di × wi × li
k
,
where P (l)i is a positive prediction confidence for label
l of the i-th classification model, di is the number of
data records that were collected from current user to train
the i-th classification model, divided by average number
of data records of given type collected for all users, wi
is the accuracy of the i-th classification model, and li
is the “strength” of the i-th classification model. In our
experiments, we set wi to be equal to the macro accuracy
level of the corresponding i classifier, which is estimated
after performing 10-fold cross validation on each individual
features set. We jointly learned the li coefficient for each
modality by performing the “Stochastic Hill climbing with
Random Restart (SHCR)” optimization9, which is able to
9en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hill climbing
obtain local optimum for non-convex problems and, can,
thus, produce reasonable ensemble weighting.
We present an example on how ensemble model works for
different data sources. Suppose users ux and uy have 100
and 300 tweets respectively and we have already obtained
the classification accuracy for some Twitter features set
as 0.321. Then the score of classifier trained on these
features P (l)ik will be multiplied by: wux = 0.321, dux =
100/200 = 0.5 and wuy = 0.321, duy = 300/200 = 1.5 for
ux and uy respectively. These score will also be multiplied
by the current iteration assignment of lik . After all the
five classifiers are weighted as described above, the output
scores will be averaged and the result will represent the
classification ensemble score assigned to label l on the
current iteration k. The above procedure will be repeated
until the SHCR coveraged, by varying the lik parameters on
each iteration aiming to maximize the overall accuracy.
3.2.5 Experimental results
As we mention before, the number of male and female
users in our dataset is similar while the users’ age is mainly
in the range of between 10 and 40 years old. The similar age
distribution was also observed in related works [21][18]. Due
to the uneven users’ age distribution, we have divided users’
on age groups as follows: “< 20”, “20-30”, “30-40”, “> 40”.
We evaluated the performance of our approach in terms
of macro accuracy, which is the average accuracy between
all classification labels. The evaluation metric was selected
due to its capability of equally treating all data labels
in unbalanced datasets, so that the overall performance
will not be overpriced. The evaluation of gender and age
prediction was based on 222 users who have reported their
exact age and perform activity in all three data sources,
and can thus be considered as reliable ground truth. The
age group prediction model was trained based on other
users whose age group was estimated from their education-
related information by performing rule-based classification
(548 users). According to our experiment, the bias of
estimated ages does not exceed ±2.31 years. It is thus
reasonable to use the estimated age for training the age
group prediction classifier. The gender prediction model was
trained based on 3, 544 users who have reported their gender
and are not in evaluation set. The age and gender prediction
results are presented in Table 3.
From Table 3, it can be seen that different data sources
perform differently in predicting different demographic
attributes. For example, in gender prediction task, the LDA
features play a crucial role and perform the best among
other single sources. The reason is that there exists high
difference in interests between male and female users. For
example, female users may discuss family and children,
while male users tent to tweet about cars and finance.
By integrating all text-based features together with visual
features, it introduces the best combination for age and
gender prediction among all bi-source ensembles, while the
location plays a minor role. The possible reason is that
there are distinct differences in picture taking preferences
and writing style among different users’ age groups and
genders. For example, older people may take pictures of food
and scenery, while younger users could be more emotional
in their tweets.
However, the best results for both gender and age group
prediction are obtained by late fusion of all features using the
Table 3: Performance of demographic profiling in
terms of Macro Accuracy. RF - Random Forest;
NB - Naive Bayes; SVM - Support Vector Machine
Method Gender Age
State-of-the-arts techniques
SVM Location Cat. (Foursquare) 0.581 0.251
SVM LWIC Text(Twitter) 0.590 0.254
SVM Heuristic Text(Twitter) 0.589 0.290
SVM LDA 50 Text(Twitter) 0.595 0.260
SVM Image Concepts(Instagram) 0.581 0.254
NB Location Cat. (Foursquare) 0.575 0.185
NB LWIC Text(Twitter) 0.640 0.392
NB Heuristic Text(Twitter) 0.599 0.394
NB LDA 50 Text(Twitter) 0.653 0.343
NB Image Concepts(Instagram) 0.631 0.233
Single-Source
RF Location Cat. (Foursquare) 0.649 0.306
RF LWIC Text(Twitter) 0.716 0.407
RF Heuristic Text(Twitter) 0.685 0.463
RF LDA 50 Text(Twitter) 0.788 0.357
RF Image Concepts(Instagram) 0.784 0.366
Multi-Source combinations
RF LDA + LIWC(Late Fusion) 0.784 0.426
RF LDA + Heuristic(Late Fusion) 0.815 0.480
RF Heuristic + LIWC (Late Fusion) 0.730 0.421
RF All Text (Late Fusion) 0.815 0.425
RF Media + Location (Late Fusion) 0.802 0.352
RF Text + Media (Late Fusion) 0.824 0.483
RF Text + Location (Late Fusion) 0.743 0.401
All sources together
RF Early fusion for all features 0.707 0.370
RF Multi-source (Late Fusion) 0.878 0.509
Random Forests ensemble. It outperforms all single source
models, different combinations of classifiers in ensemble
models, state-of-the-arts techniques, and model trained on
early fused sources.
4. RELATED WORK
User profile learning via multi-sources is a comparably
new topic in social media research, and there are little
work devoted to it. The emergence of new cross-linking
functionality in modern social Web platforms is related to
our work. For instance, the work conducted by Wang et
al. [25] performed high level comparison between Facebook,
Twitter and Foursquare profiles for randomly sampled
Foursquare users; they performed both content level and
network level analysis. From the network point of view, it
was noted that “67 percent of friend pairs on Foursquare are
also friends on Facebook, and 43 percent of friend pairs on
Foursquare follow each other on Twitter” [25]. The authors
observed that active Foursquare users are usually active in
Twitter as well, which is consistent with the observations
derived from our dataset. In other study, Chen et al.
[4] tried to discover cross-site linking regularities in large-
scale online social networks dataset. By gathering almost
all Foursquare user network graph and applying first order
statistical analysis, the authors [4] were able to extract
comprehensive knowledge about the Foursquare network
structure and users cross social network behaviour. At the
same time, Zhong et al. [29] attempted to discover network
evolution relations across various social forums datasets
(Tencent, Epinion, Facebook, Xiaonei, Twitter, Sina Weibo,
Github, StackOverflow). As a result, the proposed by
authors statistical approach outperformed the baselines in
link prediction task. Finally, Ottoni et al. [15] discovered
user generated data relations across Pinterest and Twitter
social services; however, the work focused mostly on data
description, but not model for profile learning.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This work presented an initial study of user profile
learning via integration of multiple data sources. We
constructed a dataset by crawling information from Twitter,
Foursquare and Instagram. To facilitate research by other
researchers, we have released this dataset [7]. Based
upon this dataset, we conducted first-order and higher-
order learning for user mobility and demographic profiling
in Singapore region. User mobility was modelled as a
location-topic distribution, while demographic profile was
represented by age and gender attributes. From our
experimental outputs, we can draw the conclusions that:
multi-source data of the same users mutually complements
each other and their appropriate fusion boosts the user
profiling performance.
We list some potential research topics that can be
conducted on our released dataset:
• Complete demographic profiling. Researchers are
encouraged to learn other demographics attributes,
such as occupation, personality and social status [1].
• Extended mobility profiling. In current study, we
focused on category-specific user mobility profiling;
while it would be useful to incorporate spatio-temporal
factors of users’ movement [17].
• Causality pattern extraction. It is important to
discover potential causal relationships between events
from multiple data sources [9]. For example, the
“flower” image concept could be temporally related
with flower shop check-ins or tweets about flowers.
• Cross-source user identification. The alignment of
user accounts across multiple social resources [23] can
benefit from user profile compilation [25].
• Cross-region user profiling and community matching.
This direction [28] may offer insight on differences and
similarities between users’ preferences.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the Singapore National
Research Foundation under its International Research
Centre @ Singapore Funding Initiative and administered by
the IDM Programme Office.
The Microsoft Windows Azure Cloud and Microsoft
MSDN subscription were provided by “MB-Guide”10 project
and as part of Microsoft BizSpark program.
7. REFERENCES
[1] E. Amigó, J. Carrillo-de Albornoz, I. Chugur, A. Corujo,
J. Gonzalo, E. Meij, M. de Rijke, and D. Spina. Overview of
replab 2014: author profiling and reputation dimensions for
online reputation management. In Information Access
Evaluation. Multilinguality, and Interaction. 2014.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2003.
[3] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P.
Kegelmeyer. Smote: synthetic minority over-sampling
technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 2002.
[4] Y. Chen, C. Zhuang, Q. Cao, and P. Hui. Understanding
cross-site linking in online social networks. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Social Network Mining and Analysis, 2014.
[5] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
10mb-guide.com
[6] M. Duggan and J. Brenner. The demographics of social media
users. 2013.
[7] A. Farseev and T.-S. Chua. NUS-MSS: A Multi-Source Social
Dataset from National University of Singapore.
http://lms.comp.nus.edu.sg/research/NUS-MULTISOURCE.htm,
2015.
[8] M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi.
Understanding individual human mobility patterns. Nature,
2008.
[9] R. Jain and L. Jalali. Objective self. MultiMedia, IEEE, 2014.
[10] I. Jolliffe. Principal component analysis. Wiley Online Library,
2002.
[11] P. Kasemsuppakorn and H. A. Karimi. Pedestrian network data
collection through location-based social networks. In IEEE
International Conference on Collaborative Computing:
Networking, Applications and Worksharing, 2009.
[12] L. Nie, M. Wang, Z.-J. Zha, G. Li, and T.-S. Chua. Multimedia
answering: Enriching text qa with media information. In
Proceedings of the International ACM SIGIR Conference,
2011.
[13] A. Noulas, S. Scellato, N. Lathia, and C. Mascolo. A random
walk around the city: New venue recommendation in
location-based social networks. In Privacy, Security, Risk and
Trust, International Conference on Social Computing, 2012.
[14] A. Noulas, S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, and M. Pontil. An empirical
study of geographic user activity patterns in foursquare. The
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2011.
[15] R. Ottoni, D. Las Casas, J. P. Pesce, W. Meira Jr, C. Wilson,
A. Mislove, and V. Almeida. Of pins and tweets: Investigating
how users behave across image-and text-based social networks.
2014.
[16] J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth. Linguistic
inquiry and word count: Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 2001.
[17] Y. Qu and J. Zhang. Trade area analysis using user generated
mobile location data. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on World Wide Web, 2013.
[18] F. Rangel, P. Rosso, M. Koppel, E. Stamatatos, and G. Inches.
Overview of the author profiling task at pan 2013. Notebook
Papers of CLEF, 2013.
[19] A. Sadilek, H. A. Kautz, and V. Silenzio. Predicting disease
transmission from geo-tagged micro-blog data. In Association
for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
[20] S. Shang, D. Guo, J. Liu, and K. Liu. Human mobility
prediction and unobstructed route planning in public transport
networks. In IEEE International Conferebce on Mobile Data
Management, 2014.
[21] E. Stamatatos, W. Daelemans, B. Verhoeven, M. Potthast,
B. Stein, P. Juola, M. A. Sanchez-Perez, and
A. Barrón-Cedeño. Overview of the author identification task
at pan 2014. Analysis, 2014.
[22] C. Von Der Weth, V. Hegde, and M. Hauswirth. Virtual
location-based services: Merging the physical and virtual world.
IEEE International Conference on Web Services, 2013.
[23] J. Vosecky, D. Hong, and V. Y. Shen. User identification across
multiple social networks. In Networked Digital Tech., 2009.
[24] M. Wang, H. Li, D. Tao, K. Lu, and X. Wu. Multimodal
graph-based reranking for web image search. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 2012.
[25] P. Wang, W. He, and J. Zhao. A tale of three social networks:
User activity comparisons among facebook, twitter, and
foursquare. 2014.
[26] X. Wang, Y.-L. Zhao, L. Nie, Y. Gao, W. Nie, Z.-J. Zha, and
T.-S. Chua. Semantic-based location recommendation with
multimodal venue semantics. IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia, 2015.
[27] Y.-L. Zhao, Q. Chen, S. Yan, T.-S. Chua, and D. Zhang.
Detecting profilable and overlapping communities with
user-generated multimedia contents in lbsns. ACM
Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications,
and Applications, 2013.
[28] Y.-L. Zhao, L. Nie, X. Wang, and T.-S. Chua. Personalized
recommendations of locally interesting venues to tourists via
cross-region community matching. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2014.
[29] E. Zhong, W. Fan, Y. Zhu, and Q. Yang. Modeling the
dynamics of composite social networks. In Proceedings of the
ACM International KDD Conference, 2013.
