On the Role of Poetic Versus Nonpoetic Features
in “Kindred” and Diachronic Poetry Attribution
Brent D. Fegley
Illinois Informatics Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, NCSA Building, 1205 West Clark
Street, MC-257, Urbana, IL 61801 and Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493, Champaign, IL 61820.
E-mail: fegley1@illinois.edu
Vetle I. Torvik
Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 501 E. Daniel
Street, MC-493, Champaign, IL 61820. E-mail: vtorvik@illinois.edu
Author attribution studies have demonstrated remark-
able success in applying orthographic and lexico-
graphic features of text in a variety of discrimination
problems. What might poetic features, such as syllabic
stress and mood, contribute? We address this question
in the context of two different attribution problems: (a)
kindred: differentiate Langston Hughes’ early poems
from those of kindred poets and (b) diachronic: differ-
entiate Hughes’ early from his later poems. Using a
diverse set of 535 generic text features, each catego-
rized as poetic or nonpoetic, correlation-based greedy
forward search ranked the features and a support vector
machine classified the poems. A small subset of fea-
tures (~10) achieved cross-validated precision and recall
as high as 87%. Poetic features (rhyme patterns particu-
larly) were nearly as effective as nonpoetic in kindred
discrimination, but less effective diachronically. In other
words, Hughes used both poetic and nonpoetic features
in distinctive ways and his use of nonpoetic features
evolved systematically while he continued to experi-
ment with poetic features. These findings affirm qualita-
tive studies attesting to structural elements from Black
oral tradition and Black folk music (blues) and to the
internal consistency of Hughes’ early poetry.
Introduction
Generic features of written natural language, particularly
function word frequencies, have been effective discrimi-
nators of style in quantitative author attribution studies
(Argamon, Koppel, Pennebaker, & Schler, 2009; Can &
Patton, 2004; Damerau, 1975, p. 271; Juola, 2006, pp. 255,
265; Koppel, Schler, & Argamon, 2009, p. 11). Poetry, as a
particular type of written natural language, provides an
opportunity to explore additional types of features, such as
phonetics, prosody, and mood. What additional value do
these expressive features offer in analysis? Moreover, presup-
posing that featural diversity matters when differentiating
styles, what features, and how many of them, suffice when
their salience is unknown a priori?
We approached this challenge by creating a large and
diverse set of features appropriate for poetry. The features
were made generic intentionally so that they can be applied
to other poems and poets without loss of generality. They are
quantitative measures based on evidence extracted from the
poetry itself and inferences made from more error-prone,
extrinsic (implicit) evidence in the case of mood and read-
ability. Because this is also a computational study, features
were computed automatically. To obtain these features,
computational algorithms parsed and profiled text-based
representations of poems, without the need for manual
annotation or human intervention beyond compiling the
corpus. The distribution (or relative weight) of these
features for a given poet or period is what we mean by
“style” herein.
We categorized the features as poetic or nonpoetic, not
both, thereby endowing each feature with a mutually exclu-
sive, intrinsic aspect central to our study. By “poetic” we
mean a feature that may vary depending upon one’s inter-
pretation of the written form. For example, is a particular
word affective in any way? How is it pronounced? What
stresses apply to any of its syllables? The subcategories
“mood,” “phonetics,” and “prosody” capture these types of
questions. By “nonpoetic” we mean something that is not
innately expressive—a property of the written word or form
that has no meaning beyond its structural context. For
Received December 20, 2011; revised April 24, 2012; accepted April 25,
2012
© 2012 ASIS&T • Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.22727
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 63(11):2165–2181, 2012
example, how many syllables does a given word contain?
Is the given word a noun, a verb, something else? The
subcategories “orthography” and “lexicography” capture
these types of questions.
Our categorization and labeling are admittedly conten-
tious, because one may argue that the artful use of “nonpo-
etic” features is, in fact, what distinguishes poetry from prose.
The “prose poem” straddles both worlds, for example. We
acknowledge this challenge of literary criticism, but we wish
to sidestep it presently. Categorizing features allows us to
computationally assess the performance of each category
separately and in combination, and our results are interpreted
in the light of this particular categorization. Other cate-
gorization schemes may uncover additional aspects of
poetic style.
The foregoing definitions of poetic and nonpoetic fea-
tures play a central role in two attribution problems for
Langston Hughes: (a) Can an algorithm differentiate the
poetry of his late teens and 20s (1921–1930) from that of
other, related poets? (b) Can an algorithm differentiate the
poetry of those same early years from the poetry of his late
30s and 40s (1941–1950)? Why focus on the poetry of
Langston Hughes? The poetry is abundant, well studied,
organized in period collections (see Rampersad & Roessel,
1995), and, importantly, rich in cultural (musical, ethno-
graphic, poetic) influences. In this, it is suited ideally for
testing poetic and nonpoetic feature distinctions based on
our definitions. Hughes has company in this arena, as rep-
resented by our selections of “kindred” poets. Consequently,
these selections should exhibit high activation of poetic and
nonpoetic features as well. Our present goal is not merely
accurate classification, but insight into poetic style, using
the medium itself for development of a diverse palette
of features. Our computational approach offers a nuanced
interpretation of what “poetic” means in practice.
Background
Poetry is conditioned by the rules of its underlying lan-
guage and poetic traditions, and deviations from those rules
and traditions evidence artistic expression. The “line” dif-
ferentiates poetry (verse) from prose. It is both a rhythmic
unit and a structural unit, depending on whether one hears or
reads a poem, but it is sensed in either case as a correlated
group of syllabic stresses. Line breaks are considered a form
of visual scoring by some, a form of punctuation in and
of themselves that help give nuanced meaning to the line.
(See Brogan, 1993; Hrushovski, 1960, p. 186; Levertov,
1979; Stankiewicz, 1960.)
The Importance of Rhythm and Meter in Poetry
Pinsky (1998, p. 115) describes poetry as a “technology of
recurrent sounds.” Some theorize that poetry was originally
oral, serving the aid of memory of largely illiterate peoples.
In earlier times, proper accentuation in public performances
could be guaranteed by the poet or performer, often with the
aid of musical accompaniment (Bluestein, 1972; Corn, 1997,
pp. 22–23; Lord, 1993; see also Crain, 2007, for a link
between metaphorical language and literacy). This oral tra-
dition continues in the nursery rhymes taught to preliterate
children. Nevertheless, performance in modern times repre-
sents one of many possible subjective interpretations of
an otherwise invariant structure and, thus, an inadequate
measure of a poem’s objective properties (Stankiewicz, 1960,
pp. 74–75). Sound (pronunciation) and rhythmic emphasis
remain critical elements of the stylistic variations we seek; so,
the focus of the current work on poetry’s written form makes
the problem of deducing phonic and rhythmic patterns even
more challenging.
Rhythm and meter are essential to patterning in poetry.
The former is an outgrowth of syllabic stress; the latter, the
abstract pattern behind rhythm (the grouping of syllabic
stress patterns; Hrushovski, 1960, pp. 178–179; Pinsky,
1998, pp. 52–53; Stankiewicz, 1960, p. 77ff.). Cureton
(2003) takes a more inclusive view, noting that rhythm
comprises four interacting components: meter (“cyclical
beating”); grouping (“wavelike peaking”); prolongation
(linear progressions subject to anticipation, arrival, and
extension); and theme (an aspect of intellect and memory
rather than perception). None of these components relies on
syllables exclusively. The interaction of which Cureton
speaks will become important during our discussion of
results. In the meantime, the challenge of deducing rhythm
computationally is that “stress on a syllable in English is not
inherent in the sound, but relative. A syllable is stressed or
unstressed only in relation to the syllables around it” (Pinsky,
1998, p. 12; see also Lehiste, 2003). So, depending on the
stress applied to a syllable, a syntactic unit could be
“scanned” (read metrically) in different ways, each yielding
different outcomes (Corn, 1997, p. 55).
Moreover, demarcation of a syntactic unit by line or
punctuation makes the beginnings and endings of that unit
especially sensitive metrically and, thus, more likely to
receive special treatment (Corn, 1997, p. 46). All this rein-
forces the interpretive nature of rhythm and meter, that they
emerge from the interplay among various elements in
poetic structure: “sound effects, the spacing and repetition
of images and ideas, diction and vocabulary” (Gross &
McDowell, 1996, pp. 36–37).
The Poetry of Langston Hughes
The Guinea Coast of West Africa was home to most
Africans brought to the New World during the Atlantic slave
trade. It was also the dominant cultural region of the continent
at the time; so, cultural dilution was not a prominent outcome
of cultural fusion in the Americas. For West Africans, speech
and song had an intimate relationship, to which the distin-
guishing traits of their music attest: (a) rhythmic complexity,
(b) percussiveness, (c) antiphony, (d) “flexible intonation,”
(e) “crescendo effect,” (f) variable intonation of the third and
seventh intervals of the diatonic scale (characteristic of blues
music in the United States), (g) falsetto, and (h) use that
2166 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
does not discriminate between the sacred or secular. Percus-
siveness manifests itself as onomatopoeia (words imitating
sounds, such as “thump, thump, thump”), alliteration (use of
the same consonant for each stressed syllable), and scat
(vocal imitation of an instrument). Antiphony (“call-and-
response”) is a dialogue between a soloist and a chorus.
Unlike European folk music, where each verse is self-
contained, a verse in West African antiphony is incomplete
without a response. The “crescendo effect” is brought about
by the repetition of words, phrases, and rhythms near a song’s
end, increasing tension. This is the legacy to which Langston
Hughes was heir (see Lowery, 1975, pp. 28–37).
Langston Hughes (1902–1967) was enduringly optimis-
tic, courageous, and concerned about the exploitation and
welfare of contemporary, common African Americans
(Hughes, 1947). His poetry builds upon the formal and
thematic aspects of Black folk music, even if Hughes was
not consciously aware of that influence initially (Hansell,
1978; Hughes, 1956b). Of his time in Washington, D.C.
(1924–1926, per Rampersad, 1986), Hughes wrote:
I tried to write poems like the songs they sang on Seventh Street
. . . [that] had the pulse beat of the people who keep on going
[– those who endure despite hardship]. . . . Like the waves
of the sea . . . so is the undertow of black music with its rhythm
that never betrays you, its strength like the beat of the human
heart, its humor, and its rooted power. (Hughes, 1940, p. 209)
Hughes’ poetry is part of a lyric poetic tradition (as
opposed to narrative or dramatic) characterized by poems
that are relatively short and that express the viewpoint or
mood of a single (possibly communal) speaker (Nimura,
2005). Hughes’ work is noteworthy not only for its ethnic
sensibilities, but for what Jemie (1976, p. 30) describes
as its “economy, lucidity, evocativeness of imagery, and
mellifluousness of movement.” Qualitative analyses of
poetry often delve into matters of historical context, meta-
phor, allegory, and ethos. In the case of Langston Hughes
they also describe musical idioms, notably, blues and jazz
elements such as boogie-woogie and be-bop. Hughes took
“the blues outlook of stoic endurance, and its style of under-
statement and ironic humor” as his artistic impetus (Jemie,
1976, p. 54). He also incorporated identifiable structural
elements of blues performance into his poetry (Hughes,
1956b; Tracy, 2001, p. 144). Hughes did not invent blues
poetry or jazz poetry, but they became highly developed art
forms in his care.
The blues is rooted in Black oral tradition; it is elegiac in
tone and generally unhurried in performance (Jemie, 1976,
p. 57). The canonical form of blues verse has three lines of
text: The second line repeats the first; the third line rhymes
with the previous two. This form varies in practice:
Most common are stanzas consisting of one thought or line [of
text] repeated three times (AAA); a thought or line sung once
and followed by another line sung twice (ABB); two different
thoughts or lines followed by a refrain (AB refrain); and, most
commonly, one thought or line sung twice with a third line
resolving the thought of the first two lines (AAB) [Hughes’
preferred form]. In all cases the repetition of lines can be
approximate—words changed, added, or omitted. The end
words of the lines normally rhyme, and the line designations
(AAA, AAB, ABB, etc.) should not be confused with a notation
of the rhyme scheme. (Tracy, 2001, pp. 144–145)
[Note that A lines end with identity rhymes, and B lines end
with different words that rhyme with them (Tracy, 2001,
p. 76).]
The basic textual unit of blues verse is the line or half-line.
The unit is accentual. It is based upon the “‘bent’ notes,
slurs, pitch coloration, and melismatic effects” of the music
that defy conventional musical notation (Tracy, 2001, p. 145).
Hughes rendered his blues poems “ethnopoetically” by
creating half-lines out of the aforementioned AAB stanzaic
structure—extending a stanza from three to six “lines”—to
incorporate the musical rhythm and voice of oral perfor-
mance. Hughes had other motivations for such rendering,
however. Vanity Fair, among other publishers, paid him by
the line for his poetry; so economic reality may have held
more sway than musical sensibility (Hughes, 1956b; Tracy,
2001, p. 155).
Jazz poetry, in contrast to blues poetry, according to Jemie
(1976), is generally “instrumental and aggressive,” reflecting
“the bouncy rhythms and exuberance that characterize the
music.” It is also informal, relaxed, and improvisational. “The
sentences are casual and short-winded; the phrases are short,
tumbling after one another in rapid succession . . . [which]
aids in the impression of spontaneity. The language is most
often colloquial, sometimes the hip talk of the musicians,
almost always the language of the common people, rarely the
language of the academies” (Jemie, 1976, pp. 57–58; see also
Hughes, 1956c).Although considered less successful than his
work with the blues, Hughes’ most notable contribution
in this regard is his verse collection Montage of a Dream
Deferred, published in 1951 (Dickinson, 1972; Patterson,
2000).
In sum, Hughes’ poetry reflects the language of his
people and his time—“the contemporary life, language,
and music of the city, rather than in the South and the
past” (Jemie, 1976, p. 60). His work is grounded in
Black oral tradition and Black folk music, both of which
contribute structural and thematic elements to it. In search-
ing for style markers in Hughes’ poetry, therefore, we
should look to visual (typographic) and syntactic elements
such as line length and punctuation, and to other elements
such as phrase repetition, rhyme, and rhythm at multiple
levels of granularity, including, but not limited to, syllable,
unit (line and/or half-line) and stanza. We should be vigi-
lant also for rhymes in the form of repeated consonants
(alliteration) and vowels (assonance), particularly end-of-
line rhymes.
Related Work
The present study is situated among other author attribu-
tion studies that take a multivariate, computational approach
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2167
DOI: 10.1002/asi
to style analysis. Stamatatos, Fakotakis, and Kokkinakis
(2001), for example, used 22 features at different scales to
improve classification outcomes in reviewing text from a
Modern Greek weekly newspaper, among them, unitary
features such as sentence lengths and punctuation counts,
phrases defined by part-of-speech tags, and higher order
features involving dictionary lookups to determine the fre-
quency of rare or common words. Zheng, Li, Chen, and
Huang (2006) considered 270 different features includ-
ing character counts and frequencies, vocabulary richness,
average word length as well as context-relevant structural
features such as greetings, quotations, and signatures. In
reviewing stylochronometric literature from the last 60 years,
Stamou affirmed a multivariate approach in identifying eight
different types of style markers worthy of further consider-
ation: punctuation marks, character markers, parts of speech,
most common words (including function words), content
word frequencies, syllable markers, words appearing only
once or twice in a text (hapax legomena and hapax dislego-
mena, respectively), and vocabulary richness (Stamou, 2008,
p. 195).
The application of computational stylistics to English-
language poetry remains a rare event in published litera-
ture—rarer still is the attempt to tie quantitative features to
qualitative analysis. Hoover (2008) considered the work of
select American poets born in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. He observed that the frequencies of moderately
frequent and rare words—that is, “characteristic,” prima-
rily content words (not function words)—provided an
effective way to differentiate poets. Moreover, when com-
bined with part-of-speech tagging, such measures offered
an effective means for returning discussions of style from
abstract metrics to the text itself, facilitating poetic inter-
pretation. Kaplan and Blei (2007) found the combination
of orthographic, syntactic, and phonemic features (84 fea-
tures in all) more effective in differentiating poetic styles
than word frequencies alone. Forsyth (1999) observed that
short substrings discovered via a Monte Carlo process
were sufficient to classify the poetry of W. B. Yeats into
appropriate periods. Whissell (1999) considered the fre-
quency of common words (including function words) as
well as affect (emotionality) and imagery (based on the
prevalence of concrete nouns over abstract nouns) in her
study of Robert Frost’s poetry. She found variability
among features, rather than their patterns, revealing of
increasing complexity and abstractness in the poetry of
Robert Frost’s later years.
The aforecited studies impose a few constraints of inter-
est to us presently: the analyses focus on (a) a small set of
preselected features over relatively few domains and/or (b)
dimensional reduction at the expense of interpretive value.
With the possible exception of Whissell, they stop short of
more inclusive accounts of individual style. The present
contribution attempts to address each of these constraints by
(a) increasing the number and diversity of features consid-
ered and (b) linking quantitative analysis to qualitative
description.
Method
Two sets of binary classification tasks provided the
framework for exploration: a poem is either authored by
Langston Hughes or not; a poem belongs to one period of
Langston Hughes’ output or to another. Although simplistic
in construction, this conception was anything but simplistic
in execution, as shall become apparent shortly. The follow-
ing subsections describe this study’s corpus, the more spe-
cific questions to be answered, and the types of stylistic
features considered.
Corpus
Several factors influenced the choice of era and poets for
this study. First, by the late 19th century, American poets
were moving beyond the poetic models and methods
established by their European forebears, and their poetry
had gained international stature for its “variety, energy,
contrarian tendencies, and feistiness” (Kummings, 2001,
p. 601). Consequently, we should expect greater variety in
their output and perhaps more dimensions upon which to
measure that variation.
Second, wildly divergent forms of expression offer too
easy a target for classification. In fact, to avoid outliers, we
wanted poems to be similar in many, but not necessarily all,
conceivable dimensions. Moreover, we sought to test whether
subtle differences among poems are detectable. So, in select-
ing poetry for analysis, we privileged visual commonalities
(typography and apparent word count, for example) over
idiosyncratic representation.
Third, poets who acknowledge the influence of other
poets establish a connection that may pervade their own
work. Perhaps these connections become part of a con-
tinuum that binds their collective output in some way.
Fourth, poets who develop a reputation through their
poetry may be presumed to exhibit distinguishing character-
istics in their writing—essential qualities that make their
contributions unique.
The corpus for the present study comprises four sets
labeled Other, Hughes200, Hughes201, and Hughes40. Other
(1872–2008) contains poems from poets who avowed
Hughes’ influence or whose influence Hughes avowed (see
Academy of American Poets, 2012; Falla, 2005; Goldberg,
2005; Hughes, 1956a; Jones, 2005; Kilgore, 2005; Miller,
2007; Rampersad, 1986; Thomas & Dove, 1995; Sielke,
2005). Hughes200 (1921–1930) and Hughes40 (1941–1950)
contain the collected poems of Hughes in his late teens and
early 20s and late 30s and early 40s, respectively. These are
period collections in Rampersad and Roessel (1995), our
source. Each poem therein appears in chronological order of
its first publication, as does the digital representation we
used. The text of the poems is of the last version published,
which might be a significant fact for at least two poems,
namely, “Midwinter Blues” and “Bound No’th Blues”
(Rampersad & Roessel, 1995, pp. 629, 630), which exchange
standard spelling for vernacular (e.g., “de” for “the,” “ma”
for “my”), and vice versa.
2168 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Hughes201 is a subset of Hughes200, containing the
first (and earliest) 132 of 230 poems from that collection.
This choice might improve kindred attribution accuracy,
since including Hughes’ poetry from other periods is more
likely to increase than decrease variability in the data set.
Table 1 provides a further breakdown of the sets. For
Hughes40, we treat “Montage of a Dream Deferred” as a
single work as Hughes intended (with headings excluded
presently).
Our corpus excludes poetry identified explicitly by their
sources as children’s poetry. This choice reflects an assump-
tion that, on average, children’s poetry of the era is likely to
be homogeneous, structurally and morphologically. Appen-
dix 2 of Rampersad and Roessel (1995) is devoted to
Hughes’ poetry for children, which spans the years 1921
through 1958 inclusive. From visual inspection, this poetry
tends to have a significant number of line-ending pure
rhymes and identity rhymes—confirming our suspicion.
Thus, we might expect to have a difficult time differentiating
one children’s poet from another without benefit of contex-
tual clues.
Poem selection for Other was based on qualitative judg-
ment of structural similarity with the poems selected for
Hughes. By this we mean visual assessment of features such
as line length and number of stanzas prior to automated
processing. This approach was motivated by the need to
create a uniform space for exploration. Poems of wildly
divergent structure and composition could have been used,
but would not have provided a compelling test of metrics.
Table 1 shows that some of the basic statistics are consistent
across groups, but can vary significantly within groups.
The poems of Other and Hughes201 have, on average, 102
words ( 85 standard deviation [SD]) dispersed over 3
stanzas ( 3 SD) with 8 words ( 3 SD) in each of 18 lines
( 14 SD). The obvious exception is the set for Bob
Kaufman, whose poems do not share the apparent structural
affinity with Hughes’ as do others in the corpus. However,
Kaufman’s poetry, like Hughes’, includes elements of
be-bop and jazz; so structural affinity likely exists at a dif-
ferent, perhaps smaller, scale (Falla, 2005).
The relatively even distribution of poems between Other
and Hughes201, and between Hughes200 and Hughes40,
is not accidental. It reflects an attempt to mitigate bias in
classification outcomes. Compared to Other, Hughes201
represents 47% of the combined total. Hughes200 represents
51% of the total when combined with Hughes40.
The two basic questions of this study may be refined now
as follows: (a) Can Hughes’ poetry be distinguished from
others’ via quantifiable features alone, and if so, what are
these features? (b) Did Hughes’ style evolve in the 10 to 20
years that separate the poems in Hughes200 and Hughes40,
and if so, by what measures? Discerning the elements of
style is the next challenge, which is explored in the next
subsection.
TABLE 1. Distribution of poems by poet, period, and set in the corpus.
Period
Poem. . . Word count. . . Words per line. . . FW count. . .
Count Pct Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Pct
Bontemps, Arna Wendell 1963 12 4% 145 126 7 2 62 52 43%
Brooks, Gwendolyn 1963–1994 11 4% 119 65 7 2 48 25 40%
Creeley, Robert 1961–2006 14 5% 107 86 4 1 48 38 45%
Dove, Rita 1989 14 5% 126 42 6 2 54 18 43%
Dunbar, Paul Laurence 1872–1906 12 4% 222 154 7 2 98 72 44%
Espada, Martín 1990–2006 6 2% 262 134 6 2 112 63 43%
Hughes, Langston 1921–1926 132 47% 66 45 5 2 27 20 41%
Kaufman, Bob 1956–1978 12 4% 134 142 12 46 44 49 32%
Komunyakaa, Yusef 1984 14 5% 132 76 4 2 53 29 41%
McKay, Claude 1889–1948 10 4% 97 25 7 1 41 12 43%
O’Hara, Frank 1957–2008 4 1% 154 42 7 2 68 18 44%
Sandburg, Carl 1916 14 5% 67 31 6 4 29 14 44%
Weaver, Afaa Michael 1992 14 5% 147 87 6 1 70 40 48%
Whitman, Walt 1872 12 4% 101 74 10 5 43 31 43%
Total 281 102 85 6 8 43 37
Hughes, Langston 1921–1930 230 51% 67 42 5 2 27 18 40%
1941–1950 223 49% 95 136 4 2 39 53 41%
Total 453 81 101 4 2 33 40
Note: FW = function word; SD = standard deviation; Pct for poem count = the ratio of a given poem count to total poem count for the group; Pct for FW
count = the ratio of the count of FWs to word count.
The first grouping compares sets labeled Hughes201 (1921–1926) and Other (1872–2008) in this article; the second compares Hughes200 (1921–1930) and
Hughes40 (1941–1950). Averages and SDs are rounded to the nearest one. Period indicates the year or range of years covering the corresponding count of
published poems. Poets in Other were selected based on avowed influence; and their poems were chosen based on qualitative judgment—visual assessment
of structural similarity with poems in Hughes201. Statistics for Hughes201 versus Other suggest stylistic constraints in Hughes’ early years as a
poet—Hughes’ poems have a percentile rank of 0.31 for word count variance and 0.15 for FW count. For Hughes200 versus Hughes40, high variance in word
and FW counts in Hughes’ later years intimates his experimentation with structure and sound.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2169
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Features
Feature selection implies some foreknowledge of the
domain of inquiry, or at least some expectations of the fea-
tures that might be important in distinguishing style. The
development of quantifiable measures for this study began
with qualitative analysis. Figure 1 shows manual tagging,
for illustrative purposes only, of a few generic features
of Langston Hughes’ poem “Down and Out” (Rampersad &
Roessel, 1995). Note that while features can be reduced to
counts, frequencies, and transformations thereof, they also
overlap—adding layers of complexity.
All features selected for this study were constrained by a
single driving principle: They had to be computable without
direct human intervention. Manual annotation or tagging of
poems was dismissed outright as an unacceptable constraint
on scalability. The consequence: Most features required use
of additional resources of some kind. All features were
defined algorithmically and codified in a computer program
created for this study. The program (available upon request)
produced a vector of statistical measures and rhyme
schemes for each poem, along with the most frequent word
n-grams and part-of-speech (POS) tag n-grams. Our catego-
rization and tabulation of these features are shown in
Table 2. Data sets resulting from combinations of these
vectors were the basis for the classifiers (models) developed.
To simplify computational feature extraction, our imple-
mentation diverged from the analysis depicted in Figure 1 in
two significant ways. First, our encoding of phrase repetition
is based on identity rather than distance, that is, two different
lines need to match exactly to count as repetition. Second, we
chose not to distinguish between slang and colloquialism,
identifying the latter in our encoding simply as any
contraction (a non-possessive containing an apostrophe) or
first- or second-person pronoun (see Biber, 1988, p. 19). In
addition, considering the metrical sensitivity of lines at their
breakpoints (described above in the Background section)—
and assuming Hughes established the breakpoints deliber-
ately—we treat the visual (typographic) line as a proxy for the
aural unit and call it a “line” hereinafter. This definition is
common, but not universally accepted (see Brogan, 1993; see
also Perloff, 1998, p. 144).
Dictionaries
Two publicly available databases for syllabification and
pronunciation were evaluated for this study: the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (MRC-PD; Wilson, 1988), and
The Carnegie Mellon Pronouncing Dictionary (CMUDict;
Carnegie Mellon University Speech Group, 2007). MRC-PD
contains 150,837 entries with 120,038 unique word instan-
ces, each with up to 26 different linguistic and psycholinguis-
tic attributes (Wilson, 1988). These attributes range from
written word frequency counts to subjective ratings to pho-
netic transcriptions, all based on publicly available sources.
The phonemic provenance of words in MRC-PD is to be
found in the 12th edition of Daniel Jones’ Pronouncing
Dictionary (1963).
CMUDict contains 133,681 entries with 123,378 unique
word instances. The phonemic provenance of its words
derives from the ARPAbet symbol set developed in the early
1970s for speech recognition systems. CMUDict concerns
itself with phones and stress patterns exclusively, unlike
MRC-PD. Despite MRC-PD’s comprehensiveness, only
33,314 (28%) of its unique word instances have complete
phone and stress pattern coverage. For the type of syllable
counting and rhyme analysis required, CMUDict became
our dictionary of choice; we set MRC-PD aside.
<{Bab[y]}, if you love m[e]>
<Help me when {I'm} down and out>. 
<If you love me, {bab[y]}>,
<Help me when {I'm} down and out>, 
{I'm} a {po’} {gal}
Nobody gives a damn about. 
The credit {man's} {done took} {ma} cl[o]thes 
And rent {time's} nearly h[ere].
{I'd} like to buy a {straightenin'} c[o]mb, 
{An'} <I need a dime {fo’} b[eer]>. 
<I need a dime {fo’} b[eer]>. 
Symbol Description 
{  } Colloquialism; Slang 
[  ] Assonance rhyme 
___  Identity rhyme 
<  > Phrase repetition 
FIG. 1. Select features of Hughes’ poem “Down and Out” illustrating that
even a few basic features reveal complex layering.
TABLE 2. Subcategories of measurement used in computational analysis
of the corpus along with number of features represented.
Subcategory Supporting technology/algorithm
Feature count. . .
Nonpoetic Poetic
Orthography SMOG grading (readability)
(McLaughlin, 1969)
74 —
Syllabification (Talburt, 1985)
Lexicography Ngram Statistics Package
(Text-NSP) (Pedersen et al., 2008)
108 —
TreeTagger (Santorini, 1990;
Schmid, 1994)
Mood Affective Norms for English Words
(ANEW) Database (Bradley &
Lang, 1999)
— 20
Phonetics The Carnegie Mellon Pronunciation
Dictionary (Carnegie Mellon
University Speech Group, 2007)
— 331
Prosody Metrical patterns (Landman, 2001) — 2
Total 182 353
2170 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Orthography
Orthographic features regard words and their letters as
written, without higher level interpretation. Examples of
basic measures include word count, line count, stanza count,
average line length (in words and syllables), average word
length, average number of lines per stanza (paragraph), fre-
quency of nouns, adjectives, and verbs as well as pun-
ctuation symbol frequency and phrase repetition. To avoid
privileging poems of a certain class, raw counts were disre-
garded in developing this study’s classification models.
Syllables were inferred from stress patterns in CMUDict.
For words not available in that dictionary, a general algo-
rithm described by Talburt (1985) was applied with a few
minor additions. (For another approach to syllabification,
see Ananthakrishnan, 2004.) Additionally, actual numbers
appearing within a poem were converted into their equiva-
lent written forms (for example, “14,000” became “fourteen
thousand”).
SMOG grading (McLaughlin, 1969) was used as a proxy
for readability. However, the assessment of readability using
only words on a printed page is problematic for several
reasons. Topic familiarity, reading fluency, and word recog-
nition are among cognitive factors that the current auto-
mated approach cannot capture (see Zakaluk & Samuels,
1988).
Lexicography
This subcategory comprises word function and includes
such measures as part-of-speech (POS) frequencies (word
type, both phrasal and clausal), word co-occurrence (n-gram
or skip-gram analysis, where order matters, but contiguity
does not), the frequency of contractions, and the frequency
of first- and second-person pronouns.
POS tagging applies to single lexical items, not to
phrases, and was facilitated by TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994).
TreeTagger relies on the Penn Treebank (Treebank; Karp,
Schabes, Zaidel, & Egedi, 1992; University of Pennsylvania,
LINC Laboratory, 1999), which is a handcrafted, annotated
collection of over 4.5 million words of American English in
various contexts: from contemporary media sources, such as
the Wall Street Journal and IBM computer manuals, to pas-
sages from the works of Mark Twain and Herman Melville,
among others (Marcus, Santorini, & Marcinkiewicz, 1993).
The set of function words considered for the present study
comprised those in Table 3.
TreeTagger employs a suffix lexicon as part of a multi-
step process to facilitate word matching. Beyond this ability,
however, we made no attempt to improve the chances
for word matching by stemming or lemmatizing words
(using the Porter stemming algorithm or converting words
into their canonical forms, for example).
Phonetics
Phonetics is the sound of words. Measures in this sub-
category include rhyme type and rhyme frequency, the
repetition of consonant sounds (such as alliteration) and
vowel sounds (assonance) that may repeat within a line,
between adjacent lines, and/or between noncontiguous lines.
Dale (1998) identifies over 40 different rhyme types (includ-
ing variants), but the present study searched for only 10
basic forms: assonance, eye, half, head, identity, light, para,
pure, syllable, and uneven rhyme types (see Table 4).
Prosody
Poetic meter (scansion, the rhythmic structure of a line) is
derived by a technique called “scanning” (Corn, 1997).
TABLE 3. Part-of-speech (POS) tags from the Penn Treebank represen-
ting function words (Franz, 1996).
POS Tag Description
CC Coordinating conjunction
DT Determiner
EX Existential “there”
IN Preposition or subordinating conjunction
MD Modal
PDT Predeterminer
POS Possessive ending
PP Personal pronoun
PP$ Possessive pronoun
RP Particle
TO “to”
WDT Wh-determiner
WP Wh-pronoun
WP$ Possessive wh-pronoun
WRB Wh-adverb
TABLE 4. Rhyme types considered (See Dale, 1998).
Type Description Examples
assonance same stressed vowel phoneme feast/feed; fever/feature
eye same spelling, excluding
initial consonants
love/move
half final consonants match
[distinguished here from
a “near” rhyme in being
more specific about the
nature of the match]
spot/cut; hollow/shallow
head initial consonants match leaves/lance
identity same word; same
pronunciation
light stressed phoneme duplicates
unstressed phoneme
live/prohibitive; frog/dialog
para consonants match; vowels
differ
summery/Samurai; lover/liver;
hill/Hell
pure same pronunciation (initial
consonants may or may not
match; but they are the
same in number)
cat/mat; bright/night
syllable identical syllable count and
stress pattern
belfry/selfish; shadow/matter
uneven different same final phoneme;
different syllable count
pen/open; ten/oven
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2171
DOI: 10.1002/asi
For the present study, patterns of stressed and unstressed
syllables were obtained for each word in each line of poetry.
This process involved finding an exact match for a word in
CMUDict; failing that, syllables of the word were derived
algorithmically, as mentioned above (in the Orthography
section). The taxonomy developed by Landman (2001) pro-
vided a means to classify the patterns observed. In this
taxonomy, the basic units of measure are labeled by the
number and pattern of syllables. An iamb, for example, has
the pattern 01—two syllables, unstressed and stressed. The
longest matching patterns received greatest weight in deter-
mining the dominant meter of a poem. Although metrical
scholars consider syllabic stress in various degrees of
subtlety, to facilitate comparison with Landman’s list, the
patterns obtained were reduced to a binary representation of
ones and zeros—stressed and unstressed, respectively.
Mood
TheAffective Norms for English Words database (ANEW,
hereinafter) was used to obtain measures for the differing
moods within poems (affective stylometry; Bradley &
Lang, 1999). ANEW classifies words on several affective
characteristics, namely, valence (pleasure/pain), arousal,
and dominance. The version obtained for the current study
comprises 1,032 words in three gender-variant versions.
Only the gender-agnostic version was used for present
research. ANEW is based on the Brown corpus, which con-
tains about a million words ofAmerican English from various
sources. (See Kucera & Francis, 1967. For alternatives to
ANEW, see Osherenko & André, 2007; Whissell, 1996,
2008.)
Word Matching
In the context of this study, exact word matches were
deemed sufficient for dictionary lookups for two reasons.
First, stemming or lemmatizing a word alters it. A word so
altered no longer has the same number of syllables, which
changes the sound of the word and the way it participates
rhythmically in a poetic line. For this same reason, no attempt
was made to correct for spelling by matching words based on
edit distance or statistical likelihood. All words were pre-
sumed to have been rendered correctly in the source text and
as the poet intended. A poet’s use of vernacular presents an
interesting case. A word not found in a dictionary could be
revealing of a biased or incomplete resource or a deliberate
attempt to represent a manner of speech in written form.
The second reason for favoring exact word matches
during dictionary lookups regards the dictionaries them-
selves. MRC-PD provides lemmas; CMUDict does not. The
English grammar data set underlying TreeTagger includes
lemmas, but it does not include pronunciation or syllabi-
fication, and no attempt was made to use it as a way to
overcome word search limitations in CMUDict or MRC-PD.
Again, since word coverage in MRC-PD was limited relative
to CMUDict, and since the perceived benefit of stemming
or obtaining a lemma appeared low relative to the effort
required, MRC-PD was abandoned completely in favor of
CMUDict. Although this treatment could be problematic in
other contexts, the number of identical words between the
current corpus and CMUDict has an average match rate of
97% ( 4% SD). The distribution does not favor one poet
over another ostensibly; so stemming or lemmatizing would
have occurred at the same rate. For ANEW, the average word
match rate is 11% ( 6% SD)—a low figure surely, but not
unexpected given ANEW’s size.
Using Hughes’ poems by way of example, words not
found in CMUDict include, but are not limited to, the follow-
ing types: colloquialisms (chillun; agin’; where’re; befo’;
mo’; cryin’s); scat (eeeoooooo; baba-re-bop; doo-doo-doo);
phrases (dream-dead; flesh-and-blood; sugar-lump; shaft-
steel; saberthroat); proper nouns (Coca-Cola; Phylon;
Winston-Salem); purposeful misspellings (dawg’s; Lawdee;
heaben; ruint; evah); foreign words (caigo; deum; plaît);
missing words (veldt; dusky; tamale; élan; uselessness; ban-
danna); acronyms (NAACP, PhD, WPA). Automated parsing
also introduced some noise that foiled matching: the require-
ment for exact matches (meaning the effective elimination of
possessive nouns), and ineffective accounting for typography
(dashes) in separating words, phrases, or clauses (e.g.,
pretenders-not-to-be; one–-two–-buckle; yes–-but).
The Classifier Algorithm
Several classification algorithms were considered, and
we chose Platt’s sequential minimal optimization (SMO)
algorithm (Platt, 1998), as implemented by Witten and
Frank (2005) in the Weka machine learning workbench.
SMO trains a support vector machine (SVM), which sepa-
rates positive and negative examples (in our case, poems) by
the widest margin possible based on a hyperplane, repre-
sented by a combination of the features and a threshold
value. SVM’s parameters enable discretion in margin size
and how the features are combined. This enables the SVM to
distinguish examples that are not linearly separable. SMO
enhances SVM’s scalability, providing an approximate solu-
tion to an otherwise numerical quadratic programming opti-
mization problem (see Juola, 2006, pp. 285–286). All these
properties combined make SMO an appropriate choice for
our classification tasks.
We used a linear kernel (a polynomial kernel with an
exponent/degree of 1.0) with no lower order terms, a com-
plexity constant of 1.0, normalized the training data, and
applied stratified 100-fold cross-validation. Data sets served
to both train and test the models. Stratified cross-validation
ensured a roughly even distribution of instances of different
classes for each fold to avoid overestimating performance
by overtraining.
SMO, and SVM in general, transform feature sets into
complex, multidimensional spaces. As a consequence, the
connection between feature and outcome disappears quickly
during execution (Juola, 2006, pp. 309–310). To understand
what features carry the most weight in classification
2172 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
outcomes (the specific features that distinguish the poems of
Langston Hughes), we must appeal to other means and
methods, which we describe in the next subsection.
Feature Ranking
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve reflects
a model’s ability to classify observations correctly by com-
paring true-positive and false-positive ratios (Fawcett, 2006;
Spackman, 1989). An area of 1.0 under the ROC curve
indicates perfect discriminatory capabilities, while an area of
0.5 indicates no better than random effectiveness. For its
robustness in comparing classifier performance (Bradley,
1997), we chose the area under the ROC curve, specifically its
median (MROC), as the ranking criterion.
To identify the most effective features we employed
correlation-based greedy forward search with stratified 100-
fold cross-validation and repeated holdout on each of three
separate sets of features (poetic, nonpoetic, and both in
combination) (see Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003; Hall, 1999).
Figure 2 describes the approach. Generally, the algorithm
iterates over all features in a set (A, where A is a subset of S),
selecting the feature having the highest MROC. This feature
is then removed from the original set and added to an
ordered subset (B, where B is also a subset of S). Iteration
proceeds over the features that remain in the original set (A),
finding the next feature—in combination with the one
chosen previously—that yields the highest MROC. This
process continues until no more features remain in the
original set (or until reaching a predefined minimum
threshold on the number of ranked features).
Poetic and nonpoetic feature sets were evaluated sepa-
rately and in conjunction to eliminate the interactive effects
between them. In all cases, features highly correlated with
class and those with low intercorrelations (redundancy)
received the highest rankings.
Results
Figures 3 and 4 show that as the number of features
increases, classifier accuracy increases gradually too, up to a
point. This tells us two things: No single feature is decisive
and MROC is a robust measure, given its relatively small
variability. The late jump of MROC for nonpoetic features in
Figure 4(a) at n = 19 is an indication of one combination of
features (out of many combinations) that the greedy one-step
look-ahead algorithm failed to detect early on. While a
single-step look-ahead was not optimal, increasing the
number of steps in the algorithm would have required a
trade-off between noise and computational efficiency: It
might allow earlier convergence on a core set of features, but
at increased computational cost. Feature selection is a diffi-
cult task in data mining and machine learning generally.
Greedy forward search is one approach. We do not expect
any one feature to be an effective style marker independently.
In Figure 3(a), the mere presence of poetic features drives
up combined model accuracy in the top three features, but
poetic features clearly hurt the combined sets overall. The
behavior changes in Figure 4(a). Here, nonpoetic features
dominate in the first four features, but, generally, poetic
features give combined sets the advantage thereafter. Cou-
pling this with the inferior performance of poetic features
alone, we see that dependent relationships among features
exist within and across categories.
Figures 3(b) and 4(b) show an interesting relationship
between precision and recall. Precision (acceptance, accu-
racy, or purity) and recall (hit rate or completeness) are
known empirically to be inversely related—when one
increases, the other decreases. This relationship, called
the precision-recall trade-off (Gordon & Kochen, 1989), is
something we can understand intuitively. Generally, the
more examples we obtain (higher recall), the more variance
we introduce in our sample (less precise). Yet we see here
that precision and recall are balanced. Moreover, their values
are rather high for the kindred classification task. Let us
address each of these observations in turn.
Buckland and Gey (1994) explain that since both
precision and recall are cumulative measures, the only way
to overcome the trade-off between them is to ensure that
they increase together. This means that with each sample,
precision can be no less than its previous value. By ensuring
that each feature added to a model reflects the optimal
choice at a given time (see Figure 2), we are able to maintain
a stable ratio between precision and recall with each
procedure MedianROC(C)
foldCount ← 100 
comment: Evaluate classifier (model) using C.
for i ← 1 to foldCount 
do D[i] ← weightedAverageROCArea
return (median(D)) 
procedure HighestRankedFeature(A, B) 
maxMedianROC ← medianROC ← 0 
i ← size(B) + 1 
C ← B
for each feature ∈A
C ← B + feature
medianROC ← MedianROC(C) 
if medianROC > maxMedianROC then  
maxMedianROC ← medianROC
B[i] ← feature
return (B)
main 
S ← featureSet
comment: A ⊆ S; B ⊆ S. 
A ← S
B ← ( ) 
while size(B) <= min(size(S), threshold) 
B ← HighestRankedFeature(A, B) 
A ← S – B 
output (B) 
FIG. 2. GreedyOnestep(featureSet).
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2173
DOI: 10.1002/asi
addition (the x axis in Figures 3 and 4), despite their fluc-
tuation for each model (data not shown).
Although our numerical results are not directly compa-
rable with those in the aforecited computational studies of
poetic style, we find them consistent with Koppel, Schler,
and Argamon (2009, 2011). Koppel et al. find that precision
increases as the number of candidate authors decreases
(achieving a high of 93.2% precision with 39.3% recall) and,
separately, that precision increases as the number of features
increases (achieving a high of 87.9% precision with 28.2%
recall). The values we report for precision are based upon a
relatively low number of candidate poets and a relatively
high number of features. Consequently, we expect that any
increase in the number of poets represented in our corpus, or
any decrease in the number of features we consider, will
affect precision negatively. This is only a partial explana-
tion, however. Relatively low precision for the diachronic
classification task suggests that the degree of variance
among features (reflecting diversity within the corpus) is a
contributing factor as well.
As we consider the features themselves, the stylistic dif-
ferences uncovered by our classification models become
apparent. Tables 5 and 6 show the features with the greatest
discriminatory power. Table 5 details the features represented
in Figure 3, while Table 6 does the same for Figure 4.
The composition of features differs markedly between cat-
egories and between classification tasks, but perhaps the
exclusion of certain features from the models is even more
remarkable.
In both Tables 5 and 6, explicit references to rhythm and
meter are nowhere to be found. This is curious given the
particular musical orientation of Hughes’ poetry, not to
mention that of his “kin.” Perhaps syllable count could
be construed as a proxy for rhythm if “flexible intonation”
(or flexible “scanning”) were allowed as a latent variable.
However, we categorize syllable count as a nonpoetic
feature. So, if we treat it now as a poetic feature—as a proxy
for rhythm, because this fits better with our conception of
musical elements within the poetry—we must acknowledge
a deficiency in the method used to compute syllabic stress
(assuming that its computation is even possible given the
variability of speech).
On the other hand, the strong performance of poetic fea-
tures in Table 5—rhyming schemes, in particular—affords
(a) Ranked feature influence on median ROC area, with 95% confidence intervals in dotted lines. 
(b) Select SMO classifier results. 
denibmoCciteoPciteopnoN
70101tnuocerutaeF
Instances correctly classified 85.41% 87.19% 82.56%
338.0378.0368.0noisicerP
628.0278.0458.0llaceR
Median ROC area 0.863 0.865 0.839
FIG. 3. Feature influence on SMO model effectiveness using Hughes201-Other data sets. Subfigure (a) depicts the effect of adding one feature at a time
in testing SMO models. Each plot point represents a single model. Only the first 30 features for each feature set are shown. Subfigure (b) tabulates the results
of the models having the first highest median ROC area among the top 10% of all such values in the first 10 features. [Color figure can be viewed in the online
issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
2174 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
a countervailing interpretation: rhyme-induced phonemic
stress as a cause of rhythm. Rhyme schemes potentiate
phonemic stress when juxtaposed; so we might expect
their complex interplay (facilitated by repetition) to be a
significant cause of the polyrhythm, percussiveness, and
crescendo of West African music in language. Although
linguistic theory has largely rejected “phoneme” as a concept
(McCarthy, 2003), we use it here over “syllable” as a conve-
nience to emphasize the sounds of speech. By “phonemic
stress” we mean the acoustic emphasis placed on any of the
constituent parts of a syllable (onset, nucleus, and coda
and its subparts) (Lehiste, 2003; Steriade, 2003).
From present results, rhyme schemes appear to be
Hughes’ device of choice. Qualitative analysis supports
this finding. Lowery (1975) notes the following about
Hughes’ “The Weary Blues” (1925):
The first technique that attracts the reader’s attention is the
poet’s unconventional use of English prosody in the develop-
ment of the theme. That is, Hughes alternates penta- and hex-
ameter lines with di- and trimeter ones, and this unusual
placement approximates the polyrhythms of the blues. The use
of alliteration to simulate the various rhythms complements the
former device. For example, the “d” sequence in “Droning a
drowsy syncopated tune” reproduces the percussive tendency
characteristic of the blues, and the “l” sounds of the phrase
“pale dull pallor of an old gas light” convey the sensation
of swing, also a basic feature of blues. (pp. 172–174)
We see from Table 5 that the classifier was indeed able to
distinguish Hughes’ poetry effectively from others’ on these
grounds (other than meter), lending further credence
to the self-consistency of Hughes’ early poetic style.
Evidence of phonemic stress is crucial to any claim that
Hughes’ poetry is musical.
However, presence of function-word metrics, of past
participles and superlative adjectives among highly ranked
features, is unclear. Perhaps these nonpoetic features arise
(a) Ranked feature influence on median ROC area, with 95% confidence intervals in dotted lines. The late 
jump for non-poetic features is a direct consequence of the failure of one-step greedy look-ahead to 
detect within-category feature interaction. Increasing the number of steps would allow the curves to 
converge earlier, but at significantly higher computational cost.  
(b) Select SMO classifier results. 
denibmoCciteoPciteopnoN
9601tnuocerutaeF
Instances correctly classified 67.55% 63.80% 70.86%
017.0146.0676.0noisicerP
907.0836.0576.0llaceR
Median ROC area 0.731 0.682 0.757
FIG. 4. Feature influence on SMO model effectiveness using Hughes40-Hughes200 data sets. Subfigure (a) depicts the effect of adding one feature at a time
in testing SMO models. Each plot point represents a single model. Only the first 30 features for each feature set are shown. Subfigure (b) tabulates the results
of the models having the first highest median ROC area among the top 10% of all such values in the first 10 features. [Color figure can be viewed in the online
issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2175
DOI: 10.1002/asi
TABLE 5. Features ranked by greedy forward search for data sets labeled Hughes201 or Other.
Rank
Nonpoetic. . . Poetic. . . Combined. . .
MROC Feature description MROC Feature description MROC Feature description
1 0.775 loge of the mean number of syllables
per line
0.785 SD of the number of head rhymes
per line
0.785 SD of the number of head rhymes
per line
2 0.779 percentage of prepositions or
subordinating conjunctions (FW)
0.757 percentage of eye rhymes among
line-terminating words
0.783 SMOG grade
3 0.795 percentage of past participles 0.802 p value of the mean number of head
rhymes per line
0.810 loge of the median number of
syllable rhymes per line
4 0.824 loge of the median number of words
per line
0.825 loge of the median number of half
rhymes per line
0.819 pattern of eye rhymes among
line-terminating words
5 0.838 percentage of superlative adjectives 0.833 loge of the mean number of pure
rhymes between two lines
separated by a third line
0.829 loge of the median number of
syllable rhymes between two lines
separated by a third line
6 0.844 percentage of gerunds or present
participles
0.834 loge of the median number of light
rhymes between two lines
separated by a third line
0.834 loge of the percentage of half
rhymes among line-terminating
words
7 0.859 percentage of words with possessive
endings
0.853 p value of the mean number of pure
rhymes per line
0.839 percentage of assonance rhymes
among line-terminating words
8 0.860 percentage occurrence of existential
“there” (FW)
0.859 loge of the median number of
uneven rhymes between any two
adjacent lines
0.839 loge of the percentage of symbols
9 0.863 loge of the percentage of adjectives 0.860 pattern of assonance rhymes among
line-terminating words
0.839 percentage of symbols
10 0.863 loge of the percentage of singular
proper nouns
0.865 percentage of uneven rhymes among
line-terminating words
0.839 loge of the percentage of superlative
adverbs
Note. MROC = median ROC area as plotted in Figure 2(a); FW = a function-word metric; SD = standard deviation.
TABLE 6. Features ranked by greedy forward search for data sets labeled Hughes200 or Hughes40.
Rank
Nonpoetic. . . Poetic. . . Combined. . .
MROC Feature description MROC Feature description MROC Feature description
1 0.685 loge of the percentage of verbs 0.629 percentage of words found in the
ANEW database
0.685 loge of the percentage of verbs
2 0.669 mean number of syllables per line 0.644 mean number of para rhymes per
line
0.675 pattern of identity rhymes among
line-terminating words
3 0.709 percentage of Wh-pronouns (FW) 0.666 loge of the p-value of the median
number of assonance rhymes
between two lines separated by a
third line
0.689 mean number of pure rhymes
between two lines separated
by a third line
4 0.724 percentage occurrence of existential
“there” (FW)
0.670 SD of the number of light rhymes
between two lines separated by a
third line
0.713 percentage of adverbs
5 0.727 percentage occurrence of the verb
“to have,” past participle
0.681 loge of the median number of para
rhymes between any two adjacent
lines
0.744 loge of the percentage of syllable
rhymes among line-terminating
words
6 0.727 percentage of symbols 0.682 p value of the median number of
identity rhymes per line
0.748 loge of the mean number of
characters per word
7 0.724 loge of the percentage of plural
proper nouns
0.682 loge of the median number of
syllable rhymes per line
0.750 p value of the mean number of light
rhymes per line
8 0.728 percentage of ellipses 0.682 median number of syllable rhymes
per line
0.750 loge of the median number of light
rhymes between two lines
separated by a third line
9 0.728 loge of the percentage occurrence of
the verb “to have,” past participle
0.682 loge of the mean of the mean
valence (ANEW)
0.757 percentage of adjectives (other than
comparative or superlative)
10 0.731 percentage of adjectives (other than
comparative or superlative)
0.679 loge of the SD of light rhymes per
line
0.754 loge of the median number of
identity rhymes between two lines
separated by a third line
Note. MROC = median ROC area as plotted in Figure 3(a); FW = function-word metric; SD = standard deviation.
2176 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
from word and phrase repetition as well—repetition being
an operating characteristic of the blues and Black oral tra-
dition. Additionally, the appearance of syllables per line and
words per line among highly ranked features is not indica-
tive of redundancy in feature definition necessarily. The
feature “SMOG grade” (Simple Measure of Gobb-
ledygook from McLaughlin, 1969) actually depends upon
both and, notably, appears among the top-ranked combined
features.
Table 6 offers a curious contrast: evidence of conflict and
transition—the evolution of Hughes’ style, where poetic
features no longer discriminate as effectively (though still
better than random)—giving rise to distinctive use of
affective words (a difference in number and aspect of words
found, or not found, in ANEW), verbs, and different
rhyming schemes. Qualitative analysis supports this result as
well. Lowery (1975) writes of the “Easy Boogie” from
Montage of a Dream Deferred (1951) as follows:
[It is] an example of a basic rhythmic change in bop style: less
use of the bass drum, which is kept for explosions or special
accents. The string bass replaces it and keeps up a steady,
unaccented four-to-a-bar rhythm, which is light, flowing and
more subtle than was previously the case in ragtime. . . .
Stanzas one and two constitute the first musical phrase . . . and
represent the string bass of the “orchestra.” Hughes achieves
this simulation through two devices. The repetition of the first
line (“Down in the bass”) illustrates the rhythm itself while
the use of the gerund form shows its continuity. The lack of
commas in the first verse also denotes the ongoingness of
the steady beat. Through the use of simile, “steady beat/ like
marching feet” the music is personified, thus anticipating the
scene which is sketched in the last verse. And the first person
point of view prepares us for another solo.
The intervening line between verses two and three is used
to convey a sense of the conflicting changes which are
characteristic of jazz. (pp. 226–227)
Hughes himself prefaced the work by saying that
like be-bop, [it] is marked by conflicting changes, sudden
nuances, sharp and impudent interjections, broken rhythms, and
passages sometimes in the manner of a jam session, sometimes
the popular song, punctuated by riffs, runs, breaks, and
disctortions [sic] of the music of a community in transition.
(Rampersad & Roessel, 1995, p. 387)
Hughes realizes this rhythmic complexity in lines such
as “Oop-pop-a-da!/Skee! Daddle-de-do!/Be-bop!” (from
“Children’s Rhymes,” Montage of a Dream Deferred,
Rampersad & Roessel, 1995, p. 390)—language and phras-
ing uncharacteristic of his early poetry—and a quickening
pulse noted by Jemie (1976, p. 64) in the poem “Up-Beat,”
from the same collection (Rampersad & Roessel, 1995,
p. 408).
Mood appears twice in the diachronic classification of
poetic features only (Table 6). The ANEW match rates for
both data sets is nearly the same (12%  6% SD for
Hughes200 vs. 10%  6% SD for Hughes40). Mean valence
is identical between data sets as well (6.05  1.08 SD for
Hughes200 vs. 6.06  1.13 SD for Hughes40, based on a
9-point rating scale, ranging from pleasant to unpleasant,
where 9 represents the most unpleasant). Although mean
valence effects little individual change in MROC, after
accounting for other features in the model, it suddenly
becomes important. The combinatorial effect of poetic fea-
tures shows that a difference in mood exists between
Hughes’ early and later poetry. That Hughes’ poems often
evoke suffering and unhappiness has support from other
authors, including Hughes himself. He wrote his best poems
when he was unhappy (Hughes, 1940, p. 54; Jemie, 1976, p.
xxiii). Moreover, the blues idiom upon which he relied was
itself predicated upon the concerns of the downtrodden. The
change in mood we see here may have less to do with
Hughes’ internal state than a change in the manner of
expression, however—a move toward jazz motifs in poetic
form.
Not all of the words italicized by Hughes when
“Montage of a Dream Deferred” appeared in Selected
Poems of Langston Hughes (1959) appear in our source.
This is important, because in this case, the italicized words
affect the rhythmic sequences to which Hughes refers in his
preface (Rampersad & Roessel, 1995, p. 672). In discussing
“Dream Boogie” (Rampersad & Roessel, 1995, p. 388),
Patterson (2000, p. 681) notes further that Hughes used
italics and indented lines as a device to “show the ambiva-
lence and animosity of an African American speaker trying
to explain the meaning of the music to a Euro-American
listener.” Hughes appears to be reveling in structural experi-
mentation in these later years. The inability to capture or
address typographical nuances such as italics, capitalized
words, and text position is a limitation of our implementa-
tion. Nevertheless, our set of features was sufficient to
achieve a separation of periods.
Tables 5 and 6, combined, represent 53 unique features.
Of the 53, only four co-occur. We may dismiss one of these
co-occurrences—the percentage of symbols—because it
arises from a false positive (i.e., the misidentification of the
letter “E” in the name “W. E. B. [DuBois]” during POS
tagging). Of the remaining three, two may be found in both
poetic and combined feature sets; only one occurs in non-
poetic and combined feature sets (see Table 7). These three
TABLE 7. Most conserved and highly predictive features among all
data sets.
Feature Description Nonpoetic Poetic Combined
loge of the median number of light
rhymes between two lines separated
by a third line
— X X
loge of the median number of syllable
rhymes per line
— X X
percentage occurrence of existential
“there” (FW)
X — —
Note. FW = function word.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2177
DOI: 10.1002/asi
features, then, represent the most conserved and highly pre-
dictive features of all. This means that they vary in a way
sufficiently consistent to help distinguish Hughes’ early
poetry not only from the poetry of his “kin,” but from his
later work as well. From current evidence, Hughes’ use
of phonemic rhymes suggests a cause of the rhythmic
complexity that pervades his poetry.
Discussion
This study set out with two objectives: (a) to determine
the efficacy of generic nonpoetic and poetic features in
classifying poetry and (b) to see whether these quantitative
features reinforce or contradict qualitative assessments of
poetry. It focused on the work of Langston Hughes in his
late teens and 20s and late 30s and 40s. To address the first
objective, two binary classification tasks differentiated
Hughes’ work from that of other, “kindred” poets, and
from two periods of Hughes’ own poetry. Greedy forward
search ranked features obtained by computational means
and SMO assessed their effectiveness in classification. To
address the second objective, these features were consid-
ered in the context of qualitative analyses of Hughes’
work.
From our “kindred” classification task, we found non-
poetic features as effective as poetic features. That nonpoetic
features alone could serve to differentiate poets affirms the
findings of other author attribution studies. Qualitative analy-
ses of Hughes’ poetry provide context for this outcome
as well. For example, we know that Hughes distinguished
himself by transcribing and transforming the Black English,
music, hopes, and dreams of commonAfricanAmericans into
evocative poetry. He maintained a deep abide for Black oral
tradition and Black folk music (the blues, particularly). These
influences had their own set of rules and expectations. The
blues, like other art forms, are defined by rules of construc-
tion—basic syntactic structure, and variation within limits.
Our finding that the most conserved and highly predictive
features of Hughes’ early poetry—patterns of syllabic stress
and phonemic stress in what is otherwise free verse—sup-
ports this view, as does the high ranking of assonance rhyme
schemes among line-ending words, and the median number
of words per line.
Few features suffice to differentiate Hughes’ style from
others’ and from his later work—10 or less in our examples,
depending on one’s criteria for success. Rudman (1997) and
Stamatatos et al. (2001), among others, note that a combi-
nation of diverse features allows for better differentiation.
Although our poetic and nonpoetic feature sets were diverse
in the type and composition of their elements, their effec-
tiveness depended on the classification task. When consid-
ered among other poets, we found that Hughes stands out for
the consistency of variation in his use of both poetic and
nonpoetic features. Differentiating the poetry of Hughes’
20s and 40s is another matter. In this more difficult classi-
fication task, nonpoetic features are more effective. The
multidimensional perspective revealed a change in Hughes’
language. His later work favors greater use and variance of
content words (verbs, adjectives, and adverbs), and less use
and variance of certain types of rhyme (e.g., identity, light,
pure, and syllable). This finding is consistent with what
Jemie (1976, p. xv) described as the evolution of Hughes’
jazz poetry, and perhaps of jazz music itself, from “con-
trolled counterpoint . . . to sustained complexity” (see also
Hughes, 1956c; Patterson, 2000).
Poetry itself offers interesting ground for study. Its com-
plexity is not simply grammatical, but auditory and emotive
as well. It is inherently multidimensional. The variability
and expressiveness of the English language, its rhythm
and rhyme, add to this complexity. That nonpoetic features
should be so effective in classifying works in this domain is
all the more remarkable, then. Perhaps this outcome simply
reflects a poetic tradition of deviation from rules underly-
ing normal speech and grammar. Perhaps nonpoetic
features afford more opportunities for individualism in
artistic expression—but perhaps a distinction between
poetic and nonpoetic features depends ultimately on context.
Nevertheless, had we not considered features in separate
groups—partitioning dimensions to limit the search space—
competition among features would have impeded our ability
to reaffirm the empirically strong relationship between
rhyme and rhythm in Hughes’ art, for example. Poetry’s
features may defy unambiguous categorization, but treat-
ing groups of such features independently helped realize
explanatory potential.
More generally, our results suggest that defining higher
order feature boundaries—something Kusiak (2001) calls
“feature bundling”—prior to model building may be a
useful tactic not only for improving classifier accuracy (as
Kusiak found also) but in helping explain classifier output.
Automated discovery of subspaces (decision regions) in
highly dimensional data is a common theme in data mining
and machine learning. We believe this is a consequence
of the need to define better feature sets, not models. An
approach to classification that mixes desirable traits of quali-
tative and quantitative methods seems warranted. It might
invite more interdisciplinary collaboration as well. (Note
Melnik, 2002, and Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2003.)
Examination of the current methods using the work of
another poet and/or a different poetic genre (e.g., children’s
poetry) is a natural next step. Future work could explore to
what extent “structure” (e.g., the function of collections)
and/or idiom (e.g., the representation of natural speech in
written form) plays a role in style differentiation. The dialect
poetry of Paul Laurence Dunbar as well as the poetry of other
members of the Harlem Renaissance could be helpful in this
regard. Exploration of such topics would require develop-
ment and use of more sophisticated features—features
capable of distinguishing colloquialism and slang and phrase
repetition, for example, perhaps even musical phrasing.
Additionally, research could explore ways to deal com-
putationally with concrete poetry and other typographic or
graphical features (such as font size, color, illustrations) that
challenge grammar itself—a challenge presented by some of
2178 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Hughes’ later poetry, notably Ask Your Mamma: 12 Moods
for Jazz.
Sonification offers another route for style analysis.
Mapping textual elements to sound may allow us to “see”
that which is typically hidden or taken for granted—
something beyond words. The close relationship between
poetry and music makes this a particularly compelling
option. Frequency (pitch), amplitude (volume), phase (dura-
tion), and their modulation provide a rich palette for such
mapping. The rhythmic elements that characterize Hughes’
poetry—phonemic or syllabic stress, even punctuation—
could be exploited with these properties in mind. For
example, as a first pass, by assigning different percussive
instrument sounds to different levels of syllabic stress as
well as punctuation, and then keeping time constant line by
poetic line as we allow a computer to march through one of
Hughes’ poems, we might come to a clearer understanding
of the crescendo effect and rhythmic complexity. Perhaps
we might also find structure in “free verse.”
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans, roundworm) and
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) have been model organ-
isms in genetic research, facilitating discoveries in RNA
interference, programmed cell death, gene transcription, and
replication. Could poetry be a model “organism” for fields
such as information science and computational linguistics?
Curiously, despite its ancient origins, its role in provoking
thought, and its potential for enlightenment, poetry has been
virtually ignored in the computational sciences. Scholars
in these fields might do well to heed Hughes’ call: “What
happens to a dream deferred?” (Rampersad & Roessel,
1995, p. 426).
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. David Dubin and Miles Efron, and the
anonymous reviewers of this article, for the generosity of
their time and thoughtful feedback.
References
Ananthakrishnan, S. (2004). Statistical syllabification of English phoneme
sequences using supervised and unsupervised algorithms [Term project
report]. Retrieved from University of Southern California web address
http://sail.usc.edu/~ananthak/files/stat-syllabifier-report.pdf
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Pennebaker, J.W., & Schler, J. (2009). Automati-
cally profiling the author of an anonymous text. Communications
of the ACM, 52(2), 119–123. doi:10.1145/1461928.1461959
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bluestein, G. (1972). The voice of the folk: Folklore and American literary
theory. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Bradley, A.P. (1997). The use of the area under the ROC curve in the
evaluation of machine learning algorithms. Pattern Recognition, 30(7),
1145–1159. doi:10.1016/S0031-3203(96)00142-2
Bradley, M.M., & Lang, P.J. (1999). Affective Norms for English Words
(ANEW): Instruction manual and affective ratings (Technical Report
C-1). Gainesville, FL: The Center for Research in Psychophysiology,
University of Florida, NIMH Center for the Study of Emotion and
Attention.
Brogan, T. (1993). LINE (Sanskrit pda, Gr. stichos [q.v.], Lat. versus
“verse”). The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Buckland, M., & Gey, F. (1994). The relationship between recall and
precision. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
45(1), 12–19. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199401)45:1<12::AID-
ASI2>3.0.CO;2-L
Can, F., & Patton, J.M. (2004). Change of writing style with time.
Computers and the Humanities, 38, 61–82. doi:10.1023/B:CHUM.
0000009225.28847.77
Carnegie Mellon University Speech Group. (2007). CMU-Dict (The
Carnegie Mellon Pronouncing Dictionary) (Version 0.7a) [Computer
software]. Retrieved from https://cmusphinx.svn.sourceforge.net/
svnroot/cmusphinx/trunk/cmudict/
Corn, A. (1997). The poem’s heartbeat: A manual of prosody. Brownsville,
OR: Story Line Press.
Crain, C. (2007, December 24). Twilight of the books. The New Yorker.
Retrieved from http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2007/12/
24/071224crat_atlarge_crain
Cureton, R.D. (2003). Language of poetry. Linguistics and Literature,
International Encyclopedia of Linguistics (e-reference ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press. Available at http://www.oxford-linguistics.
com/entry?entry=t202.e0617.s0007
Dale, P. (1998). An introduction to rhyme. London: Bellew Publishing.
Damerau, F.J. (1975). The use of function word frequencies as indicators
of style. Computers and the Humanities, 9, 271–280. doi:10.1007/
BF02396290
Dickinson, D.C. (1972). A bio-bibliography of Langston Hughes, 1902–
1967 (2nd ed.). Hamden, CT: Archon Books.
Falla, J. (2005). KAUFMAN, BOB (1925–1986). In J. McCorkle,
J.H. Gray, & M. Balkun (Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia
of American poets and poetry (Vol. 3, H-L). Santa Barbara, CA:
Greenwood.
Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 27(8), 861–874. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010
Forsyth, R.S. (1999). Stylochronometry with substrings, or: a poet young
and old. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 14(4), 467–478. doi:10.
1093/llc/14.4.467
Franz, A. (1996). Automatic ambiguity resolution in natural language pro-
cessing: An empirical approach. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
1171. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Goldberg, E. (2005). BROOKS, GWENDOLYN (1917–2000). In M.
Balkun, J.H. Gray, & J. McCorkle (Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia
of American poets and poetry (Vol. 1, A-C). Santa Barbara:
Greenwood.
Gordon, M., & Kochen, M. (1989). Recall-precision trade-off: A derivation.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 40(3), 145–
151. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(198905)40:3<145::AID-ASI1>
3.0.CO;2-I
Gross, H.S., & McDowell, R. (1996). Sound and form in modern poetry
(2nd ed.). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Guyon, I., & Elisseeff, A. (2003). An introduction to variable and
feature selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 1157–
1182.
Hall, M.A. (1999). Correlation-based feature selection for machine learning
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Waikato, Hamilton,
New Zealand.
Hansell, W.H. (1978). Black music in the poetry of Langston Hughes:
Roots, race, release. Obsidian, 4(3), 16–38.
Hoover, D.L. (2008). Searching for style in modern American poetry. In S.
Zyngier, M. Bortolussi, A. Chesnokova, & J. Auracher (Eds.), Directions
in empirical literary studies. Linguistic Approaches to Literature (Vol. 5,
pp. 211–228). Philadelphia: John Benjamins North America.
Hrushovski, B. (1960). On free rhythms in modern poetry. In T.A. Sebeok
(Ed.), Style in language (pp. 173–190). New York: The Technology Press
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Hughes, L. (1940). The big sea: An autobiography (American Century
Series ed.). New York: Hill and Wang.
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2179
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Hughes, L. (1947). My adventures as a social poet. Phylon, 8(3), 205–212.
Available at http://negroartist.com/writings/My%20Adventures%20as%
20a%20Social%20Poet.pdf
Hughes, L. (1956a). Reading from his work, Langston Hughes, CA. 1956,
Part 1 of 4 [MP3 recording]. Available at http://will.illinois.edu/
americanarchive/item/illinoisbroadcastarchives_1207a/
Hughes, L. (1956b). Reading from his work, Langston Hughes, CA. 1956,
Part 2 of 4 [MP3 recording]. Available at http://will.illinois.edu/
americanarchive/item/illinoisbroadcastarchives_1208a/
Hughes, L. (1956c). Reading from his work, Langston Hughes, CA. 1956,
Part 3 of 4 [MP3 recording]. Available at http://will.illinois.edu/
americanarchive/item/illinoisbroadcastarchives_1207b/
Jemie, O. (1976). Langston Hughes: An introduction to the poetry.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Jones, S. (2005). KOMUNYAKAA, YUSEF (1947–). In J. McCorkle, J.H.
Gray, & M. Balkun (Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia of American
poets and poetry (Vol. 3, H-L). Santa Barbara: Greenwood.
Juola, P. (2006). Authorship attribution. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval, 1(3), 233–334.
Kaplan, D.M., & Blei, D.M. (2007). A computational approach to style in
American poetry. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining, ICDM (pp. 553–558). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Com-
puter Society. doi:10.1109/ICDM.2007.76
Karp, D., Schabes, Y., Zaidel, M., & Egedi, D. (1992). A freely available
wide coverage morphological analyzer for English. In Proceedings of
COLING-92 (pp. 950–959). Nantes, France. doi:10.3115/992383.
992409
Kilgore, J. (2005). BONTEMPS, ARNA (1902–1973). In M. Balkun, J.H.
Gray, & J. McCorkle (Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia of American
poets and poetry (Vol. 1, A-C). Santa Barbara: Greenwood.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Argamon, S. (2009). Computational methods in
authorship attribution. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 60(1), 9–26. doi:10.1002/asi.20961
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Argamon, S. (2011). Authorship attribution in the
wild. Language Resources & Evaluation, 45(1), 83–94. doi:10.1007/
s10579-009-9111-2
Kucera, H., & Francis, W.N. (1967). Computational analysis of present-day
American English. Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
Kummings, D.D. (2001). Poetry. In P.S. Boyer (Ed.), The Oxford
companion to United States history (pp. 601–603). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kusiak, A. (2001). Feature transformation methods in data mining. IEEE
Transactions on Electronics Packaging Manufacturing, 24(3), 214–221.
doi:10.1109/6104.956807
Landman, H.A. (2001). A computer scientist looks at metrical feet.
Retrieved from http://www.polyamory.org/~howard/Poetry/feet.html
Lehiste, I. (2003). Syllables and stress in phonetics. Syllables. International
encyclopedia of linguistics (e-reference ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Available at http://www.oxford-linguistics.com/entry?
entry=t202.e1062.s0001
Levertov, D. (1979). On the function of the line. Chicago Review, 30(3),
30–36.
Lord, A.B. (1993). Oral poetry, esp. The new Princeton encyclopedia
of poetry and poetics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lowery, D.M. (1975). Selected poems of Nicolás Guillén and Langston
Hughes: Their use of Afro-Western folk music genres. (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Marcus, M.P., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz, M.A. (1993). Building a
large annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2), 313–330.
McCarthy, J.J. (2003). Phoneme. International encyclopedia of linguistics
(e-reference ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Available at
http://www.oxford-linguistics.com/entry?entry=t202.e0834
McLaughlin, G.H. (1969). SMOG grading: A new readability formula.
Journal of Reading, 12(8), 639–646.
Melnik, O. (2002). Decision region connectivity analysis: A method for
analyzing high-dimensional classifiers. Machine Learning, 48(1–3),
321–351. doi:10.1023/A:1013968124284
Miller, E.E. (2007, April 4). Interview with Martín Espada. Foreign Policy
in Focus. Retrieved from http://www.fpif.org/articles/interview_with_
martin_espada
Nimura, T. (2005). Lyric poetry. In H. Ostrom & J.D. Macey, Jr.
(Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia of African American literature
[Five Volumes]. Santa Barbara: Greenwood.
Osherenko, A., & André, E. (2007). Lexical affect sensing: Are affect
dictionaries necessary to analyze affect? In A. Paiva, R. Prada, & R.W.
Picard (Eds.), Affective computing and intelligent interaction. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 4738, pp. 230–241). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Patterson, A. (2000). Jazz, realism, and the modernist lyric: The poetry
of Langston Hughes. Modern Language Quarterly, 61(4), 651–682.
doi:10.1215/00267929-61-4-651
Pedersen, T., Banerjee, S., Purandare, A., Thomson-McInnes, B., &
Kohli, S. (2008). Ngram Statistics Package (Text-NSP) (Version 1.09)
[Computer software]. Available at http://ngram.sourceforge.net/
Perloff, M. (1998). Poetry on & off the page. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Pinsky, R. (1998). The sounds of poetry: A brief guide. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.
Platt, J.C. (1998). Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for
training support vector machines (Technical Report MSR-TR-98-14).
Microsoft Research.
Rampersad, A. (1986). The life of Langston Hughes: I, too, sing America
(Vol. 1: 1902–1941). New York: Oxford University Press.
Rampersad, A., & Roessel, D. (Eds.) (1995). The collected poems of
Langston Hughes. New York: Vintage Books.
Rudman, J. (1997). The state of authorship attribution studies: Some
problems and solutions. Computers and the Humanities, 31(4), 351–365.
doi:10.1023/A:1001018624850
Santorini, B. (1990). Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the Penn
Treebank Project. (Technical Report MS-CIS-90-47, 3rd Rev.). Philadel-
phia, PA: Department of Computer and Information Science, School of
Engineering and Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved
from http://repository.upenn.edu/cis_reports/570/
Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision
trees. In Proceedings of the International Conference on New Methods
in Language Processing (pp. 44–49). Manchester, UK: Centre for
Computational Linguistics. Available at http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
Sielke, S. (2005). MCKAY, CLAUDE (1889–1948). In J. McCorkle, J.H.
Gray, & M. Balkun (Eds.), The Greenwood encyclopedia of American
poets and poetry (Vol 4, M-R). Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood.
Spackman, K.A. (1989). Signal detection theory: Valuable tools for
evaluating inductive learning. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Workshop on Machine Learning (pp. 160–163). San Mateo, CA: Morgan
Kaufman.
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., & Kokkinakis, G. (2001). Computer-based
authorship attribution without lexical measures. Computers and the
Humanities, 35, 193–214. doi:10.1023/A:1002681919510
Stamou, C. (2008). Stylochronometry: Stylistic development, sequence of
composition, and relative dating. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
23(2), 181–199. doi:10.1093/llc/fqm029
Stankiewicz, E. (1960). Linguistics and the study of poetic language. In
T.A. Sebeok (Ed.), Style in language (pp. 69–81). New York: The Tech-
nology Press of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Steriade, D. (2003). Syllables in phonology. Syllables, International
encyclopedia of linguistics (e-reference ed.). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Available at http://www.oxford-linguistics.com/entry?
entry=t202.e1062.s0002
Talburt, J. (1985). The Flesch index: An easily programmable readability
analysis algorithm. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual International
Conference on Systems Documentation (pp. 114–122). NewYork: ACM.
doi:10.1145/10563.10583
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, D. (Eds.) (2003). Handbook of mixed methods
in social and behavioral research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
2180 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Thomas, M.W. (Interviewer) & Dove, R. (Interviewee). (1995, August 12).
The Swansea Review. Swansea, UK: Swansea University. Retrieved from
http://www.english.illinois.edu/maps/poets/a_f/dove/mwthomas.htm
Tracy, S C. (2001). Langston Hughes and the blues. Urbana, IL: University
of Illinois Press.
University of Pennsylvania, LINC Laboratory. (1999). Penn Treebank
Project. Available at http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~treebank/
Whissell, C. (1996). Traditional and emotional stylometric analysis of the
songs of Beatles Paul McCartney and John Lennon. Computers and
the Humanities, 30(3), 257–265. doi:10.1007/BF00055109
Whissell, C. (2008). A comparison of two lists providing emotional norms
for English words (ANEW and the DAL). Psychological Reports,
102(2), 597–600. doi:10.2466/pr0.102.2.597-600
Whissell, C.M. (1999). Holding emotional and linguistic rulers up to the
poetry of Robert Frost. Psychological Reports, 85(3), 751–758. doi:
10.2466/pr0.1999.85.3.751
Wilson, M.D. (1988). The MRC psycholinguistic database: Machine-
usable dictionary, Version 2.00. Behavior Research Methods, 20(1),
6–11. doi:10.3758/BF03202594
Witten, I.H., & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical machine
learning tools and techniques (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Zakaluk, B.L., & Samuels, S.J. (1988). Toward a new approach to
predicting text comprehensibility. In B.L. Zakaluk & S.J. Samuels
(Eds.), Readability: Its past, present, and future (pp. 121–144). Newark,
DE: International Reading Association. Available at http://eric.ed.gov/
PDFS/ED292058.pdf
Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H., & Huang, Z. (2006). A framework for
authorship identification of online messages: Writing-style features
and classification techniques. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 57(3), 378–393. doi:10.1002/
asi.20316
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2012 2181
DOI: 10.1002/asi
