 
 
Detecting deception through RST:  
A case study of the Casey Anthony trial 
 
Kelli Lynn Finney 
Simon Fraser University 
kfinney@sfu.ca 
 
 
Many researchers have used linguistic analyses to determine if 
features, such as syntactic patterns or word choice, vary based on the 
truth or untruth of an utterance. For example, Newman et al. (2003) 
examined lying in written communication, finding that deceptive 
utterances used more total words but fewer personal pronouns. 
However, relatively few studies have focused on speech or writing 
style, which can be used to aid in authorship attribution and 
plagiarism identification (Cristani et al., 2012), and would thus seem 
to prove valuable for detecting deception. 
 Recently, efforts have been made to remedy this by extending 
the application of linguistic feature analysis. For example, Rubin and 
Lukoianova (2014) applied Mann and Thompson’s (1987) Rhetorical 
Structure Theory (RST) to elicited written narratives that participants 
self-identified as either truthful or deceitful. Their findings suggest 
that RST relations, illustrative of functional relationships between 
‘spans’ of text, vary based on the truthfulness of the narratives. 
However, this study, like previous studies, relies on researcher-
prompted untruths rather than naturally occurring ones. As such, 
participants have little motivation to make the deception believable, 
unlike in real-world situations. 
 The present study thus combines linguistic analysis with an 
examination of naturally occurring deception in the high-stakes setting 
of the State of Florida versus Casey Marie Anthony, in order to 
determine if findings like those of Rubin and Lukoianova (2014) are 
generalizable to deceptive statements in real-world settings. From 
publically available legal case documents, a corpus of 724 words (65 
text segments) was selected and RST relations were coded. While 
some of Rubin and Lukoianova’s (2014) findings were minimally 
supported, no strong correlation between relations and the truth value 
of an utterance were found, suggesting the need for additional 
research in this area. 
Keywords: Rhetorical Structure Theory; RST; deception; deceptive 
statements 
 
 
1   Introduction: Detecting deception by linguistic means 
 
Many researchers have used linguistic analysis to determine if features, such as 
syntactic patterns and word choice, vary based on the truth or untruth of an 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
13 
utterance. For example, Newman et al. (2003) examined lying in written 
communication, finding that deceptive utterances used a greater number of words 
as well as fewer personal pronouns. Hancock et al. (2007) conducted a 
comparable study of synchronous computer mediated communication with 
similar findings. It is notable, however, that relatively few studies have focused 
specifically on speech or writing style, which can be used to aid in authorship 
attribution and plagiarism identification (Cristani et al., 2012), and would thus 
seem to prove valuable for detecting deception. 
More recently, some have made efforts to remedy this, thereby extending 
the application of linguistic feature analysis. For example, Rubin and Lukoianova 
(2014) applied Mann and Thompson’s (1987) Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) 
to elicited written narratives that participants described as being either truthful or 
deceitful. After examining the groups of 18 deceptive stories and 18 truthful 
stories collected from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk website, they found that the 
RST relations, illustrative of functional relationships between ‘spans’ of text, 
varied based on the truthfulness of the narratives. While these studies suggest that 
a relationship does exist between the truthfulness of utterances and linguistic 
variables, they all rely upon researcher-prompted untruths rather than naturally 
occurring ones. As such, study participants have little motivation to make the 
deception believable, unlike in a real-world situation. 
Other fields, such as psychology, note a similar lack of non-laboratory 
studies. Vrij and Mann (2001) comment that their study, examining the deceptive 
and truthful statements of a convicted murderer, was, at the time, the only known 
study of its type in a “high-stakes realistic setting” (p. 187). This study, while in 
such a setting, did not approach deception detection from a linguistic framework, 
it focused instead on the potential correlation of specific behaviors with 
deception.  
The present study thus extends previous work by combining linguistic 
analysis with the examination of naturally occurring deception in the high-stakes 
setting of a courtroom trial. It is hypothesized that deceptive statements will 
evidence different RST relations than those found in truthful statements. Prior to 
presenting the analysis and accompanying results, however, some background 
related to the subtopics of study will be helpful. 
This background comprises two main categories: an overview of RST and 
its applications and a survey of the use of linguistic research in deception 
detection. Following this, several case studies employing linguistics for deception 
detection are introduced. An examination of these works evidences the possibility 
of employing linguistic feature analysis for detecting deception, and shows the 
strong potential that RST has in such analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
14 
2   Introduction to RST and stylometry 
 
2.1   RST: Purpose and applications 
 
Rhetorical structure theory (RST) is an attempt to make visible the organization 
of a text by illustrating functional relationships (Mann & Thompson, 1987). This 
is done by chunking a text, identifying nuclei (main units) and satellites 
(supplementary units) of each block of text, and labeling the corresponding 
relationship between nuclei and satellites. Taboada and Mann (2006) summarize 
the variety of applications of RST, from identification of key parts in an 
evaluative text (such as a movie review) to essay scoring, to writing instruction. 
Not only does RST provide a way of organizing relationships within text, it 
can also potentially provide information about the types of relationships that 
characterize a particular genre (Benwell, 1999, as cited in Taboada & Mann, 
2004). While RST has been applied to numerous linguistic situations, 
surprisingly, only one study was found that used it to analyze textual relations as 
a distinctive stylistic feature (discussed in Section 3.2). Thus, the present study, 
which does so, serves to remedy this gap and provide an innovative application of 
RST. 
 
2.2   Written idiolects and stylometric analysis 
 
Some, such as Coulthard (2004) have proposed that a set of linguistic features 
found in writing functions in the same manner as an idiolect. He speculates that 
an individual’s writing contains unique characteristics that can assist with such 
issues as authorship identification and plagiarism, serving as a “linguistic 
fingerprint” of sorts. Following from his proposal, numerous studies have 
employed ‘stylometry,’ the statistical analysis of the presence of various 
linguistic features, in order to determine authorship. One of the most widely-
known cases where stylometry was successfully employed in author identification 
is that of the Unabomber. For nearly two decades, this United States-based 
terrorist sent bombs to individuals and universities, and threatened airlines. Due 
to his use of common scrap materials in bomb construction, the bombs proved 
untraceable. It was not until he sent an essay to the FBI in the mid-1990s to 
explain his motives and, perhaps, seek recognition, that authorities were able to 
make progress on the case. The essay he sent was published in various national 
newspapers; the individual’s brother recognized the writing style, and provided 
writing samples to authorities (FBI, 2008). After comparing these numerous 
samples to the essay, the Unabomber was eventually identified from the presence 
of various idiolect features, such as the use of a particular set of phrases. 
While stylometry potentially encompasses numerous categories of 
linguistic features, including lexical (e.g. word frequencies, n-grams, and depth of 
vocabulary), syntactic (e.g. types of phrases), and character, semantic, and genre-
specific features, most studies have focused on lexical features (Stamatatos, 
2011). This is likely because, of all possible features, these are the easiest to 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
15 
collect, count, and describe statistically. Newman et al. (2003), for example, 
examine such features as the frequency and type of personal pronouns used, the 
use and type of conjunctions, and the use and type of prepositions in deceptive 
and truthful statements. The frequencies were compared not only between 
statements with differing truth value, but also among typed, handwritten, and 
spoken text formats wherein university students provided deceptive and true 
statements regarding their views on abortion. 
Some, however, have extended the breadth of stylometric analyses by 
exploring other linguistic feature patterns. For example, in an attempt to assist 
with genre classification, Picornell (2013) examined cohesion and coherence 
relations and syntactic structures in addition to lexical features in written witness 
statements. Also in an attempt to move beyond lexical counts in stylometric 
analyses, Cristani et al. (2012) examined conversational features such as turn-
taking in naturally-occurring instant messaging conversations to assist with 
authorship identification. 
 
3   Linguistic methods of detecting deception 
 
3.1   Stylometric analysis for deception detection 
 
One field where stylometry has been widely applied is in the field of forensic 
linguistics. While identifying authorship is still a main focus, the application of 
stylometry has been extended to the analysis of written witness statements to 
differentiate between truthful utterances and deceptive ones (Picornell, 2013). In 
addition, actual tools used by law enforcement often incorporate features of 
linguistic style analysis, such as the statement validity analysis checklist 
mentioned by Porter and Yuille (1996), which includes analysis of coherence in 
statements. 
While it thus appears that stylometry might be a useful tool in a forensic 
setting, others, including some working in law enforcement, are skeptical. For 
example, Armistead (2012) notes that such analyses have methodological 
problems, including the presumption that deceptive statements differ from 
truthful ones in ways that are observable and consistent. In addition, Armistead 
(2012) comments that, even if it were the case that such a consistent pattern was 
established, implementing the techniques used in the studies would not be 
practical in a law enforcement setting. However, he acknowledges that these 
linguistic studies of deception do have the benefit of being subject to academic 
scrutiny, in terms of being peer reviewed and empirically tested. Thus, it is 
probable that a linguistic method of deception detection could be implemented by 
law enforcement professionals in the future, if such a method could provide 
consistent results and be easily used by non-linguists. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
16 
3.2   Extension of RST to deception detection 
 
With RST serving as a way of identifying the structural relationships between 
parts of a text, and potentially, in combination with such theories as that of 
Biber’s (2011) continua, extending to an identification of characteristic patterns 
in a particular register or genre, it would seem that using RST to compare truthful 
and deceptive utterances would be a natural extension of the theory. Recently, 
some have attempted to do so, namely Rubin and Lukoianova (2014). The 
authors collected a sample of truthful and deceptive narratives and then analyzed 
these using a combination of RST and vector space modeling. Representing the 
stories as vectors allowed them to arrange stories in similarity-based clusters, 
determined by identified levels of truth or deception. In turn, this allowed them to 
statistically analyze the clusters based on the RST relations found. 
The results seem to suggest that, as hypothesized for the present study, a 
different set of RST relations characterizes deceptive stories than characterizes 
truthful stories. For example, Rubin and Lukoianova (2014) found that summary, 
preparation, unconditional, and disjunction relations appeared only in the 
deceptive stories, while enablement, restatement, and evidence were found only 
in the truthful stories. However, since this study relied on elicited stories that 
were ranked by their authors as deceptive or truthful, rather than real-world cases 
of deception or truth, it is unclear whether these results can be generalized. If it is 
the case that a similar pattern is found in a high-stakes setting using naturally 
occurring deception and truth, RST analysis could become a useful tool for law 
enforcement analyses of suspect and witness statements. 
 
4   Introduction to the data 
 
In selecting data for this analysis, it was necessary to find legal documents that 
were both easily accessible, and, more importantly, that contained examples of 
both statements determined to be deceptive and statements determined to be 
truthful. The documents selected are from the case of the State of Florida versus 
Casey Marie Anthony. This case centred on the disappearance of the defendant’s 
two-year-old daughter, Caylee Marie Anthony. Dubbed “the social media trial of 
the century” by TIME magazine (Cloud, 2011), the case received daily media 
coverage for nearly three years (2008-2011) in both newspapers and television, as 
well as in fields such as Twitter, which hosted feeds from both the Orlando 
Sentinel as well as Florida’s Ninth Judicial Circuit Court, among others (Cloud, 
2011). 
Initially, it is likely that the public was captivated by disbelief that a mother 
would refrain from reporting her child’s disappearance to anyone for a month, as 
Anthony did. However, as coverage of the case progressed, attention shifted to 
the numerous lies that Anthony told when providing statements to the police, all 
the while pleading for their help in locating her daughter. Such news outlets as 
ABC even published articles listing these lies, complete with links to audio 
recordings of the defendant’s interviews with police (Hopper, 2011). At the time 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
17 
of writing, YouTube still hosts videos of the trial proceedings, and both official 
statements from the Orange County Sheriff’s office, as well as interview 
transcripts, are accessible to the public online. 
 
4.1   Methodology 
 
The texts selected for analysis were obtained online from media.trb, which in turn 
obtained them from the Orlando Sentinel. Both portions of Casey Anthony’s 
written statement as well as her responses to police, as recorded in interview 
transcripts, were analyzed. The written statement was that provided by Casey 
Anthony to the Orange County Sheriff’s Office (OCSO) on July 16, 2008, and 
consists of 680 words. The interview transcript is that of the July 23, 2008 
interview between Anthony and OCSO Detective Melich. In its entirety, the 
statement consists of 13,495 words. Of this total, 4,346 words were those of the 
defendant. Combining Anthony’s written statement and her remarks from the 
interview transcript yielded a corpus of 5,026 words. 
From this corpus, portions comprising 31 and 34 segments of text, 
respectively, were selected. This was done for two reasons. First, since the 
purpose of the study was to determine if different RST relations characterize true 
versus deceptive texts, it was thought that it would be beneficial to compare two 
text portions that contained a similar number of segments in order to potentially 
obtain a comparable number of relations. Second, especially at the beginning of 
the interview, Anthony’s responses consist of “Uh-huh,” coded by the transcriber 
as an indication of an affirmative response. It was thought that analysis of 
‘content full’ responses would provide more useful results. 
The resulting corpus from the interview transcript consisted of 259 words 
comprising 34 segments, and that from the written statement consisted of 465 
words in 31 text segments. In total, the written statement portion and the selected 
responses from the interview transcript consisted of 724 words and 65 segments. 
Due to space constraints, the written statement and interview transcripts are not 
herein included; however, a URL where they can be accessed is provided in the 
reference section (Guide to Casey Anthony case legal documents, n.d.) 
The documents, originally in .pdf form, were manually converted to plain 
text format and then imported into RST tool for annotation (O’Donnell, 2003). 
The written statement was analyzed separately from the interview remarks. In 
RST tool, each text was segmented following sentence boundaries (the original 
statement did not have paragraph boundaries; these were not added). After 
segmenting each text, RST structures were identified and RST relations indicated, 
using the provided set of “classic” relations from RST tool. 
Since portions containing deceptive statements and potentially truthful 
statements were often in relationship with one another, the decision was made to 
analyze the RST relations in each text as a whole, and then compare the relations 
in the deceptive parts to those in the truthful portions. This also helped to guard 
against bias in the analysis. As the goal of the study is to determine whether 
specific sets of RST relations correlate with the truthfulness or deceptiveness of 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
18 
statements, being conscious of the truth value during analysis would call the 
validity of the results into question. 
After all texts were marked in RST tool, the portions of each were coded as 
being deceptive or truthful. Deceptiveness of the texts was determined using the 
list of lies in Hopper (2011), as well as by the statements made by OCSO 
Detective Melich in the July 23, 2008 interview, wherein he identifies certain of 
the defendant’s statements as such. Other portions not explicitly identified as lies 
were coded as true.1 Following this, a list of relations and their frequencies were 
compiled for both the deceptive texts and the truthful texts. Finally, the relations 
identified in the deceptive texts were compared to those found in the truthful 
texts. 
 
5   RST relations in deceptive and truthful texts 
 
After completing RST analyses of the written text segment and interview 
transcript excerpts, each chunk of text was identified as either truthful or 
deceptive, and the relations in each were compared. In the interview excerpts, one 
chunk, identified as the ‘phone call’ text, was almost entirely deceptive with the 
exception of two text spans (16-17). The RST analysis of this text is provided in 
Figure 1. 
 
                                                   
1 Identifying statements based on proven truthfulness, either through police statements in 
the interview transcripts or court determinations, would have been methodologically 
stronger (Thank you to a reviewer for noting this). Doing so was the original intent. 
However, the nature of the material made this a difficult task. Most transcripts featured 
police working to uncover falsehoods rather than corroborate truths, which follows from 
the structure of the US justice system: a suspect is innocent until proven guilty. Thus, all 
statements are held to be true until they are proved false. It would, perhaps, be more 
appropriate to view the ‘truthful’ statements as ‘non-false’ statements. 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
19 
 
Figure 1: RST analysis of "phone call" text 
 
The other interview text, termed the ‘park’ text, a portion of which is presented in 
Figure 2, was judged to be entirely true. 
 
 
Figure 2: RST analysis of ‘park’ text, spans 8-17 
 
The written statement portion, however, showed fluidity between true and 
deceptive portions. For example, the true spans describing Anthony’s daughter 
(spans 2-6 in Figure 3) are provided as background to the deceptive information 
about Zenaida the nanny, who never existed, in spans 8-15. 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
20 
 
Figure 3: RST analysis of portion of ‘statement’ text 
 
Table 1 summarizes the RST relations found in both the truthful and deceptive 
text portions and indicates the frequency with which the various relation types 
occur. 
 
Relation Name Deceptive  Truthful 
Elaboration 14 13 
Circumstance 4 1 
Evaluation 0 2 
Evidence 1 2 
Justify 0 2 
Interpretation 0 1 
Conjunction 1 0 
Restatement 1 0 
Antithesis 1 0 
Condition 1 0 
Solutionhood 1 0 
Volitional-Cause 1 0 
Table 1: Frequencies of RST relations in analyzed texts 
 
Most noticeable about the RST relations in the two classes of text is the similarity 
between the number of elaboration relations, with 13 relations of this type in the 
truthful text portions, and 14 in the deceptive text portions. However, since 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
21 
elaboration is one of the most common discourse relations, this is not surprising. 
Also of note are the wider range of relations found in the deceptive texts, with 
nine different types of relations found as compared to six in the truthful text 
excerpts. 
In addition, several spans of text were judged as showing a relation 
between a deceptive portion and a truthful one. These include spans 2-6 with 
spans 8-15 in the written statement (presented in Figure 3) and spans 15-17 in the 
‘phone call’ portion of the interview transcript (seen above in Figure 1). 
Rubin and Lukoianova (2014), in their RST analysis of narratives 
discussed in Section 3.2, found that a limited set of relationships characterized 
each of the classes of deceptive and truthful texts. Based on their conclusions, it 
was hypothesized that such relations as disjunction, unconditional, summary, and 
preparation would characterize deceptive texts, while enablement, restatement, 
and evidence would describe truthful texts. However, this was not the case. 
Instead, as seen in Table 1, some relations such as evidence and elaboration were 
found in both deceptive and truthful texts. 
 
6   Discussion and conclusions 
 
It was hoped that the truth value of statements would show a clearer correlation 
with the types of RST relations found. However, this was not the case. This could 
be due to a variety of factors. For example, the defendant, Casey Anthony, was 
known by friends to be a habitual liar (this was revealed over the course of the 
trial). As someone becomes more adept at deceiving, it is likely that the relations, 
which may have once differed from those found in truthful statements, would 
become similar. It is also possible that Anthony herself came to believe some of 
the lies she told, which would likely result in a patterning of the relations in such 
statements with those identified as true. 
On a more practical level, it is also likely that the amount of text analyzed, 
as well as the type of text analyzed, contributed to the inconclusive nature of the 
results. In a small sample of text, the number of possible RST relations will be 
comparatively small. This is especially true of the interview transcript portions. 
Often, the spans of Anthony’s answers were in relation with the questions posed 
by the interviewer rather than with each other. By separating these from their 
context, it was more difficult to see cohesive links between the spans. The length 
of her responses, often merely an “Uh-huh” or a “Yes” did not provide enough 
content to determine a relationship. 
Likewise, the topic of the passage was perhaps not ideal for the purpose of 
an RST analysis. In the written statement, Anthony focuses mostly on a 
description of her daughter, the nanny, and the circumstances surrounding her 
daughter’s disappearance. The interview statements also showed a similar 
elaborative structure. Possibly, selecting texts from the genre of written court 
statements or trial transcripts requires a more thorough perusal of content prior to 
analysis in order to obtain data that does not focus solely on elaboration. It is also 
possible that the interview transcripts and the written statement are better 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
22 
classified as different sub-genres, and would thus not be appropriate for a 
comparative analysis such as the present one. 
In addition to the excessive number of elaboration relations found, another 
difficulty encountered when completing the RST analysis was the definitions of 
RST relations themselves. That is, the wording of the definitions conveys the 
assumption that the provided text is not flouting Grice’s maxim of quality. For 
example, it seems that the relation of Circumstance, by its very definition, implies 
that a statement must be true, in that it states that “S is not unrealized” (Mann & 
Thompson, 1987). If a satellite describes a situation that did not occur because it 
is in itself deceptive, it seems that a circumstance relation should not be possible. 
Despite the difficulties encountered in the current analysis, and the 
inconclusive results, it is still thought that RST could prove to be a valuable tool 
for law enforcement professionals. Additional studies examining RST relations in 
deceptive and truthful statements that use larger corpora of data, as well as a 
wider range of data types (i.e. audio and video statements or interview responses), 
would be beneficial in making such a determination. It also seems that RST 
relations might be better used in conjunction with other facets of linguistic feature 
analysis such as syntactic patterns and word choice, rather than being used as the 
sole means of determining the truth value of an individual’s statements. Doing so 
would likely provide an analysis having greater depth and breadth, and, more 
importantly, would increase the credibility of using linguistic analyses in law 
enforcement settings while guarding against RST analysis becoming either a law 
enforcement fad or a linguistic polygraph. 
 
References 
 
Armistead, T. W. (2012). The detection of deception by linguistic means. 
Policing: An international journal of police strategies and management, 
35(2), 304–326. 
Biber, D. (2011). Register and discourse analysis. In Gee, J. P. & Handford. M. 
(Eds.) The Routledge handbook of discourse analysis (191-208). New 
York: Routledge. 
Cloud, J. (2011). How the Casey Anthony murder case became the social-media 
trial of the century. TIME. Retrieved from: content.time.com/ 
nation/article/0,8599,2077969,99.html 
Coulthard, M. (2004). Author identification, idiolect, and linguistic uniqueness. 
Applied Linguistics, 25(4), 431–447.  
Cristani, M., Roffo, G., Segalin, C., Bazzani, L., Vinciarelli, A. & Murino, V. 
(2012). Conversationally-inspired stylometric features for authorship 
attribution in instant messaging. Proceedings of the 20th ACM international 
conference on multimedia (1121–1124). Retrieved from: 
http://dl.acm.org.proxy.lib.sfu.ca/citation.cfm?id=2396398. 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) (2008). FBI 100: The unabomer. Retrieved 
from: https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2008/april/unabomber_042408 
 
 
 
Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 25(2), 12–23 
© 2015 Kelli Lynn Finney 
 
 
23 
Guide to Casey Anthony case legal documents. n.d. [Data file]. Retrieved from: 
media.trb.com/media/acrobat/2008-08/41844520.pdf 
Hancock, J. T., Curry, L. E., Goorha, S. & Woodworth, M. (2007). On lying and 
being lied to: A linguistic analysis of deception in computer-mediated 
communication. Discourse Processes, 45(1), 1–23. 
Hopper, J. (2011). Listen to Casey Anthony’s top ten lies. ABC news. Retrieved 
from: http://abcnews.go.com/US/casey_anthony_trial/casey-anthony-top-
ten-lies/story?id=13742643 
Mann, W. C. & Thompson, S. A. (1987). Rhetorical structure theory: A theory of 
text organization. Retrieved from: http://www.sfu.ca/rst/pdfs/ 
Mann_Thompson_1987.pdf 
Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J.W., Berry, D. S. & Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying 
words: Predicting deception from linguistic styles. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 29(5), 665–675. 
O’Donnell, M. (2003). RST tool, version 3.4.1. WagSoft. 
http://www.wagsoft.com/RSTTool/ 
Picornell, I. (2013). Analysing deception in written witness statements. Linguistic 
Evidence in Security, Law and Intelligence (LESLI), 1(1), 41–50.  
Porter, S. & Yuille, J. C. (1996). The language of deceit: An investigation of the 
verbal clues to deception in the interrogation context. Law and Human 
Behaviour, 20(4), 443–458.  
Rubin, V. L. & Lukoianova, T. (2014). Truth and deception at the rhetorical 
structure level. Journal of the Association for Science and Technology, 
66(5), 905–917. 
Stamatatos, E. (2011). Plagiarism detection using stopword n-grams. Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(12), 
2512–2527.  
Taboada, M. & Mann, W. C. (2006). Applications of rhetorical structure theory. 
Discourse Studies, 8(4), 567–588.  
Vrij, A. & Mann, S. (2001). Telling and detecting lies in a high-stakes situation: 
The case of a convicted murderer. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15(2), 
187–203. 
 
 
