Automatic Identification Genre of Audiovisual 
Documents  
Manel Fourati, Anis Jedidi, Faiez Gargouri  
Laboratory MIR@CL 
University of Sfax. 
Sfax, Tunis 
Manel.Fourati@fsegs.rnu.tn, jedidianis@gmail.com, faiez.gargouri@isimsf.rnu.tn 
 
 
Abstract—Identifying the Genre of an audiovisual document is 
among the major challenges for multimedia retrieval. Indeed, 
the lack of semantic metadata extraction makes these resources 
underused in the retrieval process. To overcome these 
difficulties, the extraction of semantic descriptions requires an 
analysis of the audiovisual document’s content. The 
automation of the process of describing audiovisual documents 
is essential because of the richness and the diversity of the 
available analytical criteria. In this paper, we present a method 
that allows the identification of a semantic and automatic 
description from the content such as genre. We chose to 
describe the cinematic audiovisual documents based on the 
documentation prepared in the pre-production phase of films, 
namely synopsis. The experimental result on Imdb (Internet 
Movie Database) and the Wikipedia encyclopedia indicate that 
our method of genre detection is better than the result of these 
corpuses. 
Keywords—Identification, Audiovisual documents, Genre, 
Semantic.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
The quantity of audiovisual data available on the web 
and in audiovisual information databases is growing 
exponentially. Despite the use of adaptive techniques of 
information research in the exploration of audiovisual 
documents, the problem of the user’s dissatisfaction persists 
in different dimensions such as the exploitation and the 
research on audiovisual documents, especially the cinematic 
documents. To resolve this problem, we find it essential to 
extract some representative descriptions of content of 
cinematic documents such as genre descriptions. 
Knowing that the genre represents a significant 
description for the films [1], we focus on the extraction of 
this description through a textual analysis from an 
unstructured textual document. The originality of the 
proposed method is that the extraction of the genre 
description is made in an automatic and semantic way. 
This paper is organized as follows: The next section 
discusses the related works that deal with different 
techniques of genre and key word identifying of audiovisual 
documents. Section 3 is an overview of our approach of 
extracting genre. Section 4 presents the experiments of 
audiovisual genre detection. Finally, the last section 
concludes the paper and deals with future works. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
In order to identify the genre’s audiovisual documents, it 
is necessary to extract representative descriptions of the 
audiovisual document. The use of these descriptions is a 
necessary condition to reach the required information easily. 
In this section, we present an overview of the most relevant 
works proposed in literature related to the description and 
identification of audiovisual genre and the textual document 
genre. 
A. Genre audiovisual identification 
As part of the identification genre’s audiovisual 
documents, several approaches are based on the 
classification of the general genre, namely [2] and [3].  
[2] used the weighted kernel logistic regression for video 
classification in the following genres: News, Sport and 
Movies. In order to extract the appropriate features, the 
authors extracted the key frames, used DCT (Discrete 
Cosine Transform) to obtain DCT coefficients and applied 
PCA (Principal Component Analysis) to select the pertinent 
DCT coefficients. However, [3] have used a set of 
computational features from visual characteristics (effects, 
motion and color) for video classification in the following 
genres: Sports, Music, news, cartoons and commercials.  
Some works proposed methods to identify the genre’s 
content of the audiovisual document; significant ones are [4] 
and [5]. [4] suggested, for movie genre categorization, a 
method have used low level visual features from scene 
categorization. This method use movie trailers for video 
classification in the following genres: action, comedy, 
drama, and horror. Gregory pais mentioned in [5] the use of 
a symbolic fusion between the textual information 
(extracted from synopsis) and color and activity information 
(extracted from image) for identifying animated movie 
genre “Drama”. In our work, we focus on genre 
identification of films’ content. We used textual information 
(synopsis) to identify all genres of films.  
B. Description of the textual document genre 
 Some works propose methods based on linguistic 
analysis and some others are based on statistic analysis. [6] 
proposed a method of the statistical discriminant analysis. 
The inputs of this method are the features extracted from the 
document such as a part of speech tagger and personal 
pronouns. The outputs are a set of discriminant functions 
that distinguish between genres. To improve his results, 
Karlgren [7] uses other simple statistical features: sentence 
length, word length, syntactic complexity. In [8] in order to 
identify the genre, the authors use word frequency and 
frequency of punctuation marks. To predict the membership 
to the genre group, Stamatos applies the discriminant 
analysis used in the works of [6]. 
A more interesting method in the literature is the use of 
the statistic frequency of words in the text. [9] and [10] 
propose using a weighting method which is commonly used 
for information retrieval, the TF-IDF. [11] introduced the 
deviation formula of TF-IDF to Tf ratio and Idf ratio to 
obtain a set of training documents used for the statistic 
classifier Naive Bayesian. [12] describes an approach based 
on linguistic analysis. This method uses linguistic cues to 
identify generic and automatic genres. These cues are 
classified into four categories: structural cues (e.g. passive, 
nominalization, part-of-speech…), lexical cues (e.g. terms 
of address (Mr., Ms.), character-level cues (e.g. punctuation 
marks) and derivative cues (e.g. ratios and measures of 
variation). Brett uses the statistical technique LR (Logistic 
Regression) and neural network (single and multilayer 
perceptron) as computational methods   for modeling a 
response using a binary logic function. In [13], the author 
identifies the genre by analyzing the linguistic content of 
words appearing in the transcripts of the audio tracks of 
video. The method defines stop words frequency as 
discriminant terms of genre by applying the metric TF-IDF 
(Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) for the 
genre and not the document. 
More recently, [14] has reported in his work the use of 
words frequency and genre frequency. He selected four 
genres (fantasy, Science Fiction, Philosophy and classical 
literature) and computed the frequency of these genres in the 
dictionary (GWFD) and the frequency of words in several 
books and then he built a set of frequency dictionary words 
(OWFD). The most frequent words of the dictionary are 
selected as pertinent. In order to identify genres, Hyoyoung 
selected four colors and drew ellipses on these colors to 
indicate the genre of each word. Though interesting, the 
methods presented in the literature are hampered by 
shortcomings. They provide linguistic and statistical 
analyses without considering the semantics contained in the 
document.  Such semantic descriptions extracted from the 
content of the document become a necessary condition for 
linking the document content and description. 
In this paper, we propose a method of genre detection of 
audiovisual documents using the pre-production documents. 
A more interesting method taking into account the statistic, 
the linguistic and the semantic analysis, which is described 
in the rest of this paper. 
III. OVERVIEW OF THE APPROACH 
To describe the genre of audiovisual document, different 
axes are used such as audio, video, soundtracks. The 
objective behind this description is a better identification 
and retrieval of the audiovisual document. We will 
concentrate on the pre-production documentation to extract 
automatic genre and key words of the audiovisual 
document. The synopsis is a pre-production document 
which contains a lot of important information. It represents a 
summary of the script and describes the outlines of the 
film’s story. Indeed, the more semantic description there is, 
the more the user's satisfaction is ensured. We will reserve 
this section to provide an overview of our proposed 
approach for the identification of genre and key words’ 
audiovisual documents.  
To identify these descriptions, we are trying to conceive 
a system based on the extraction of semantics from the 
audiovisual document. The specificity of our annotation 
approach of audiovisual documents using the pre-production 
document is based on a combination of a statistical, 
linguistic and a semantic analysis. The entire process of our 
approach is automatic. Figure 1 describes this method, 
which consists of four phases that we can shortly explain as 
follows: 1) The Pre-treatment phase, 2) The Genres’ 
Extraction phase, 3) The Genres’ Identification phase, and 
4) The Key words identification phase. 
 
Fig. 1. Identification of Audiovisual Documents’ Description. 
A. The pre-treatment phase 
The first phase of our approach is a pre-treatment phase. 
The input of this phase is the synopsis and the output is the 
vector which contains the most frequent terms of the 
document (V). From the synopsis we extract the pertinent 
phrases synopsis using the tool KEA (Key phrase Extraction) 
[15]. When the key phrases are extracted, we eliminate all 
semantically insignificant terms (removing the stop words) 
and lemmatizing each term using the Stanford lemmatizer. 
Finally, we extract the vector which contains the most 
frequent terms of the document. This vector represents the 
starting point of the second phase of our process: the Genre 
s’ extraction phase. 
B.  The Genres Extraction phase  
In our work we identify all cinematic genres (e.g. 
Action, Adventure, Drama, science-fiction, comedy...). Two 
different techniques are used to extract the genre description 
from the document: The statistical measure TF-IDF and the 
semantic similarity measures. 
• The statistical measure TF-IDF used to evaluate the 
importance of a term contained in a document. We 
propose adapting the TF-IDF metric not only to the 
predefined genres but to their synonyms and 
Genre Identification
Pre-treatment phase
Synopsys
Semantic processing
List of Genre
Action
Adventure
Drama
…
WordNet
Synonym
Hypernym
Statistic Analysis
TF*IDF
Semantic similarity
measures
Genre Extraction
phase 
Genre identification  
phase 
Key word identification  
phase 
hypernyms which are extracted from the semantic 
lexical database WordNet. 
• The semantic similarity measures used to compute the 
semantic distance between terms/genres. We exploit 
these measures to estimate the proximity of each term 
(ie the most frequent words) in the different concepts 
extracted (ie genre, synonym and hypernym). In 
literature, several metrics have been proposed. The 
typical measures that we decided to adopt are: the 
Jaccard [18], the Cosine [19], the Dice [20] and the 
Overlap [21] measures. 
Consider a matrix, M, which contains the extracted 
genres with their synonyms and hyperonyms. A directed 
acyclic graph, G=(S, A) represents the result of this phase of 
our process. With S= {vertices} = {TFIDF, Jaccard, Dice, 
Overlap, Cosine}, A = {edges} = {res tfidf, res jaccard, res 
dice, res overlap, res cosine}, res i = {Ti, V, C}, Ti=Term i, 
V= measured value and ‘C’= instance of genre. For each 
term Ti, we calculate the values for two different techniques 
previously cited (TF-IDF and The semantic similarity 
measures) to obtain the result res i. If the term Ti has a non-
zero value it will be stored in the graph G. Below, we 
present an example:  
If (resTfIDF(Ti, M)! =0) then 
G[1] add(Ti, V, C) 
        End if 
        If (rescosine(Ti, M)! =0) then 
G [2]add(Ti, V, C) 
        End if 
C. The Genre Identification phase  
The result from the genre extraction phase is the base 
core of the Genre Identification. The oriented acyclic graph 
G represents all the genres automatically extracted from the 
document in the different techniques previously cited. The 
Following Figure shows an example of a modelling graph 
chained list. 
 
Fig. 1. example of a modelling graph 
 
In order to identify the key genres from the content of a 
document, the main idea is to find the related words for each 
genre. Each genre ‘C’ contains one or several terms ‘Ti’, 
and each term ‘Ti’ has at least one representative value. We 
propose measuring the pertinence of each genre. Two cases 
are then possible: 
•   max 	v   If the term Ti refers to the genre 
‘C’through more than one distance. Where: wTi is the 
weight of the term Ti in the genre ‘C’. 
•    v     If the term Ti refers to the genre ‘C’ 
through only a single distance. 
The pertinence of a genre ‘C’ is measured by the 
following formula:           
	 
∑  

           (1) 
where nb represents the number of terms according to 
the genre ‘C’. Below, we present an example of pertinence 
computing. 
We assume that C1 = Action and as shown in Figure 
1the terms T1, T2 and T5 are related to C1 ie. wT1= max 
(v1, v2, v8, v10), wT2=v4 and wT5= max (v7, v11)  
 pert(c1)=( wT1+ wT2+ wT5)/ 3 
To sum up, our automatic system gives as a result some 
semantic genres extracted from the content. The genre 
having the highest pertinence represents the dominant genre 
in the description extracted and all the other concepts are 
considered as secondary genres.  
D. The Key word identification phase 
When the genres are extracted from a semantic and 
automatic process, we identify the key words related to the 
content of audiovisual document. Below, we present an 
algorithm which shows the steps of the extraction Key 
words description. 
Algorithm Key word identification  
Input: GS = {Cj}: a vector of genre extracted 
from the previous phase.  
Output: T: vector of key words 
Begin: 
S_genre: size_GS  
k: size_key_word 
V: a vector of most frequent terms of 
synopsis. 
K  0 
For i in [1..S_genre] 
  For j in [1..nb] 
    If(term_most_frequent(Tj,V)) then  
       T[k] Tj 
       K K+1 
    EndIf 
  EndFor 
EndFor 
End 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTS:  
We collected 150 English documents from the online 
database Imdb (Internet Movie Database) [22]. This base 
categorizes films in one to five genres from twenty-four 
genres. In our work, we use all genres of films (33 genres 
extracted from the Imdb and the Wikipedia encyclopedia). 
These web collections are used for testing and training the 
genre identification proposed in this paper.  
In [23], we tested our experimental result in only 60 
documents. We used criteria for measuring performance: 
exhaustivity and specificity. In this paper, we tested our 
experimental result in 150 synopses and we compared our 
approach with the result already mentioned in the Wikipedia 
TF*IDF Jaccard Dice Overlap Cosine
T1 v1 c1 T1 v2 c1
T1 v3 c2T2 v4 c1
T3 v5 c3
T4
T5
T1
T2
T2
v9
v9 c3 T5 v11 c1
T1 v10 c1
v7 c1
c2v6
v8 c1
c2
encyclopedia and in the Imdb database. To evaluate our 
experiment results, we used the following criteria: recall, 
precision and F-measure. The obtained results are presented 
in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  THE PERFORMANCE MEASURES. 
 Our Approach [5] 
precision 58% 43% 
recall 41% 81% 
Fscore 48.04% 46% 
As shown in Table I, we compared our approach with 
the work presented in [5]. The value shown in the Table I 
represent the performance measures of its work using the 
synopsis of the film. The authors tested their work on 107 
synopses and used only the genre “drama”. The results 
were: P=43%, R=81% and Fscore=46%. By comparing the 
performance measures of our test outcome with these 
values, we find that the experimental results are interesting, 
as 150 synopses are tested for all genres of movies. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an automatic audiovisual documents 
genre and key words description. The objective of this 
approach is to overcome the semantic analysis gap in order 
to extract the audiovisual genre. In this context, we use the 
pre-production documents to combine the statistical analysis 
and the semantic analysis. Our statistical analysis is based 
on the TF-IDF.  We propose adapting this metric to the 
semantic lexical database WordNet. In addition, we exploit 
four semantic similarity measures to estimate the proximity 
between terms and genres. In our future work, we plan to 
explore the structuring and the homogenization of the 
descriptions by XML descriptors (metadata) integrated in 
the MPEG7 standard. 
VI. REFERENCES 
[1] Marc, N., Jocelyne N., Peter, R. King and Ludovic, G. 2007.Genre 
Driven Multimedia Document Production by means of Incremental 
Transformation. In proceedings of the 2007 ACM symposium on 
Document engineering. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 111-120.  
[2] Ahmed A. M. Hamed, Renfa Li, Zhang Xiaoming, and Cheng Xu. 
2013. Video genre classification using weighted kernel logistic 
regression. Adv. MultiMedia 2013, Article 2 (January 2013). 
[3] Ba Tu Truong; Dorai, C., "Automatic genre identification for content-
based video categorization," Pattern Recognition, 2000. Proceedings. 
15th International Conference on , vol.4, no., pp.230,233 vol.4, 2000. 
[4] Howard Zhou, Tucker Hermans, Asmita V. Karandikar, and James M. 
Rehg. 2010. Movie genre classification via scene categorization. 
In Proceedings of the international conference on Multimedia (MM 
'10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 747-750.  
[5] Pais, G.; Lambert, P.; Beauchene, D.; Deloule, F.; Ionescu, B., 
"Animated movie genre detection using symbolic fusion of text and 
image descriptors," Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI), 
2012 10th International Workshop , vol., no., pp.1,6, 27-29 June 2012  
[6] Karlgren, J and Douglass,C. 1994. Recognizing text genres with 
simple metrics using discriminant analysis.  In Proceedings of Coling 
94, Kyoto, Japan, pp 1071-1075. 
[7] Karlgren, J., Ivan, B., Johan, D., Anders, H., Niklas, W., Iterative 
Information Retrieval Using Fast Clustering and Usage-Specific 
Genres”, 8th DELOS workshop on User Interfaces in Digital 
Libraries, Stockholm, Sweden, 21-23 October 1998. Pages 85-92. 
[8] E.Stamatatos, N.Fakotakis, G. Kokkinakis, “Text Genre        
Detection Using Common Word Frequencies”, In Proc. of the 18th 
Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics (COLING2000) Saarbrücken, 
Germany, pp. 808-814, 2000 
[9] Brezealed, B and Cook, D. 2006. Using closed captions and visual 
features to classify movies by genre. In Proceedings of Multimedia 
Data Mining/Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. MDM '07, New 
York, NY, USA, Article No. 4. 
[10] Lin Wei-Hao and Alexander Hauptmann. 2002. News video 
classification using SVM-based multimodal classifiers and 
combination strategies. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM 
international conference on Multimedia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
323-326.  
[11] Yong-Bae Lee & Sung Hyon Myaeng(2002). Text Genre 
Classification with Genre-Revealing and Subject-Revealing Features. 
In Proceedings of the 25th annual international ACM SIGIR 
conference on Research and development in information retrieval, 
2002. ACM, New York, NY, USA. Pages 145-150. 
[12] Brett, K., Geoffrey, N., Hinrich, S. 1997. “Automatic Detection of 
Text Genre”. ACL’97, Madrid, pages 32-38. 
[13] Stanislas, O., Mickael, R. and Georges, L.  Transcription-based video 
genre classification. IEEE. International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 14-19 March 2010. Dallas, 
TX. Pages 5114 – 5117. 
[14] Hyoyoung, K., Jin, Wan Park. , Genre Visualization Based on Words 
Used in Text. International Conference, HCI International 2013, Las 
Vegas, NV, USA, July, 2013, Proceedings, Part II .pp 551-554. 
[15] Medelyan, O., Witten I. H. (2006) "Thesaurus Based Automatic 
Keyphrase Indexing." In Proc. of the Joint Conference on Digital 
Libraries 2006, Chapel Hill, NC, USA, pp. 296-297. 
[16] Ronan Cummins. 2013. A Standard Document Score for Information 
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on the Theory of 
Information Retrieval, Oren Kurland, Donald Metzler, Christina 
Lioma, Birger Larsen, and Peter Ingwersen (Eds.). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, Pages 24, 4 pages.  
[17] Stefano, C., Alessandro, B., Marco, B., Emanuele, DV., Piero F., 
Silvia, Q. 2013. An Introduction to Information Retrieval. Book Web 
Information Retrieval, 2013. pp 3-11. 
[18] Jaccard p. 1901.Etude comparative de la distribution florale dans une 
portion des alpes et des jura. Bulletin de la société vaudoise des 
sciences naturelles, vol 37, pp 547-5790. 
[19] C. Van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retrieval (Book 2nd ed). 
Butterworth-Heinemann Newton, MA, USA, 1979. 
[20] Nei, M., Li, WH. 1979. Mathematical model for studying genetic 
variation in terms of restriction endonucleases. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 76: 5269—5273. 
[21] LR Lawlor, Overlap, similarity, and competition coefficients. Journal, 
Vol. 61, No. 2, Apr., 1980.Pages 245-251. 
[22]  Internet Movie Database, Available at: http://www.imdb.com/ last 
visit: 29/09/2014. 
[23] M. Fourati, A. Jedidi, F. Gargouri, " Automatic Audiovisual 
Documents Genre Description", in 6th International joint conference 
on knowledge discovery and information retrieval(KDIR 2014), 
Rome,Italy, 21- 24 octobre 2014. 
