International Journal of the Humanities 
Volume 2, Number 2 
Article: HC04-0192-2004 
 
 
What can 
Katerina T. Frantzi, Assistant Professor in C
of Mediterranean Studies, Un
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by Tom NLanguage Resources
they do with Terrorism?
omputer Science, Department
iversity of the Aegean, Greece  
 
 
airn and Mary Kalantzis

International Journal of the Humanities 
Volume 2, Number 2 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This paper is published at www.Humanities-Journal.com 
a series imprint of theUniversityPress.com 
First published in Australia in 2004-2006 by Common Ground Publishing Pty Ltd at 
www.Humanities-Journal.com 
Selection and editorial matter copyright © Common Ground 2004-2006 
Individual papers copyright © individual contributors 2004-2006 
All rights reserved. Apart from fair dealing for the purposes of study, research, criticism or review as permitted 
under the Copyright Act, no part of this book may be reproduced by any process without written permission 
from the publisher. 
 
ISSN 1447-9508 (Print) 
ISSN 1447-9559 (Online) 
 
The International Journal of the Humanities is a peer-refereed journal published annually. Full papers 
submitted for publication are refereed by the Associate Editors through an anonymous referee process. 
 
Papers presented at the Second International Conference on New Directions in the Humanities,  
Monash University Centre in Prato, Italy, 20-23 July 2004. 
 
 
Editors 
Tom Nairn, The Globalism Institute, RMIT University, Australia. 
Mary Kalantzis, Dean, Education, Language and Community Services,  
RMIT University, Melbourne.  
 
 
Editorial Advisory Board of the International Journal of 
the Humanities 
Juliet Mitchell, Cambridge University, UK. 
Paul James, Globalism Institute, RMIT University, Australia. 
Krishan Kumar, University of Virginia, USA. 
David Christian, San Diego State University, California, USA. 
Giorgos Tsiakalos, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. 
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Columbia University, USA. 
Mick Dodson, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia. 
Jeffrey T. Schnapp, Stanford Humanities Laboratory, Stanford University, USA. 
Nikos Papastergiadis, The Australian Centre, University of Melbourne, Australia. 
Bill Kent, Monash Centre, Prato, Italy. 
Felicity Rawlings-Sanaei, Global Movements Centre, Monash University, 
Australia. 
Chris Ziguras, The Globalism Institute, RMIT University, Australia. 
Eleni Karantzola, Department of Mediterranean Studies, University of the 
Aegean, Greece. 
Bill Cope, Common Ground, Australia. 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of the Humanities, Volume 2, Number 2  • www.Humanities-Journal.com  
Copyright © Common Ground • ISSN 1447-9508 (Print) • ISSN 1447-9559 (Online) 
Paper presented at the Second International Conference on New Directions in the Humanities,  
Monash University Centre in Prato, Italy, 20-23 July 2004 • wwwHumanitiesConference.com 
 
Language Resources 
What can they do with Terrorism? 
Katerina T. Frantzi, Assistant Professor in Computer Science, Department of Mediterranean Studies, 
University of the Aegean, Greece 
Abstract 
While the first aim for computational corpus linguistics was to serve linguistics, today its applications lie far 
beyond these borders. This work incorporates corpus linguistics techniques to forensic linguistics and 
particularly to the field of evidence of authorship. 
We work on the set of the text announcements written by “17 November” (“17N”), a terrorism organization that 
was active in Greece for over 25 years. The summer of 2002 all (or most?) of the “17N” possible members were 
arrested. We focus on the provision of evidence of authorship of the announcements sent to newspapers before 
the members were arrested. We apply corpus linguistics techniques on the 84 announcements in order to 
propose a way for the extraction of information regarding their linguistic and non-linguistic characteristics. A 
comparison of these characteristics could show if and to what degree some of them share any of these 
characteristics. This would help the mapping of the announcements to possible authors, a subject that belongs to 
a subfield of forensic linguistics called the provision of evidence of authorship. We do not attempt to give any 
hint on whether an announcement was written by a specific person or not. This is a subject that involves many 
parameters and is far beyond the scope of this work.  
Keywords: Corpus Linguistics, Forensic Linguistics, Terrorism 
Introduction  
The term “applied linguistics” covers today a large 
number of applications, although it is often still used 
to refer to second language learning. Besides, the 
limits of corpus linguistics have become a lot 
broader so that they do not anymore cover just the 
traditional areas of linguistics. This work proposes 
the application of corpus linguistic techniques to 
forensic linguistics (Broeders, 1999). Forensic 
linguistics, the application of linguistics to the 
analysis of forensic language in written or oral form, 
is a rather recent area. Terrorism, on the other hand, 
is a crucial subject in our day (Herbst, 2003), and the 
need for the collaboration of various scientific areas 
in order to fight it is vital. “17 November” (“17N”) 
was a terrorism organization that was active in 
Greece for over 25 years. The objective of this work 
is the set of the announcements that had been written 
by the 17N members and had been sent to 
newspapers before the members were arrested. The 
aim of this work is to demonstrate the contribution 
of corpus linguistic techniques to the provision of 
evidence of authorship, applying them to the 
extraction of linguistic and non-linguistic 
characteristics for each of the 84 17N 
announcements. The similarities and differences that 
can be revealed among the announcements could 
help the mapping of the announcements to their real 
authors. We should note that, until the end of the 
trial, possible authors had not accepted their role as 
the authors of the organization announcements. We 
should make clear however that any type of 
conclusion regarding who has written which 
announcement is far beyond the purpose of this 
work, since this is a result of various parameters. 
The extraction of characteristics from the 
announcements could be theoretically done 
manually, without the help of corpus linguistics 
techniques. However, it would then need an 
impractical amount of time and human resources. A 
text analysis of that size, that makes no use of 
corpus linguistics techniques, does not guarantee the 
completeness and quality of the results. 
Forensic Linguistics 
The area of applied linguistics is still often used to 
refer simply to the application of linguistics to 
language learning. However, linguistics can be 
applied and used in many other areas, one of which 
is Forensic Linguistics.  It has been a few decades 
now that linguists have offered significant help in 
trials in the form of provision of evidence, and 
linguistics has found a new area of application, that 
of language, crime and the law. Forensic linguistics 
is a relatively new area that grows both in the 
number of people interested in it and in the number 
of its subfields (Olsson, 2004).  
Forensic linguistics expresses the application of 
linguistics to the analysis of the forensic language in 
written or oral form. Today, forensic linguistics, 
according the AILA Scientific Commision on 
Forensic Linguistics, includes the study of the 
language of the law, the study of legal interpretation 
International Journal of the Humanities, Volume 2, Number 2 
 
1604 
and translation, the alleviation of disadvantage 
produced by language in legal processes, the 
provision of forensic linguistic evidence and of 
linguistic expertise in issues of legal drafting and 
interpretation (McMenamin, 2002; Conley & 
O’Barr, 1998; Cotterill, 2002; Semino & Culpeper, 
2002; Shy 1998). 
Linguistic evidence, the field of interest of this 
work, can be divided into two broad categories, that 
of evidence of communication and that of evidence 
of authorship. It can be further classified as evidence 
in phonology, lexis, grammar, discourse, register, 
genre and sociolinguistic variation. Often however, 
lawyers do not easily accept linguists to have 
relevant expertise in their area, and there are cases 
where the second were not permitted to provide 
evidence (Gibbons, 2003). 
This work focuses on the provision of linguistic 
evidence and particularly of evidence of authorship. 
In general, the text may be in either oral or written 
form and may also vary in length from something 
quite small to something big in the size of a book. 
There is also the case where a decision has to be 
taken on whether a person has produced just a part 
or the whole of the text. A common case is that of a 
text to be mapped to one out of two (or more) 
persons (Gibbons, 2003). 
Corpus Linguistics Fits Everywhere 
There is still much to be learnt about language, the 
most common form of communication. Human 
nature capabilities put limits on the amount of 
information that can be revealed from language 
resources manually. However, humans have found 
the way to solve many problems that could not be 
solved manually, or would need practically 
impossible time for their completion. The way is the 
computer and all the relevant technology, always 
equipped of course with human knowledge. 
Regarding the process of language and the 
knowledge that can be extracted from it, computer 
aid involves the Corpus Linguistics techniques. 
Corpus Linguistics uses corpora in electronic form 
together with statistical and linguistic tools to extract 
information about language in an accurate and quick 
manner that could not be achieved manually 
(Kennedy, 1998; Ooi, 1998; Sinclair, 1991). 
Corpus Linguistics, soon after its appearance, 
broke the limits of just helping research in pure 
linguistics. Of course, there is no doubt that there is 
still much to be done on the traditional application 
areas of corpus linguistics, such as lexicography, 
terminology, information extraction, etc. Easy and 
quick access to information, precise and objective 
information extraction, are consequences to the 
electronic information obtained by corpus linguistic 
techniques. These encourage researchers to keep on 
searching for new fields that could benefit from the 
area (Biber, et al., 1998; McEnery & Wilson, 1996). 
Corpus linguistics has given new power to 
linguistics, releasing it from the tight theoretical 
limits and making it a field with various real-world 
applications. In this work we apply corpus linguistic 
techniques to the forensic linguistics application area 
and particularly to its subfield of evidence of 
authorship. 
Applying CL Techniques to the 17N 
Announcements 
When the problem is the provision of evidence of 
authorship, it is very helpful to have some texts that 
have been definitely written by the person suspected 
to be the author of the examined text. These texts 
can then be used as comparison texts in order to find 
similarities or/and differences between them and the 
texts under examination. Significant similarities, 
combined with other positive elements could lead 
the court to the assignment of the examined text to 
its author. On the other hand, significant differences, 
could lead to the opposite result. A case that a text is 
to be assigned to a possible author can be weakened 
if these differences are significant. Of course this 
text comparison is not always easy. Similarities and 
differences can be spread evenly and any kind of 
conclusion could be very hard to make. Positive 
identification is generally more difficult to achieve. 
When we talk about positive identification we often 
cannot be absolute but rather probabilistic about the 
result (Gibbons, 2003; Broeders, 1999; Sjerps & 
Biesheuvel, 1999). 
The organization “17N” was active in Greece for 
about 25 years. It started its action the 1970 decade 
and lasted until 2002 (Kassimeris, 1997; Παπαχελάς 
& Τέλλογλου, 2002). The summer of 2002 the 
members of the organization were arrested - whether 
all, most or just some of the members of the 
organization were arrested, is beyond the objective 
of this work.  The 17N announcements were sent to 
newspapers by the organization members during its 
active period. When the members of the 
organization were arrested, the 84 announcements 
were collected and published in the form of a book 
(Κάκτος, 2002). The set of all the announcements is 
the data to process. In order to be able to process the 
announcements, we had to transform them into 
electronic form. We first had to scan the 
announcements and then transform the images into 
text, using an optical character recognition (OCR) 
program. During the OCR phase we paid a lot of 
attention not to make any corrections that would 
alter the original text, e.g. correct the original 
spelling. This kind of corrections would harm the 
information extraction stage (the spelling of words, 
for example, reveals important information that 
characterises the specific text).  
The final, in electronic form, texts are in plain text 
format. The total number of words of all the 
announcements is 230,878. The shorter 
announcement, in terms of number of words, 
Language Resources 
1605 
contains 44 words, while the longest contains 14,182 
words. The size difference between the number of 
words of the longest and the shortest announcement 
gives a range of 14,132 words. The average length 
of the announcements, again in terms or number of 
words, is 2,748.55. A sample of the announcements 
is given in Table 1. The process of the 
announcements, i.e. the application of corpus 
linguistic techniques, is implemented under the 
Linux environment (Frantzi, 2005). 
There are many characteristics that we can explore 
the announcements for. We have to select just a few 
to present here. The exploitation of all (or almost all) 
the characteristics is not the scope of this work. Here 
we want to demonstrate the contribution of corpus 
linguistic to the provision of evidence of authorship 
and the fight against terrorism. However the 
exhaustive exploitation of the announcements 
characteristics is part of the future work. We will 
not, in any way, try to give any answer to the 
question of which person has written which 
announcement. Not even the presentation of the 
exhaustive exploitation of the announcements 
characteristics should make us attempt to give any 
answer to that question. Incorporated in the whole 
set of the trial parameters however, such results can 
be used to make a case stronger or weaker.   
Table 1 
A Sample of the Announcements: the 60th Announcement 
 
 
Table 2 gives a sample of the extracted 
information that comes as a result of the 
announcements statistical process. For practical 
reasons it only contains a sample of the information 
extracted. Also, for the same reason, the information 
given is only presented for a small subset of the 
announcements. Of course, in court, all the extracted 
information, and for the whole set of 
announcements, will be presented. In this table, 
where we propose the corpus linguistic techniques 
for the provision of evidence of authorship, we give 
a sample of the information extracted for 10 out of 
the 84 announcements. 
Every column of the table (starting from the 
second), represents a type of information regarding 
the 10 sample announcements. The identification 
number of the announcements is given by the line of 
the table. The first column of the table gives the 
number of the announcement, which is assigned 
according the date the announcement was sent to 
newspapers by the 17N organization. The 2nd 
column gives the size of the announcement in terms 
of its total number of words, while the 3rd the 
number of different words used in each 
announcement. The 4th column normalizes the 
number of different words in each announcement so 
that a comparison among them can be more accurate 
(the normalization is done for 100 words). The 5th 
column gives the number of sentences for each 
announcement, while the 6th gives the average 
sentence size it terms of number of words. 
International Journal of the Humanities, Volume 2, Number 2 
 
1606 
Table 2 
A Sample of Extracted Information for 10 Announcements 
Number of 
Announcement 
Total 
Number of 
Words  
Number of 
Different 
Words  
Number of Different 
Words/Total Number 
of Words  
Number of 
Sentences 
Average 
Sentence 
Length  
3rd 854 488 57.14 63 13.55 
5th 3126 1361 43.53 132 23.68 
25th 3902 1575 40.36 170 22.95 
40th 1099 513 47.67 45 24.42 
41st 6873 2343 34.08 254 27.06 
51st 976 533 55.61 38 25.68 
52nd 4265 1795 42.08 243 17.55 
70th 2458 973 39.58 127 19.35 
79th 4104 1692 41.22 154 26.64 
81st 2121 1020 48.09 87 24.37 
 
Table 3 is another sample of the extracted 
information. It gives the content word frequency 
lists from a sample of 4 announcements. These lists 
reveal information from the nouns, adjectives, verbs, 
etc. that the specific author prefers to use. It is 
informative that an announcement contains a 
specific content word much more often than another 
announcement does, especially when this word is 
not part of the announcements’ subject. The spelling 
of the words is also important, especially when in a 
particular announcement a word is used with a  
specific spelling, while this is not the case for other 
announcement.  
Obviously, similar presentations and comparisons 
can be given for other word categories.  There is 
information for example in the use of the word 
«όµως» instead the use of word «αλλά» or «µα» (all 
three meaning “but” in greek), in the use of the word 
«έπειτα» instead of the word «µετά» (both meaning 
“then”), of «δις» instead of «δύο φορές» (both 
meaning “twice”), of «ενάντια» instead of 
«εναντίον» (both meaning “against”). The above 
information can be extracted when examining single 
words, but important information is also found in the 
use of collocations as well as other syntactic 
structures. This type of information is revealed by 
examining frequency lists of various types of 
collocations and word combinations. 
As we have previously said, it is not possible to 
give all or even a big part of the extracted 
information. This is anyway not the objective of this 
work – at least at this stage – where we focus in the 
incorporation of the subfield of forensic linguistics, 
i.e. the provision of evidence of authorship, to the 
list of corpus linguistics applications, for assisting 
the mapping of the 17N announcements to their 
author(s). 
Summary and Conclusions 
This work proposes the incorporation of corpus 
linguistics techniques into forensic linguistics. It 
focuses on the provision of evidence of authorship 
particularly in the case of the 17N terrorist 
organization announcements. Applied Linguistics 
has spread far beyond second language learning.  
Corpus linguistics itself has moved beyond the 
provision of assistance to purely linguistic areas. 
One of the new areas is that of forensic linguistics. 
Forensic linguistics, in terms of the provision of 
evidence of authorship, can be theoretically explored 
manually by experts, without the assistance of 
corpus linguistic techniques. This has been the way 
for many cases until now. But corpus linguistics 
techniques provide speed, accuracy and 
completeness to the results that cannot be achieved 
manually.  
The person suspected to be the author of all or at 
least most of the 17N announcements denied the role 
even when the trial was over and he was found 
guilty. We applied corpus linguistic techniques to 
process the 84 announcements written by the 17N 
members in order to show that this process can 
reveal similarities and differences among the 
announcements that could help the mapping between 
the announcements and their authors. We gave a 
sample of the information that can be retrieved from 
the announcements and can be used in court. Of 
course, a lot more of linguistic and non-linguistic 
information than that presented can be revealed. The 
purpose of this work was neither to show all the type 
of information that can be extracted, nor to give any 
kind of conclusion to the question of who wrote 
which announcement. To aimed to show that corpus 
linguistic techniques can reveal the characteristics 
and help the mapping of the announcements to their 
possible authors. A deeper, probing and thorough 
analysis is the scope of our future work. 
Language Resources 
1607 
Table 3 
Content Word Frequency Lists from a Sample of 4 Announcements  
25th 41st 52nd 79th 
18  τάξη 
17  λµατ 
15  σήµερα 
15  πολιτική 
13  Παπανδρέου 
11  εργατική 
10  χώρα 
9    στιγµή 
9    καπιταλιστές 
8    χώρας 
7    χρέη 
6    κρίση 
6    κέρδη 
6    εργαζοµένων 
6    απάτες 
5    υπήρξαν 
5    τάξης 
5    προβληµατικές 
5    ΠΑΣΟΚ 
5    οµίλου 
5    καπιταλιστών 
5    επιχειρήσεις 
5    εξουσία 
5    απατεώνες 
4    τεχνολογία 
4    σύνολο 
4    στρώµα 
4    πολιτικής 
4    οικονοµική 
4    οδήγησε 
4    νέες 
4    νέα 
4    Λάρκο 
4    κύριος 
4    ιµπεριαλισµού 
4    εργατικής 
4   εργαζόµενοι 
4    ΕΟΚ 
4    δεκαετία 
4    γνώσεις 
4    αποτέλεσµα 
4    αµερικάνικου 
3    χωρών 
3    χρόνια 
3    χρεοκοπία 
3    υποκύψει 
47  Ν∆ 
28  Κοσκωτά 
17 Mπακογιάννη 
14  ΠΑΣΟΚ 
14  ηγεσία 
13  σκάνδαλο 
12  Συνασπισµού 
12  πολιτική 
12  κυβέρνηση 
12  Κρήτης 
12  ΚΚΕ 
12  εκατοµµύρια 
10  Τράπεζα 
10  Συνασπισµός 
10  σκάνδαλα 
9    πρόκειται 
9    πολιτικό 
9    Γραµµής 
8    στρατηγική 
8    σταλινική 
8    παραγραφή 
8    κυβέρνησης 
8    κάνει 
8    κάθαρση 
7    χώρας 
7    χώρα 
7    Πέτσο 
7    λαού 
7    κόµµατος 
7    ζήτηµα 
7    ενδιαφέρει 
7    απόφαση 
7    αποτέλεσµα 
7    απατεώνες 
6    Τράπεζας 
6    σύνολο 
6    συνέπεια 
6    Στρατηγική 
6    σηµερινή 
6     Πειραϊκής-   
Πατραϊκής 
6   Mπακογιάννης 
6    Κοσκωτάς 
6    ΚΝΕ 
6    κεφαλαίου 
6    κεφάλαια 
17  κίνηµα 
14  ξεπούληµα 
11  λαός 
9    ΟΤΕ 
8    σύντροφοι 
8    κυβέρνηση 
8    κινήµατος 
8    αγωνιστές 
6    οργάνωση 
6    επιχειρήσεις 
6    Εµπορική 
6    δρόµο 
5    στιγµή 
5    Σκάνδαλο 
5    προβληµατικές 
5    οργάνωσης 
5    ΑΕ 
5    Μητσοτάκη 
5    λµατ 
5    λαού 
5    εκατοντάδες 
5    Βασιλειάδη 
5    ΑΓΕΤ 
4    χτύπηµα 
4    χέρια 
4    φορά 
4    φάση 
4    τράπεζες 
4    τιµή 
4    σφυρί 
4    σκοπό 
4    σκάνδαλα 
4    πουλήσουν 
4    πληρώσει 
4    µίζας 
4    ΜΑΤ 
4    ΛΑΡΚΟ 
4    λαό 
4    καθεστώς 
4    Ιονική 
4    θέση 
4    επιχειρήσεων 
4    επιθέσεις 
4    επαναστατικό 
4    Εµπορικής 
4    δεξιάς 
27  Οτζαλάν 
17  κυβέρνηση 
13  ΡΚΚ 
12  πολιτική 
11  Ελλάδα 
9    ρόλο 
8    κράτος 
8    εντολές 
7    χρόνια 
7    Τούρκους 
7    κράτους 
7    Κένυα 
7    ελληνικού 
7    Αθήνα 
6    χώρας 
6    σύλληψη 
6    Σηµίτη 
6    λαού 
6    λαό 
6    Ευρωπαϊκή 
6    Ένωση 
5    Τουρκία 
5    σχέδιο 
5    προδοσία 
5    πολιτικής 
5    περιπτώσεις 
5    Κουρδικό 
5    Ιράκ 
5    ήταν 
5    δικαιώµατα 
5    γεγονός 
5    αποτελεί 
4    υπηρεσίες 
4    συµφέροντα 
4    σηµαίνει 
4    πρέπει 
4    πράκτορες 
4    πόλεµο 
4    µυστικές 
4    µπορεί 
4    κυβέρνησης 
4    Ίµια 
4    ΗΠΑ 
4    ζήτηµα 
4    ελληνικής 
4    ∆ύση 
International Journal of the Humanities, Volume 2, Number 2 
 
1608 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to express our appreciation to our anonymous referees for their comments. 
Bibliography 
Biber, D, Conrad S, Reppen R. Corpus Linguistics - Investigating Language Structure and Use. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1998. 
Broeders, A P A. “Some observations on the use of probability scales in forensic identification”.  In Forensic 
Linguistics 6 (2), pp.228-241, 1999. 
Conley, J M and O’Barr, W M. Just Words – Law, Language, and Power. The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago and London, 1998. 
Cotterill, J (ed.). Language in the Legal Press.  MacMillan, 2002. 
Gibbons, J. Forensic Linguistics – An Introduction to Language in the Justice System. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
2003. 
Frantzi, K T.  “Linguistic and non-Linguistic Characteristics of the 17N announcements”. In Proceedings of the 
25th Annual Conference on Studies for the Greek Language, 7-9 May, 2004, Thessaloniki, Greece, 
(forthcoming, in Greek) 2005. 
Herbst, P. Talking Terrorism – An Introduction of the Loaded Languages of Political Violence. Greenwood 
Press, Westport, Connecticut, 2003. 
Kassimeris, G. Europe’s Last Red Terrorists. The Revolutionary Organization 17 November. C. Hurst & Co Ltd, 
1997. 
Kennedy, G. An Introduction to Corpus Linguistics. Addison-Wesley, 1998. 
McEnery, T, Wilson, A. Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 1996. 
McMenamin, G R. Forensic Linguistics: Advances in Forensic Stylistics. CRC Press, 2002. 
Olsson, J. Forensic Linguistics – An Introduction to Language, Crime and the Law. Continuum, 2004. 
Ooi, V. Computer Corpus Lexicography. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 1998. 
Semino, E, Culpeper, J, (eds.). Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition in Text Analysis. John Benjamin 
Publishing Company, 2002. 
Sinclair, J. In Sinclair, J. and Carter, R. (eds.), Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, England, 1991.   
Sjerps, M, Biesheuvel, D B. “The interpretation of conventional and ‘Bayesian’ verbal scales for expressing 
expert opinion: a small experiment among jurists”. In Forensic Linguistics 6(2), pp.214-227, 1999. 
Shy, R, W. The Language of Confession, Interrogation and Deception. Empirical Linguistics Series, Sage 
Publications, USA, 1998. 
Κάκτος (ed.). 17N – Οι προκηρύξεις. Κάκτος, Αθήνα, 2002 (in Greek). 
Παπαχελάς, Α, Τέλλογλου, T. Φάκελος 17 Νοέµβρη. Εστία, Αθήνα, Ελλάδα, 2002 (in Greek). 
About the Author 
Dr. Katerina T. Frantzi got her first degree in Computer Science from the National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Greece, and her PhD in Computer Science from Manchester Metropolitan University in 
collaboration with University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Manchester, U.K. She has 
worked as a research associate at the Centre for Computational Linguistics at UMIST and as a visiting researcher 
at NTT, Yokosuka, Japan. She is currently working at the Department of Mediterranean Studies, University of 
the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece. 
