ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 28 November 2013
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00895
Individuality in harpsichord performance: disentangling
performer- and piece-specific influences on interpretive
choices
Bruno Gingras1*, Pierre-Yves Asselin2 and Stephen McAdams2
1 Department of Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2 Schulich School of Music, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Edited by:
Lauren Stewart, Goldsmiths
University of London, UK
Reviewed by:
Floris T. van Vugt, University of
Music, Drama and Media Hannover,
Germany
Morwaread M. Farbood, New York
University, USA
*Correspondence:
Bruno Gingras, Department of
Cognitive Biology, University of
Vienna, Althanstrasse 14,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria
e-mail: brunogingras@gmail.com
Although a growing body of research has examined issues related to individuality in
music performance, few studies have attempted to quantify markers of individuality that
transcend pieces and musical styles. This study aims to identify such meta-markers
by discriminating between influences linked to specific pieces or interpretive goals and
performer-specific playing styles, using two complementary statistical approaches: linear
mixed models (LMMs) to estimate fixed (piece and interpretation) and random (performer)
effects, and similarity analyses to compare expressive profiles on a note-by-note basis
across pieces and expressive parameters. Twelve professional harpsichordists recorded
three pieces representative of the Baroque harpsichord repertoire, including three
interpretations of one of these pieces, each emphasizing a different melodic line,
on an instrument equipped with a MIDI console. Four expressive parameters were
analyzed: articulation, note onset asynchrony, timing, and velocity. LMMs showed that
piece-specific influences were much larger for articulation than for other parameters, for
which performer-specific effects were predominant, and that piece-specific influences
were generally larger than effects associated with interpretive goals. Some performers
consistently deviated from the mean values for articulation and velocity across pieces
and interpretations, suggesting that global measures of expressivity may in some cases
constitute valid markers of artistic individuality. Similarity analyses detected significant
associations among the magnitudes of the correlations between the expressive profiles
of different performers. These associations were found both when comparing across
parameters and within the same piece or interpretation, or on the same parameter and
across pieces or interpretations. These findings suggest the existence of expressive
meta-strategies that can manifest themselves across pieces, interpretive goals, or
expressive devices.
Keywords: music performance, individuality, expressive strategies, harpsichord, interpretation, concordance
INTRODUCTION
Over the last few decades, a growing body of research has exam-
ined issues related to individuality in musical performance (e.g.,
Repp, 1992; see Sloboda, 2000 for a review). Computational
methods have led to the development of higher-level descriptors
to capture and identify recurrent expressive gestures associated
with a given performer (Widmer and Goebl, 2004; Saunders
et al., 2008). However, few studies have attempted to quantify
markers of individuality that transcend specific pieces and musi-
cal styles. Indeed, it seems likely that, among the factors which
influence a performer’s interpretive choices, some derive from
performer-specific tendencies, including kinematic and neuro-
muscular “fingerprints” (Dalla Bella and Palmer, 2011; Van Vugt
et al., 2013), whereas others stem from stylistic considerations
related to the piece (or genre) being performed. In order to
identify which performance characteristics are reliable markers
of a performer’s artistic individuality across genres and styles, it
is necessary, as a first step, to disentangle these two contribu-
tions. Nevertheless, it has proven difficult, for several reasons, to
untangle these factors. One obvious issue is that pieces vary in
length, texture, and meter. Another issue is that these markers
of artistic individuality may plausibly encompass several expres-
sive parameters, such as articulation, velocity, or timing, instead
of being restricted to a single expressive device. To identify such
expressive “meta-strategies,” it is necessary to adopt a statistical
approach suitable for analyzing parameters that are measured in
different units. Thus, there is a need for a robust methodological
approach that allows us to obtain valid statistical inferences even
when comparing individual performance profiles across pieces
and expressive parameters.
Stamatatos and Widmer (2005) showed, by developing a
machine-learning approach based on a set of classifiers that could
reliably differentiate among 22 pianists playing two pieces com-
posed by Chopin, that performer-specific characteristics that are
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 1
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
not tied to a particular piece could be identified from a sym-
bolic representation (MIDI data) of the expressive parameters
associated with each note. More recently, similar methods were
successfully applied to the recognition of performers in commer-
cial jazz recordings (Ramirez et al., 2010) and violin recordings
(Ramirez et al., 2011) on the basis of the audio signal. In contrast
to these studies, which focused mostly on the development of effi-
cient algorithms for the automatic recognition of performers, the
present article aims to expand this field of research in a different
direction, by developing reliable and statistically rigorous meth-
ods for discriminating between piece-specific and performer-
specific stylistic influences and for detecting commonalities in
expressive patterns across pieces and interpretations.
Although a substantial body of empirical research has focused
on piano performance (see Gabrielsson, 2003 for a review), there
is a dearth of quantitative studies on expressive strategies in
harpsichord performance. However, the study of harpsichord per-
formance is particularly relevant in that it affords an opportunity
to compare and extend the findings from piano performance
research to other keyboard instruments that may favor differ-
ent expressive strategies, as well as to musical genres that have
been comparatively neglected in performance research. Here, we
analyzed a set of recordings of three pieces played by twelve
professional harpsichordists on an authentic Italian-style harp-
sichord equipped with a MIDI console which allowed the pre-
cise measurement of performance parameters. The three pieces
selected for this study were representative of the Baroque harp-
sichord repertoire and covered a broad stylistic range: the third
variation from the Partita No. 12 sopra l’aria di Ruggiero by
Girolamo Frescobaldi (1583–1643), the Prélude non mesuré No. 7,
an unmeasured prelude by Louis Couperin (1626–1661), and Les
Bergeries, a rondo by François Couperin (1668–1733). The vari-
ation from the Partita No. 12 (hereafter Partita) exemplifies the
polyphonic, contrapuntal writing of the early Baroque period.
The Prélude non mesuré (hereafter Prélude) belongs to a semi-
improvised French harpsichord genre in which the notated score
specifies the ordering and pitch height of the notes, but does not
indicate measures, nor individual note durations in most cases
(including the Prélude), thus giving performers more freedom
to form their own interpretation and making this a particularly
appropriate genre for research on individuality in performance.
Finally, the Bergeries is typical of the early eighteenth century
French harpsichord school, with François Couperin being proba-
bly one of its greatest exponents.
Besides examining recordings of three different pieces, we also
compared different interpretations of the same piece by the same
set of performers. Indeed, performers were invited to record three
different interpretations of the Partita, each emphasizing a dif-
ferent melodic line (corresponding respectively to the soprano,
alto, and tenor parts). This afforded us an opportunity to eval-
uate the impact of following an explicit interpretive strategy on
the expression of individuality in addition to investigating piece-
related effects. Four expressive parameters were analyzed for all
performances: articulation (corresponding to the amount of over-
lap between successive notes, from staccato to legato), note onset
asynchrony (defined as the difference in onset time between
events that are notated as synchronous in the score), timing
(variations in tempo), and velocity (key press velocity). In line
with Stamatatos and Widmer (2005), we extracted these expres-
sive parameters from the MIDI data corresponding to the record-
ings of the performances. As with organ performance (Gingras,
2008; Gingras et al., 2010), the harpsichord affords no or very
little timbre differentiation (excluding registration changes), and
dynamic differentiation remains limited (Penttinen, 2006). Thus,
most of the expressive features available to harpsichordists, such
as articulation, onset asynchrony, and tempo variations, involve
the manipulation of timing-related parameters, making the study
of expressivity in harpsichord performance ideally suited for the
type of MIDI-based quantitative analysis that we propose here.
We used two statistical approaches to investigate expressive
individuality in harpsichord performance. The first approach
consists in analyzing global piece- or performer-specific trends
by examining average expressive tendencies over entire perfor-
mances, whereas the second approach corresponds to a compari-
son of expressive profiles at the note-by-note level. Both methods
provide complementary information when analyzing expressive
patterns in performance (Palmer, 1989; Moelants, 2000). With
the first approach, we sought to isolate and quantify the influence
of the piece being performed (or the interpretive strategy being
followed), as well as the impact of the performer’s own stylistic
individuality, on the average levels associated with each specific
expressive parameter. For instance, this method could be used
to determine whether there were significant differences in the
mean velocity levels associated with different performers, pieces,
or interpretations. One drawback of this approach is that, because
it focuses on statistically significant differences observed on mean
values representing the average level of an expressive parameter
for each performance, it is not suitable for analyzing differences
in expressive profiles that are only manifested at the note-by-
note level, a problem for which our second approach was better
suited. Our aim was twofold with this second approach: first,
we sought to determine whether we could detect within-piece
concordance among the expressive profiles corresponding to dif-
ferent expressive parameters, when considering performances of
the same piece (and similarly when comparing performances fol-
lowing the same interpretive goal in the case of the Partita). For
instance, we wanted to evaluate whether two performers who dis-
play similar articulation profiles when playing the same piece also
tend to display similar timing profiles, and whether the reverse
is also true for performers who display dissimilar expressive pro-
files. Second, we examined within-parameter concordance across
pieces (or interpretations) when considering profiles associated
with a single expressive parameter. For example, we investigated
whether two performers who display similar articulation profiles
when playing one piece also tend to display similar articulation
profiles when playing another piece.
The first approach described here corresponds essentially to an
analysis of variance, or more generally to a broad category of sta-
tistical methods defined as general linear models. Here, because
we were interested specifically in isolating the contribution of
each individual performer (modeled as a random effect) and of
each piece or interpretive goal (modeled as a fixed effect) to the
observed variance for each expressive parameter, we used lin-
ear mixed models (LMMs) to obtain maximum likelihood (ML)
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 2
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
estimates of the “piece” (or “interpretation”) and “performer”
effects (Laird and Ware, 1982; Laird et al., 1987; Lindstrom and
Bates, 1988). LMMs are a particularly appropriate statistical tool
to address these issues because they can fit a variety of covari-
ance structures and allow for the specification of both random
intercepts (i.e., fitting individual intercepts for each performer,
corresponding to the overall mean values across all pieces for
a given expressive parameter), and random slope effects (fitting
individual effects associated with each piece for each performer)
(West et al., 2007). Although random slope effects are often
neglected, Schielzeth and Forstmeier (2009) have shown that
ignoring random slope effects tends to overestimate fixed effects
in mixed-model designs.
The second approach outlined above is akin to a similar-
ity analysis on expressive profiles. Here, we used the correlation
between pairs of expressive profiles as a similarity metric. As a
normalized and dimensionless similarity metric, the correlation
coefficient is appropriate for comparing variables with different
units or scales, such as different expressive parameters, and is
especially useful for comparing profiles or sequences (Hubert,
1979). Thus, correlation coefficients are among the most effec-
tive measures for detecting similarity in gene expression profiles
(Yona et al., 2006), a research question which has many parallels
with the similarity analysis of expressive profiles in music per-
formance. Unlike the parametric Pearson correlation coefficient,
non-parametric correlation coefficients such as Spearman’s rho
and Kendall’s tau are not sensitive to outliers and are less affected
by the shape of the statistical distribution of the data, making
them more widely applicable as similarity indices. Indeed, a recent
study identified Spearman’s rho and Kendall’s tau as being among
the most effective measures for identifying gene coexpression
networks (Kumari et al., 2012). Furthermore, non-parametric
correlations were shown to be more efficient than parametric
measures for detecting stylistic similarity between texts (Popescu
and Dinu, 2009).
In contrast to Spearman’s rho which is mathematically equiva-
lent to Pearson’s coefficient computed on ranks, Kendall’s tau is
a measure of concordance, corresponding to the probability of
agreement on the sign of the difference between pairs of values
(Newson, 2002). Therefore, Kendall’s tau is especially useful if the
direction of the change between two points is more important
than the ranking of the absolute values of the points comprising a
given sequence or profile, and has been shown to perform better
than either Pearson’s or Spearman’s coefficients when correlat-
ing psychiatric symptom ratings (Arndt et al., 1999) and when
comparing the rate and direction of change in ecological commu-
nities (Huhta, 1979). Because we were specifically interested in the
degree of concordance between performers’ expressive patterns
in the present study, we chose to use Kendall’s tau correlation
coefficient to assess the pairwise similarity between expressive
profiles. These pairwise correlations were then used to gener-
ate similarity matrices, calculated separately for each expressive
parameter and for each piece (and for each interpretation in the
case of the Partita). Comparisons were first conducted to assess
within-piece concordance between similarity matrices computed
for all expressive parameters obtained from a single piece. In
a second step, similarity matrices computed for all three pieces
on the same expressive parameter were compared to assess the
degree of within-parameter concordance between expressive pro-
files associated with different pieces. The same procedure was
then repeated to compare different interpretations of the Partita.
Lastly, to evaluate the impact of the choice of correlation coeffi-
cient on our results, we compared the outcomes of similarity anal-
yses employing Spearman’s rho vs. Kendall’s tau as a similarity
metric.
RESULTS
LINEAR MIXED MODEL ANALYSES
Comparisons across pieces
For each of the four expressive parameters (articulation, asyn-
chrony, timing, and velocity), mean values were computed
over each performance, separately for each piece (see section
Performance Data Analysis in Materials and Methods for com-
putational details). All the analyses of variance presented in this
section were conducted on the mean values thus obtained (shown
in Figure 1). LMMs were built using the step-up approach
(Snijders and Bosker, 1999; Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002), begin-
ning with an unconditional means model with only intercepts
for fixed and random effects. For the purpose of conducting
comparisons across pieces, we retained only the Partita record-
ings emphasizing the highest melodic line (soprano). Repeated-
measures LMMs were used because each piece was recorded
twice by each performer, with individual performers (12) treated
as random effects and pieces (3) treated as a fixed effect. The
potential effect of repetition (comparing the first and second
recordings of each piece), as well as the interaction between
piece and repetition, were also considered as fixed effects. Note
that the models for asynchrony did not include the Prélude
whose score does not include any note onsets notated as syn-
chronous. Furthermore, the effect of piece was not considered
in the case of timing given that durations were zero-centered
for each piece to allow for meaningful comparisons across
pieces (see section Performance Data Analysis in Materials and
Methods).
Fixed effects were first added to the models, followed by ran-
dom effects. Both random intercepts and random slope effects
were considered. At each step, the improvement to the fit of
the model was assessed by likelihood tests using ML estimation
when comparing models that differed only in the specification
of the fixed effects, and restricted maximum likelihood (REML)
estimation when comparing models that differed only in the
specification of the random effects (Morrell, 1998; Verbeke and
Molenberghs, 2000). The following paragraphs outline the model
building steps. Detailed tests of significance are only provided for
the final models (see Table 1) since all further analyses were con-
ducted on the final models. However, a summary of the p-values
obtained during the model-building steps is given below where
relevant.
In comparison to the baseline model including only intercepts
for fixed and random effects, the addition of a fixed effect of piece
significantly improved the fit of the models for articulation and
velocity (p < 0.001 in both cases), but was only marginally signif-
icant in the case of asynchrony (p = 0.08). The effect of piece was
nevertheless included in all three models to facilitate comparisons
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 3
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
FIGURE 1 | Mean values for each of the four expressive
parameters, for all three pieces. Each individual harpsichordist
(identified as H1, H2, . . . , H12) is represented by a unique symbol.
Each symbol represents the average of two recordings by the same
performer. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. (A)
Articulation, measured as relative overlap (negative values correspond
to a detached articulation and positive values to a legato articulation).
(B) Asynchrony, measured as the standard deviation of onset times
for nominally synchronous notes (in milliseconds). (C) Timing,
measured as the logarithm of the ratio of the duration of the piece
to the geometric mean (GM) of the duration of all performances of
the same piece. (D) Velocity, measured in MIDI units (16–100).
between models (Cheng et al., 2009). On the other hand, adding
the effect of repetition or the interaction between piece and rep-
etition did not improve the fit of the models (all p-values > 0.41
for repetition, and all p-values > 0.27 for the interaction between
piece and repetition). Therefore, the models obtained at the end
of this step incorporated a fixed effect of piece (except in the case
of timing) and a random intercept.
In a second step, random effects were added. In order to
ascertain that random effects, corresponding to individual effects
associated with each performer, were significant, we first com-
pared the fit of the models obtained at the end of the first step with
equivalent models including only fixed effects (no random inter-
cept). Indeed, models including a random intercept fitted the data
significantly better than models incorporating only fixed effects
(all p-values < 0.05). Subsequently, the inclusion of a random
effect of piece was also considered. Adding a random effect of
piece improved the fit for all models (all p-values < 0.01), leading
to our final models, which included a fixed effect of piece, a ran-
dom intercept, and a random effect of piece (Table 1). Note that
in the case of the models for asynchrony and timing, the inclu-
sion of a random piece effect resulted in a non-significant random
intercept, suggesting that most of the between-performers vari-
ance observed for these two expressive parameters was captured
by the random piece effect (we will revisit this point below).
Nevertheless, the random intercept was kept in all final models
in order to facilitate comparisons between models.
Finally, we sought to directly quantify the variance explained
by the fixed (piece) and random (performer) effects in our mod-
els. In contrast to traditional general linear models, there is no
standard formula for computing the proportion of variance (R2)
explained by the various parameters of a linear mixed model.
In this paper, we use a promising approach for estimating R2 in
generalized LMMs (GLMMs, which include LMMs) that was pro-
posed by Nakagawa and Schielzeth (2013). This method can be
used to obtain the proportion of variance explained by the fixed
effects in a model [defined as “marginal” R2, or R2GLMM(m) in
Nakagawa and Schielzeth’s notation], and the proportion of vari-
ance explained by both fixed and random effects [“conditional”
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 4
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
Table 1 | Linear mixed models comparing across recordings of the three pieces.
Expressive Fixed effects Random effects (performer) R2GLMM
parameter
Piece Intercept Piece Marginal Conditional
(overall mean) (slope) (fixed) (fixed and random)
Articulation F(2, 22) = 223.05,
p < 0.001
χ2(1) = 8.76,
p = 0.003
χ2(1) = 7.75,
p = 0.005
0.836 0.920
Asynchrony† F(1, 11) = 1.02,
p = 0.335
χ2(1) = 0.10,
p = 0.756
χ2(1) = 58.31,
p < 0.001
0.038 0.426
Timing* N/A χ2(1) = 0.001,
p = 0.978
χ2(1) = 95.59,
p < 0.001
N/A 0.197
Velocity F(2, 22) = 7.85,
p = 0.003
χ2(1) = 4.82,
p = 0.028
χ2(1) = 78.85,
p < 0.001
0.210 0.625
The significance of the fixed effect of piece was assessed with Type III F-tests conducted on the final models, whereas the significance of the random intercept
and slope effects was assessed with likelihood tests using REML estimation. Statistically significant p-values are indicated in bold. For each expressive parameter,
the corresponding marginal and conditional R2GLMM values were computed on a random-intercept model that was equivalent to the final model but with the random
slope effect excluded (see Nakagawa and Schielzeth, 2013). †Asynchrony values were not computed for the Prélude, whose score does not include notes that
should be played together. *The fixed effect of piece was not considered for timing, given that all values were zero-centered for each piece to allow for meaningful
comparisons across pieces.
R2, notated as R2GLMM(c)]. The proportion of variance explained
by random effects alone can be estimated by comparing both
quantities. Note that Nakagawa and Schielzeth’s formula does not
account for random slope effects (here, random piece effects).
However, R2 values obtained for random-slope models are usually
very similar to those obtained for analogous random-intercept
models when the same fixed effects are fitted (Snijders and Bosker,
1999). Therefore, we have followed Nakagawa and Schielzeth’s
(2013) suggestion of computing R2GLMM values for random-slope
models on analogous random-intercept models. The R2 values
reported in Table 1 are thus only an approximation of the R2
values for the final models, which include a random slope effect.
A comparison of the marginal R2 values obtained for the dif-
ferent expressive parameters shows that the fixed effect of piece
was dominant in the case of articulation, explaining more than
80% of the total variance, suggesting that the overall articulation
pattern (detached or legato) was mostly a function of the specific
piece to be performed, with performer-associated effects playing
only a minor role (Figure 1A). On the other hand, the fixed piece
effect had only a moderate influence on velocity (Figure 1D) and
was negligible in the case of asynchrony (Figure 1B). Random
effects (individual differences between performers), which are
discussed in greater detail below, played a much larger role for
these two expressive parameters than for articulation.
Post-hoc tests (pairwise comparisons, all p-values Bonferroni-
corrected) were conducted for articulation and velocity in order
to compare the estimated marginal means for each piece. In
the case of articulation, pairwise comparisons showed that the
Prélude was played significantly more legato than both the
Bergeries, t(1, 22) = 13.15, p < 0.001, and the Partita, t(1, 22) =
20.89, p < 0.001. The Bergeries was also played significantly more
legato than the Partita, t(1, 22) = 7.73, p < 0.001, giving the fol-
lowing ordering from more detached to more legato articulation:
Partita < Bergeries < Prélude (Figure 1A). Regarding velocity,
the Prélude was played with significantly less velocity than both
the Partita, t(1, 22) = 2.66, p = 0.043, and the Bergeries, t(1, 22) =
3.87, p = 0.003, with no significant difference between the latter
two (Figure 1D).
Statistically significant random intercepts correspond to a sys-
tematic tendency by some performers to display a given expressive
feature to a lesser or greater extent than their colleagues, across
all pieces. For the four expressive parameters surveyed here,
significant random intercepts were only found for articulation
and velocity, corresponding to a systematic tendency by some
performers to play more detached (or more legato), or with
a smaller (or greater) velocity than their colleagues, across all
pieces (Figures 1A,D). On the contrary, the non-significant ran-
dom intercepts for the timing and asynchrony models indicate
that none of the performers in our sample tended to play sig-
nificantly slower or faster, or with a lesser or greater degree of
asynchrony, than their colleagues when averaging across all pieces
(Figures 1B,C).
A significant random piece effect indicates that the effect asso-
ciated with a given piece is not uniform across all performers,
or, in other words, that different performers respond differently
to a given piece. Significant random piece effects were found for
all four expressive parameters, with large effects in the case of
asynchrony, timing, and velocity. The weaker random piece effect
for articulation is linked to the strong fixed effect observed for
this parameter, which suggests that performers tended to respond
more uniformly to piece effects in the case of articulation than for
other parameters such as asynchrony and velocity, for which the
magnitude of the fixed effect was comparatively smaller.
LMMs allow random effects to be predicted for individual
performers (Littell et al., 2006, chapter 8). A summary of the
significant intercept and piece random effects at the performer
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 5
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
Table 2 | Individual random effects associated with each performer.
Expressive Intercept Piece (slope)
parameter (overall mean)
Bergeries Partita Prélude
Articulation
(df = 36)
Detached: H7*
Legato: H3**,H5*
n.s. n.s. Legato: H3**, H5*
Asynchrony†
(df = 24)
n.s. More: H3***,
H5**
Less: H5*, H6**, H9*
More: H7***
N/A
Timing
(df = 36)
n.s. Slower: H3**,
H4*, H11*
Faster: H5**,
H8**, H12**
Slower: H2*, H7***,
H12***
Faster: H4***, H6***,
H10*
Slower: H2***, H6***,
H7***, H10***, H11*
Faster: H3***, H4*,
H5***, H8***, H9***
Velocity
(df = 36)
Less: H12*
More: H10*
Less: H3*, H4**
More: H2*
Less: H2*, H12* Less: H7**
More: H3**
Individual performers are identified by codes H1 to H12. The significance of the random intercept and piece effects predicted for each individual performer was
assessed using two-tailed t-tests. The denominator degrees of freedom are indicated for each expressive parameter in the leftmost column. *p < 0.05; **p <
0.01; ***p < 0.001; n.s., no significant effect. †Asynchrony values were not computed for the Prélude, whose score does not include notes that should be played
together.
level is provided in Table 2, with individual harpsichordists iden-
tified by codes H1 to H12. In line with the results reported
previously, no significant random intercepts were found for asyn-
chrony and timing, and only two performers showed significant
random piece effects for articulation. Significant random piece
effects were especially prevalent for timing, notably in the case of
the Prélude, suggesting a greater degree of individual variability in
the choice of tempi (Figure 1C). Furthermore, we can also see in
Table 2 that some performers displayed a greater degree of expres-
sive individuality, as indicated by a large number of significant
random effects, than others who showed few or no significant
effects (see also Figure 1). For instance, significant effects were
associated with performer H3 for all four expressive parameters,
but no effects reached significance for performer H1.
Finally, to control for the fact that all the between-pieces
comparisons conducted here employed the interpretation of
the Partita emphasizing the highest melodic line (soprano), we
repeated the LMM analyses described above using the interpreta-
tions of the Partita emphasizing the alto and tenor parts in turn.
We obtained very similar results to those shown in Table 1, both
for the F-tests on the fixed piece effect and for the likelihood
tests on the random intercept and piece effects, with identical
outcomes for the significance tests and similar F ratios and chi-
square values in all cases. This result suggests that the choice of
the interpretation of the Partita for the purpose of conducting
comparisons across pieces had very little bearing on the results of
the analyses presented here.
Comparisons across interpretations of the Partita
Because performers recorded three different interpretations of
the Partita, we also analyzed the contribution of the interpretive
goal and of performers’ individual specificities to the variance
observed on the mean values for each of the four expressive
parameters across interpretations of the Partita. Following the
procedure described in the preceding section, repeated-measures
LMMs were built using the step-up approach, beginning with
an unconditional means model with only intercepts for fixed
and random effects, treating individual performers (12) as ran-
dom effects and interpretations (3) as a fixed effect. Once again,
repetition (comparing the first and second recordings of each
interpretation), as well as the interaction between interpreta-
tion and repetition, were considered as fixed effects. Given that
the timing comparisons were conducted across interpretations of
the same piece in this case, we used the untransformed dura-
tions of the performances here (see Performance Data Analysis
in Materials and Methods).
In comparison to the baseline model including only intercepts
for fixed and random effects, the addition of a fixed effect of
interpretation significantly improved the fit of the model for asyn-
chrony (p = 0.04) and marginally for articulation (p = 0.10), but
not for either timing or velocity (both p-values > 0.16). The effect
of interpretation was nevertheless included in all four models to
facilitate comparisons between models. In contrast to what was
observed when comparing across pieces, adding a fixed effect of
repetition significantly improved the fit of the model for asyn-
chrony (p = 0.01), but not for the other parameters (all other
p-values > 0.19). Again, the effect of repetition was added to all
four models. The addition of the interaction between interpreta-
tion and repetition did not significantly improve the fit of any
model (all p-values > 0.11). Thus, the models obtained at the
end of this step incorporated fixed effects of interpretation and
repetition as well as a random intercept.
Random effects were then examined. We confirmed that mod-
els including a random intercept fitted the data significantly
better than models incorporating only fixed effects (all p-values
< 0.001). Subsequently, the inclusion of a random effect of
interpretation was also considered. Adding a random effect of
interpretation improved the fit for articulation and timing (both
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 6
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
p-values < 0.01), but not for asynchrony or velocity (both
p-values > 0.12). The random effect of interpretation was
included in all four models. Because a fixed effect of repetition
was included in the models, we also considered a random effect
of repetition, but its addition did not improve the fit of any mod-
els (all p-values > 0.12). Hence, our final models included fixed
effects of interpretation and repetition, a random intercept, and a
random effect of interpretation (Table 3).
R2GLMM values were computed following the procedure
described in the previous section. Fixed effects explained only
a small proportion of the variance, even for the expressive
parameters for which these effects were significant or marginally
significant, such as articulation and asynchrony. However, the
conditional R2GLMM values were very high, with all four models
explaining more than 80% of the variance. The very large pro-
portion of variance explained by random effects for models
comparing across interpretations implies that performer-related
specificities could account for most of the observed differences in
the mean values of the expressive parameters.
The significant effect of repetition observed in the case of asyn-
chrony corresponded to a tendency by performers to play the
second recording of each interpretation with smaller asynchronies
than the first (Figure 2B). Similarly, a marginal tendency to play
the second recording more legato was observed (Figure 2A). To
further investigate the effect of repetition in the comparisons
across interpretations of the Partita, we considered the possibility
that the repetition effect was a learning effect, and that performers
were still getting accustomed to each interpretation. We thus ana-
lyzed the error rates using a GLMM that models the frequency of
score errors as a function of the interpretation and the repetition,
using a logit (binomial) distribution. This GLMM corresponded
to a repeated-measures logistic regression with interpretation and
repetition as fixed effects, and random intercept as well as random
effect of interpretation, and was thus analogous to the LMMs pre-
sented in Table 3. Although error rates were slightly lower for the
second repetition (0.69% on average, vs. 0.82% for the first rep-
etition), neither the effect of repetition, F(1, 35) = 0.87, p = 0.36,
nor the effect of interpretation, F(2, 22) = 0.49, p = 0.62, were
close to reaching significance.
Although large statistical effects were associated with the ran-
dom intercepts for all expressive parameters, significant random
interpretation effects were only found for articulation and tim-
ing. Random interpretation effects were generally smaller than
the effects observed for the random intercepts, as indicated by
the relative magnitude of the chi-square values obtained with
likelihood tests (Table 3). In line with these results, very few ran-
dom interpretation effects associated with individual performers
were observed. In fact, only one such effect reached significance
across all performers and expressive parameters, corresponding
to performer H12 playing the “alto” interpretation with a signif-
icantly slower tempo. In contrast, a large number of significant
random intercepts associated with individual performers were
observed. Notably, most performers who exhibited a tendency to
play significantly more detached (H7) or more legato (H3), or
with less (H12) or more (H10) velocity than their colleagues when
comparing across pieces (see Table 2), also displayed the same
tendencies when comparing across interpretations of the Partita.
One exception was H5 who showed a significant tendency to play
more legato across all three pieces, but not across interpretations
of the Partita (Figure 2A).
Discussion
In contrast with the LMMs comparing expressive parameters
across pieces, for which important fixed effects were found for
articulation and velocity, the proportion of the variance explained
by fixed effects was very low for the LMMs comparing interpreta-
tions of the Partita. This suggests that systematic interpretation-
related (or repetition-related) differences between interpretations
emphasizing different melodic lines were, for the most part, rel-
atively unimportant when comparing mean values computed on
Table 3 | Linear mixed models comparing across interpretations of the Partita.
Expressive Fixed effects Random effects (performer) R2GLMM
parameter
Interpretation Repetition Intercept Interpretation Marginal Conditional
(overall mean) (slope) (fixed) (fixed and random)
Articulation F(2, 22) = 1.32,
p = 0.287
F(1, 35) = 3.25,
p = 0.080
χ2(1) = 28.43,
p < 0.001
χ2(1) = 11.06,
p < 0.001
0.016 0.823
Asynchrony F(2, 22) = 2.85,
p = 0.079
F(1, 35) = 7.44,
p = 0.010
χ2(1) = 48.81,
p < 0.001
χ2(1) = 1.23,
p = 0.267
0.018 0.905
Timing F(2, 22) = 0.06,
p = 0.944
F(1, 35) = 0.40,
p = 0.531
χ2(1) = 68.85,
p < 0.001
χ2(1) = 8.24,
p = 0.004
<0.001 0.970
Velocity F(2, 22) = 1.27,
p = 0.300
F(1, 35) = 0.24,
p = 0.625
χ2(1) = 58.51,
p < 0.001
χ2(1) = 2.41,
p = 0.120
0.003 0.942
The significance of the fixed effects of interpretation and repetition was assessed with Type III F-tests conducted on the final models, whereas the significance
of the random intercept and slope effects was assessed with likelihood tests using REML estimation. Statistically significant p-values are indicated in bold. For
each expressive parameter, the corresponding marginal and conditional R2GLMM values were computed on a random-intercept model that was equivalent to the final
model but with the random slope effect excluded (see Nakagawa and Schielzeth, 2013).
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 7
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
FIGURE 2 | Mean values for articulation and asynchrony, for all three
interpretations of the Partita. Each individual harpsichordist (identified
as H1, H2, . . . , H12) is represented by a unique symbol. Each symbol
represents a single recording. Three interpretations, each emphasizing a
different melodic line (corresponding to the soprano, alto, or tenor part)
were recorded. Each interpretation was recorded twice, with successive
recordings indicated by the number “1” or “2.” Error bars represent
the standard error of the mean. (A) Articulation, measured as relative
overlap (negative values correspond to a detached articulation and
positive values to a legato articulation). (B) Asynchrony, measured as the
standard deviation of onset times for nominally synchronous notes (in
milliseconds).
the entire performances. To be sure, this does not imply that there
were no significant differences between these interpretations,
but analyzing these differences requires a finer approach which
involves considering each melodic line in isolation (Gingras et al.,
2009). On the other hand, random effects explained a much larger
proportion of the variance for the LMMs comparing across inter-
pretations of the Partita than for the LMMs comparing across
pieces (even though these random effects were non-negligible
when accounting for the variance in asynchrony, timing, or veloc-
ity across pieces). This result indicates that individual specificities
tended to dominate when considering interpretations of the same
piece, but were relatively less important when examining different
pieces.
The significant effects associated with repetition (i.e., com-
paring the first and second recordings) in the LMMs on the
interpretations of the Partita were somewhat unexpected, because
repetition was not a significant factor in any of the LMMs mod-
eling expressive parameters across pieces. Adding repetition as a
fixed effect to these LMMs did not increase the R2GLMM values
for any of the models. The overall low error rates, as well as the
absence of a significant difference in error rates between repeti-
tions or interpretations, suggest that performers were comfortable
with each interpretation at the time of recording and do not
argue in favor of a learning effect. Nevertheless, it is possible that
changing between interpretations of the same piece during the
recording session demanded more flexibility on the part of the
performers than changing from one piece to another. This may
explain why asynchronies were slightly but significantly smaller,
and articulations slightly more legato (albeit with small effect sizes
in both cases), on the second recording of each interpretation as
performers were adjusting to the character of each interpretation.
Whereas the magnitude of the random piece effects was gener-
ally larger than that of the random intercept effects when compar-
ing across pieces (see Table 1), the opposite was observed when
comparing across interpretations of the Partita (see Table 3). This
suggests that, whereas individual performers exhibited markedly
different responses to the three pieces, individual responses to the
three interpretations of the Partita were not as differentiated. On
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 8
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
the other hand, performers who tended to play consistently more
legato, or with a faster tempo, tended to do so for all three inter-
pretations of the Partita (as indicated by the large random inter-
cept effects reported in Table 3), whereas this performer-specific
consistency was somewhat less pronounced when comparing
across pieces (as indicated by the small to moderate random
intercept effects shown in Table 1).
SIMILARITY ANALYSES ON EXPRESSIVE PROFILES
Comparisons across pieces
Kendall’s tau correlation coefficients were calculated between the
expressive profiles of all pairs of performers, separately for each
parameter and for each piece. For the purpose of conducting
comparisons across pieces, we retained only the Partita recordings
emphasizing the highest melodic line (soprano). To avoid pseudo-
replication, correlation coefficients were computed on the expres-
sive profiles corresponding to the average of the two performances
recorded by each performer for each piece (note that very simi-
lar results were obtained by averaging the correlations obtained
on each of the two performances instead of computing the cor-
relations on the averaged profiles). Correlation coefficients were
computed on a note-by-note basis in the case of articulation and
velocity, and on an event-by-event basis in the case of timing and
asynchrony. Similarity matrices were then generated by comput-
ing all possible pairwise Kendall’s taus between the 12 performers’
note-by-note (or event-by-event) expressive profiles, separately
for each parameter and for each piece. Eleven 12 × 12 similarity
matrices were obtained, four each for the Bergeries and the Partita
(one for each expressive parameter), and three for the Prélude
for which no asynchrony patterns were extant. All correlation
coefficients were positive, indicating a higher-than-chance con-
cordance between expressive profiles (the statistical significance
of each coefficient is not reported here due to the very large num-
ber of correlations, and because the aim of this analysis was not to
test the significance of each pairwise correlation but to examine
the global concordance between similarity matrices).
Two series of comparisons were conducted between the simi-
larity matrices thus obtained. First, to test for within-piece profile
concordance across expressive parameters, we assessed the degree
of congruence between the groups of similarity matrices cor-
responding to all expressive parameters analyzed for a single
piece. Second, to test for within-parameter profile concordance
across pieces, we assessed the degree of congruence between the
groups of similarity matrices corresponding to a single expressive
parameter analyzed over all pieces.
To control for familywise error rates, the CADM (“Congruence
among distance matrices”) test (Legendre and Lapointe, 2004),
which detects congruence in a group of matrices, was first applied
to each group of similarity matrices that was tested separately. If
the chi-square statistic obtained by the CADM test was significant
(as determined by a permutation test), indicating congruence in
a group of matrices, post-hoc tests were conducted to identify the
matrix (or matrices) which explained this association, following
Legendre and Lapointe (2004). The Bonferroni-Holm correction
(Holm, 1979), a sequential procedure which is less conservative
than the classic Bonferroni correction, was applied to the p-values
thus obtained. Lastly, the Mantel test, a non-parametric permu-
tation test which evaluates the degree of association between
two matrices (Mantel, 1967; Legendre and Legendre, 1998) and
is applicable to either distance matrices or similarity matrices
(Dietz, 1983), was used to determine the pairwise rank correla-
tion (Spearman’s rho) between the similarity matrix (or matrices)
identified as significantly congruent in the post-hoc procedure
and other matrices in the group. Note that, by design, both the
CADM and Mantel tests ignore the main diagonal of the matri-
ces, meaning that all the comparisons presented here were strictly
conducted between expressive profiles corresponding to different
performers. The number of degrees of freedom does not affect the
probability values obtained by permutation tests (McArdle and
Anderson, 2001) and is not reported for the CADM and Mantel
tests (see Legendre, 2000).
CADM tests were first conducted to assess the within-piece
congruence between the similarity matrices corresponding to the
four expressive parameters (only three in the case of the Prélude),
separately for each piece. A significant association was detected
for the Prélude, χ2 = 94.95, p = 0.020. Post-hoc tests revealed
that the timing similarity matrix was significantly congruent
with at least one other matrix in the group (Bonferroni-Holm
corrected p-value < 0.001). Mantel tests showed a significant cor-
relation between the matrices for timing and articulation (r =
0.421, p = 0.009), indicating that the magnitude of the pair-
wise correlations computed between all pairs of performers on
the timing profiles was positively correlated with the magni-
tude of the corresponding pairwise correlations computed on the
articulation profiles (Figure 3A; see also Figure 3B for a visual
representation of a non-significant association between the tim-
ing and velocity pairwise correlations for the Bergeries). In other
words, there was a significant tendency for performers with con-
cordant timing patterns to show concordant articulation patterns.
The correlation between the similarity matrices for timing and
velocity also reached significance (r = 0.347, p = 0.032), corre-
sponding to a tendency for performers with concordant timing
profiles to also display concordant velocity profiles (Figure 3C).
Furthermore, the CADM tests were also marginally significant
for the Bergeries (χ2 = 84.40, p = 0.076) and the Partita (χ2 =
85.31, p = 0.085), suggesting weak or partial congruence in both
cases (no post-hoc tests were conducted here since the tests did not
reach significance).
Second, CADM tests were conducted to assess the within-
parameter congruence among the similarity matrices based on a
single expressive parameter across all pieces, separately for each
of the four parameters. A significant association was detected for
articulation (χ2 = 98.33, p = 0.010) and for timing (χ2 = 88.29,
p = 0.041), but not for asynchrony or velocity (both p-values >
0.27). For articulation, post-hoc tests revealed that the articula-
tion similarity matrix for the Partita was congruent with at least
one other matrix (Bonferroni-Holm corrected p-value = 0.040).
However, the corrected p-values for the matrices corresponding
to the Bergeries and the Prélude were both marginally significant,
suggesting that the articulation similarity matrices for all three
pieces were at least partially congruent. Mantel tests showed a sig-
nificant correlation between the matrices for the Bergeries and the
Partita (r = 0.314, p = 0.038), indicating that the magnitude of
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 9
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
FIGURE 3 | Concordance between the pairwise correlations computed
on expressive profiles. τ: Kendall’s tau correlation coefficient computed on
expressive profiles between pairs of performers. r : Mantel correlation
coefficient between similarity matrices. Each dot corresponds to the
pairwise correlation between two performers. (A) Timing and articulation
pairwise correlations for the Prélude. (B) An example of a non-significant
association between the timing and velocity pairwise correlations for the
Bergeries. (C) Timing and velocity pairwise correlations for the Prélude. (D)
Pairwise correlations on the articulation profiles for the Bergeries and the
Partita.
the pairwise correlations computed between the Bergeries articu-
lation profiles for all pairs of performers was correlated with the
magnitude of the corresponding pairwise correlations computed
on articulation profiles for the Partita (Figure 3D). A marginally
significant correlation was also observed between the articula-
tion similarity matrices for the Partita and the Prélude (r = 0.241,
p = 0.072). For timing, post-hoc tests revealed that the timing
similarity matrix for the Prélude was congruent with at least one
other matrix (Bonferroni-Holm corrected p-value = 0.045), and
Mantel tests showed a significant correlation between the timing
matrices for the Prélude and the Partita (r = 0.376, p = 0.033).
Finally, to control for the fact that the comparisons across
pieces employed the interpretation of the Partita emphasizing
the highest melodic line (soprano), we repeated these analyses
using the interpretations of the Partita which emphasized the
alto and tenor parts, respectively. We obtained similar results to
those described in the previous paragraph, with identical out-
comes for the CADM tests in practically all cases. Exceptions were
the CADM test on asynchrony, which was marginally significant
with the alto interpretation (χ2 = 82.22, p = 0.092) but not with
other interpretations (all other p-values > 0.27), and the CADM
test on timing, which reached significance with either the soprano
or tenor interpretations (both p-values < 0.05), but was only
marginally significant with the alto interpretation (χ2 = 83.28,
p = 0.077). This suggests that the choice of the interpretation
of the Partita for the purpose of conducting comparisons across
pieces had only a minor influence on the outcome of the similarity
analyses.
Comparisons across interpretations of the Partita
Following the procedure described above, similarity matrices
were generated by computing all possible pairwise Kendall’s taus
between the 12 performers’ note-by-note (or event-by-event)
expressive profiles, separately for each parameter and for each
interpretation of the Partita. With very few exceptions for which
slightly negative values were obtained (corresponding to 3 out
of 792 pairwise correlations), all Kendall’s taus were positive,
indicating a higher-than-chance concordance between expressive
profiles. Twelve 12 × 12 similarity matrices were obtained, for
each of the four expressive parameters and each of the three
interpretations.
CADM tests were first conducted to assess the within-
interpretation congruence among the similarity matrices corre-
sponding to the four expressive parameters, separately for each
interpretation. As reported in the previous section, a marginal
tendency was found for the soprano interpretation (χ2 = 85.31,
p = 0.085). Additionally, a significant association was detected
for the alto (χ2 = 97.22, p = 0.026) and tenor (χ2 = 102.01,
p = 0.005) interpretations. In the case of the alto interpretation,
post-hoc tests revealed that the asynchrony and timing simi-
larity matrices were congruent with at least one other matrix
(both Bonferroni-Holm corrected p-values < 0.01). Mantel tests
showed a significant correlation between the asynchrony and tim-
ing matrices (r = 0.558, p = 0.001) and between the velocity and
timing matrices (r = 0.373, p = 0.009). For the tenor interpreta-
tion, post-hoc tests indicated that the timing matrix was congruent
with at least one other matrix (Bonferroni-Holm corrected p-
value < 0.001). Mantel tests showed that the timing matrix
was significantly correlated with the articulation (r = 0.409, p =
0.022), asynchrony (r = 0.391, p = 0.007), and velocity (r =
0.283, p = 0.022) matrices.
CADM tests were then conducted to assess the within-
parameter congruence among the similarity matrices based on a
single expressive parameter across all interpretations, separately
for each of the four parameters. The CADM tests were highly sig-
nificant for all parameters (all χ2 > 125, all p-values < 0.001).
Post-hoc tests revealed that all matrices corresponding to the
same expressive parameter were congruent with each other (all
Bonferroni-Holm corrected p-values < 0.01). Similarly, Mantel
tests indicated that all pairwise correlations conducted between
similarity matrices corresponding to the same parameter were
significant (all r > 0.39, all p-values < 0.01).
Comparison between Kendall’s tau and Spearman’s rho
In order to evaluate whether the choice of non-parametric corre-
lation coefficient affected the outcome of the similarity analyses
reported in the preceding sections, we repeated all analyses using
Spearman’s rho correlation coefficient instead of Kendall’s tau.
The CADM tests conducted on the similarity matrices gener-
ated using Spearman’s rho coefficients yielded chi-square and
p-values very similar to those obtained on the corresponding
matrices generated using Kendall’s tau, with identical outcomes
for the significance tests in all cases except for the within-
piece, across-parameters congruence for the Prélude which was
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 10
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
marginally significant with Spearman’s rho (χ2 = 85.35, p =
0.074) but reached significance with Kendall’s tau (χ2 = 94.95,
p = 0.020). Overall, the comparable results obtained with both
correlation coefficients suggest that our approach is robust to
the type of non-parametric correlation used in the similarity
analysis.
Discussion
The CADM tests conducted to assess within-piece, or within-
interpretation, congruence across all expressive parameters were
at least marginally significant for all pieces and interpretations
analyzed here, suggesting that this type of concordance across
different parameters is not uncommon. For the CADM tests
that reached significance (for the Prélude and for the alto and
tenor interpretations of the Partita), post-hoc tests showed that,
in all cases, the timing similarity matrix was shown to be signif-
icantly congruent with at least one other matrix. This indicates
that the magnitude of the correlations between the timing pro-
files of different performers tended to be positively associated
with the magnitude of the correlations between the expressive
profiles computed on at least one other expressive parameter,
suggesting that timing profiles seem to play a central role in
the within-piece or within-interpretation congruences observed
here.
CADM tests conducted to assess within-parameter congruence
across pieces or interpretations revealed much higher congru-
ences across interpretations of the Partita than across pieces, a
result which is probably expected given that different interpreta-
tions of the same piece are likely to be much more similar to each
other than performances of different pieces. Indeed, all Mantel
correlations between the similarity matrices corresponding to the
same expressive parameter were highly significant for all four
parameters when comparing across interpretations of the Partita
(note that Mantel r values are often comparatively small even
when significant, see Dutilleul et al., 2000). On the other hand,
CADM tests revealed significant congruences across pieces only
for timing and articulation. These findings suggest that while it
is very likely that performers who display concordant profiles for
one interpretation of a piece will also display concordant profiles
for a different interpretation of the same piece when considering
the same expressive parameter, this is not as likely when com-
paring across pieces, and was only observed on some expressive
parameters.
Finally, comparable results were obtained with either Kendall’s
tau or Spearman’s rho as a measure of pairwise similarity between
expressive profiles, indicating that the approach presented here
is not dependent on a particular type of non-parametric cor-
relation coefficient. Nevertheless, Kendall’s tau remains a more
general measure of concordance in our view, for the reasons
detailed in the Introduction, and is therefore more suitable than
Spearman’s rho for comparing expressive profiles across pieces (or
interpretations) and parameters.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
In this article, we sought to disentangle performer- and piece-
specific influences on expressive strategies in harpsichord per-
formance, by pursuing two lines of inquiry, one based on an
analysis of the proportion of variance in the mean values for
each expressive parameter explained by performer and piece (or
interpretation) effects, and a second one on a similarity analysis of
note-by-note expressive profiles. These analyses were conducted
on a dataset of recordings of three pieces representative of the
harpsichord repertoire made by 12 professional performers and
focused on four expressive parameters: articulation, asynchrony,
timing, and velocity.
The first approach used LMMs to show that piece-specific
influences explained a large proportion of the variance in the
mean values for some expressive parameters such as articula-
tion (and to a lesser extent velocity), whereas analogous anal-
yses on the different interpretations of the Partita showed only
negligible interpretation-specific effects. On the other hand, indi-
vidual differences explained a much larger proportion of the
variance for the LMMs comparing across interpretations of the
Partita than for those comparing across pieces, indicating that
performer-specific influences were prevalent in the former case.
These individual differences can be sorted into two categories: (1)
piece- or interpretation-related differences between performers
(corresponding to a significant random slope in a linear model)
and (2) global differences between performers across all pieces
or interpretations (corresponding to a significant random inter-
cept). The former were observed on all expressive parameters
when comparing across pieces but were generally less impor-
tant when comparing across different interpretations of the same
piece, whereas the latter only reached significance for articulation
and velocity when comparing across pieces but amounted to large
effects when comparing across interpretations. The fact that some
individual performers consistently deviated from the mean val-
ues for some expressive parameters, both across different pieces
and across interpretations of the same piece, suggests that global,
undifferentiated expressivity measures computed over an entire
performance, such as the mean overlap or the average key velocity,
may in some cases constitute valid markers of artistic individual-
ity that reliably characterize a performer’s playing style. Finally,
these analyses also revealed important differences in the degree of
individuality expressed by performers, with some harpsichordists
exhibiting statistically significant individual random intercept or
slope effects for several expressive parameters, and others only for
a few or none.
The second approach used permutation tests on similar-
ity matrices generated from pairwise Kendall’s tau correlations
between note-by-note (or event-by-event) expressive profiles to
show that, when examining profiles associated with different
expressive parameters but all corresponding to the same piece
(or same interpretation), we observed in all cases a signifi-
cant effect, or at least marginally significant tendency, for the
degree of concordance between the profiles of different per-
formers for one expressive parameter to be positively correlated
with the degree of concordance between their profiles on at
least one other expressive parameter. Moreover, we observed
that, when comparing profiles associated with the same expres-
sive parameter but corresponding to different interpretations of
the Partita, there was a significant tendency, for all four expres-
sive parameters, for performers with concordant profiles in one
interpretation to also display concordant profiles in another
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 11
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
interpretation. This was the case only for articulation and tim-
ing when comparing across pieces. These findings have several
implications. First, the fact that concordance between differ-
ent performers in one expressive parameter also tends to be
associated with concordance in a different parameter suggests
that parameters cannot always be considered in isolation, and
that a type of interpretive concinnity can manifest itself across
expressive parameters. Although this type of interaction between
expressive devices has been reported previously, for instance
between tempo and loudness curves (Widmer and Goebl, 2004)
or between asynchrony (melody lead) and velocity (Repp, 1996a;
but see Goebl, 2001), it had not, to our knowledge, been demon-
strated across different pieces or between different perform-
ers. Second, the within-parameter, between-pieces congruence
observed for articulation and timing indicates that performers
who use similar articulation (or timing) patterns in one piece
also tend to display similar articulation (or timing) profiles in
another piece. This suggests that, at least for these expressive
parameters, interpretive choices can transcend pieces and maybe
even compositional genres. Lastly, and more generally, these
observations point to the existence of expressive meta-strategies
encompassing several expressive parameters and that can man-
ifest themselves either across interpretations or even different
pieces.
The fact that a significant within-parameter, between-pieces
concordance was only observed for articulation and timing may
be related to the important role played by these expressive devices
in harpsichord performance (Gingras et al., 2009). In particu-
lar, the importance of articulation in Baroque music has been
noted elsewhere (Rosenblum, 1997; Lawson and Stowell, 1999).
In contrast, the relevance of note-by-note velocity patterns is pre-
sumably de-emphasized, at least to some extent, due to the limited
dynamic differentiation available on the harpsichord (Penttinen,
2006), and it is not clear that note-by-note variations in velocity
are intentionally employed for expressive purposes by harpsi-
chordists. Although local tempo variations are generally con-
sidered to be intimately related to the formal structure of the
pieces under consideration (Todd, 1985; Repp, 1992), individ-
ual performers may interpret formal structures in idiosyncratic
ways that are consistent across different pieces, so that performers
who agree in their timing profiles for one piece tend to agree for
a different piece. Hence, the significant between-pieces congru-
ence observed for timing suggests that, for instance, performers
using rallentando (a gradual slowing down) in similar places in
the Partita might be expected to also have comparable tempo
variation profiles in the Bergeries, whereas performers with dif-
ferent profiles for the former piece would also be expected to
exhibit less concordance in their profiles for the latter piece.
Note-by-note articulation patterns are, presumably, not tightly
linked with specific formal structures, but likely correspond to
piece-independent patterns that are characteristic of an individual
performer’s playing style. Perhaps paradoxically, the between-
pieces concordance in note-by-note articulation patterns, which
suggests the existence of a performer-related specificity that tran-
scends pieces, is contrasted with a very strong piece-specific
effect on the global articulation trends (see Table 1). Clearly,
more research, using a greater number of pieces and possibly
involving comparisons across instruments and repertoires, is nec-
essary not only to elucidate the issues outlined here, but also
to investigate more comprehensively the nature and prevalence
of the expressive meta-strategies that the present research has
uncovered.
A particularity of the experimental design used here is that
performers were asked to emphasize a specific melodic line in
the Partita (although they were free to choose whichever expres-
sive strategy they desired to achieve that aim), whereas they were
simply invited to play as if in a recital setting for the other
pieces. Although the instruction to emphasize a melodic line
would likely have affected the performers’ expressive choices,
thus potentially biasing our results, we do not believe this to
be a major concern here. First, we retained only the Partita
recordings emphasizing the highest melodic line (soprano),
which is probably closest to a natural interpretation (Palmer
and Holleran, 1994; Palmer, 1996; Goebl, 2001), for the com-
parisons across pieces. In any case, very similar results were
obtained when substituting the soprano interpretation with the
alto or tenor interpretations, both for the LMMs and for the
similarity analyses, suggesting that the choice of interpretation
had only a minimal impact on our results. Second, the results
do not show any evidence that the performers were unable to
fully express their individuality in performances of the Partita.
In that regard, it is especially relevant to note that significant
congruences were observed between the timing profiles for the
Prélude and the Partita, as well as for the note-by-note artic-
ulation patterns between the Partita and the Bergeries (with a
marginally significant congruence between the Partita and the
Prélude). This indicates that the concordance in timing or artic-
ulation patterns between individual performers was preserved
between the Partita and other pieces, even though the perfor-
mance instructions were different, which is a noteworthy result
in itself.
Besides the dichotomy between measured and unmeasured
pieces in our sample, it is likely that other stylistic features, related
for instance to the date of composition, the compositional genre,
the meter (the Bergeries is written in 6/8, whereas the Partita fol-
lows a 4/4 meter) or the texture (the Partita is written in a much
more polyphonic style than the other pieces) played a role in
the performers’ choice of expressive strategies. Our analysis did
not account for these aspects, but further research may address
them more directly by examining a greater number of pieces
and perhaps more explicitly adopting a musicological perspective.
Other expressive strategies relating to tempo and meter, such as
the use of notes inégales (in which some notes with equal written
time values are performed with unequal durations, usually as
alternating long and short) and other types of durational con-
trasts (Fabian and Schubert, 2010; Moelants, 2011), or metrical
emphasis (strong vs. weak beats), could also be explored in greater
depth.
In conclusion, this study highlighted the usefulness of LMMs,
and more generally mixed models employing likelihood esti-
mation, in quantifying piece-, interpretation-, and performer-
specific influences on expressive choices, as well as the relevance
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 12
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
of similarity analyses, based on methods found more com-
monly in biological sciences (such as the CADM and Mantel
tests), to the comparison of expressive profiles across pieces (or
interpretations) and expressive parameters. Notably, because our
methodology for the similarity analysis relies entirely on non-
parametric tests, it is potentially broadly applicable and could
likely be generalized to the study of other expressive parameters
or even perceptual response profiles. Our findings constitute a
significant addition to the literature on individuality in music
performance, especially given that very few studies compared
the same performers across different pieces or interpretations of
the same piece. Finally, the combination of the type of analysis
proposed here with empirical studies examining the perception
of individuality in music performance (Gingras et al., 2011;
Koren and Gingras, 2011) could conceivably prove to be a very
fruitful and synergistic endeavor in the investigation of artistic
individuality.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
PARTICIPANTS
Twelve professional harpsichordists, five female and seven male,
from the Montreal (Canada) area were invited to participate
in the experiment. Their average age was 39 years (range:
21–61 years). They had played the harpsichord for a mean
duration of 22 years (range: 6–40). Seven of them had previ-
ously won prizes in regional, national, or international harp-
sichord competitions. Ten reported being right-handed, one
left-handed, and one ambidextrous. All harpsichordists signed
a consent form and received financial compensation for their
participation in the study, which was approved and reviewed
by the Research Ethics Board of McGill University (Montreal,
Canada).
PROCEDURE
For the Prélude and the Bergeries, performers received no instruc-
tions besides playing the pieces as if in a “recital setting.” Each
piece was recorded twice. In the case of the Partita, perform-
ers were instructed to play three versions, each emphasizing a
different voice (respectively, the soprano, alto, and tenor parts).
Each interpretation was recorded twice, for a total of six record-
ings per performer. The order of the instructions was random-
ized according to a Latin square design. Performers were given
20 min to practice before recording the pieces (the scores of the
Prélude and of the Bergeries were given to the performers 4–6
weeks before the recording session). The entire recording session
lasted ∼1 h.
Performances took place in an acoustically treated studio,
on an Italian-style Bigaud harpsichord (Heugel, Paris, France)
with two 8-foot stops. Only the back stop was used for the
experiment. This harpsichord was equipped with a MIDI con-
sole, allowing precise measurement of performance parameters.
MIDI velocities were estimated by a mechanical double contact
located underneath the keys and from which the travel time of
the keys was measured, with a high velocity corresponding to
a shorter travel time (faster attack). MIDI velocity values for
each note event were coded in a range between 16 (slowest)
and 100 (fastest). The measured velocities were calibrated sep-
arately for each key by authors Bruno Gingras and Pierre-Yves
Asselin.
The audio signal was recorded through two omnidirec-
tional microphones MKH 8020 (Sennheiser GmbH, Wedemark
Wennebostel, Germany). The microphones were located 1 m
above the resonance board and were placed 25 cm apart.
The audio and MIDI signals were sent to a PC computer through
an RME Fireface audio interface (Audio AG, Haimhausen,
Germany). Audio and MIDI data were then recorded using
Cakewalk’s SONAR software (Cakewalk, Inc., Boston, MA, USA)
and stored on a hard disk.
PERFORMANCE DATA ANALYSIS
Performances were matched to the scores of the pieces using
an algorithm developed by the authors, which has been shown
to be suitable for ornamented harpsichord pieces (Gingras and
McAdams, 2011). To ensure that the excerpts from all three
pieces were of comparable duration, only the first part of the
rondo from the Bergeries was used in all subsequent analyses.
The excerpt from the Bergeries comprised 281 notes, whereas
the Partita contained 153 notes, and the Prélude 140 notes.
The average duration (from first to last onset) was 54.2 s for
the Bergeries excerpt (range: 47.1–61.6 s), 36.8 s for the Partita
(range: 28.3–47.5 s), and 59.9 s for the Prélude (range: 39.1–
84.2 s). These durations corresponded to the following tempi:
for the Bergeries, the mean tempo was 107.0 beats per minute
(bpm), ranging from 93.5 to 122.3 bpm, with the beat corre-
sponding to an eighth note (6/8 meter); for the Partita, the mean
tempo was 52.9 bpm (range: 40.4–67.7 bpm), with the beat corre-
sponding to a quarter note (4/4 meter); for the Prélude, the mean
tempo was 149.2 bpm (range: 99.8–214.7 bpm), with each note
onset counted as a “beat” in the absence of a notated rhythmic
structure.
The mean error rates per performance, defined as the propor-
tion of wrong notes or missing notes relative to the total number
of score notes, were as follows: for the Bergeries, 0.37% (range:
0–1.42%); for the Partita, 0.82% (range: 0–2.61%); and for the
Prélude, 0.54% (range: 0–2.14%). These low error rates are com-
parable to the rates reported by Repp (1996b) and Goebl (2001)
in studies on professional piano performance, suggesting that the
performance data collected for the current study were of suitable
quality for assessing individual expressive profiles in professional
harpsichord performance.
Four expressive parameters were analyzed for each perfor-
mance: articulation, note onset asynchrony, timing, and velocity.
Articulation refers to the amount of overlap between two consec-
utive note events ni and nj belonging to the same melodic line
or voice. A legato articulation corresponds to a positive overlap
(when the offset of note ni occurs after the onset of note nj),
whereas a detached or staccato articulation corresponds to a neg-
ative overlap. Here, the onset of a note is defined as the time at
which the corresponding key is pressed (as measured by the MIDI
system) and its offset corresponds to the time at which the key is
released. Because the amount of overlap varies with tempo (Repp,
1995), we chose to use the overlap ratio, defined as the ratio of the
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 13
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
overlap between two consecutive note events and the inter-onset
interval between these notes, as a measure of articulation (Bresin
and Battel, 2000).
Note onset asynchrony is defined as the difference in onset
time between note onsets that are notated in the musical score
as synchronous (Palmer, 1989). Several measures of onset asyn-
chrony have been constructed. Rasch (1979) proposed to use the
root mean square, or standard deviation of the onset times of
nominally simultaneous notes. We chose to use this measure here.
Onset asynchrony values were not computed in the case of the
Prélude, whose score does not include nominally synchronous
notes.
To analyze expressive timing, tempo values were computed
from the inter-onset interval between consecutive note onset
events. To allow for meaningful comparisons across pieces for the
LMM analysis, the logarithm in base two of the total duration of
the piece (defined as the time interval between the first onset and
the last onset of the piece, see Moelants, 2000) divided by the geo-
metric mean of the total duration across all performances, was
used (Wagner, 1974; see also Repp, 1992). This procedure yields
a tempo valuation that is centered and scaled for each piece, with
a value of 1 corresponding to a tempo that is twice as slow (dura-
tion twice as long) as the mean tempo for all performances of the
piece, and a value of −1 corresponding to a tempo that is twice
as fast (duration twice as short). Untransformed durations were
used for the LMMs analyzing the different interpretations of the
Partita.
For the event-by-event timing profiles, local tempo values were
obtained for each note onset event e by computing the loga-
rithm of the ratio of the duration (inter-onset interval) of e to
its expected duration (i.e., the duration obtained by dividing the
notated duration of e by the notated duration of the entire piece,
corresponding to a “deadpan” or mechanical performance with
an invariant tempo) was used. In this case, a local tempo value
of 0 for e corresponds to the mean tempo of the performance
(indicating no local deviation from the mean tempo), whereas a
value of 1 corresponds to a local tempo that is twice as slow as
the mean tempo, and a value of −1 to a tempo that is twice as
fast.
Lastly, in the case of velocity, the raw MIDI velocity values
associated with the key press corresponding to each note onset
(see Procedure) were used for the analysis.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
LMMs were fitted using the PROC MIXED function in SAS 9.0
(SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) (Singer, 1998; Littell et al., 2006).
All models were fitted using a variance components (VC) covari-
ance matrix, which is the default covariance matrix structure for
LMMs both in PROC MIXED and in the analogous MIXED pro-
cedure in SPSS 19.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Analogous
models were also fitted with the unstructured and compound
symmetry covariance structures, but these models either did not
converge or yielded worse fits than equivalent LMMs fitted with
the default VC structure. Although all reported analyses were
conducted in SAS, we verified that equivalent models yielded
identical results with the MIXED procedure in SPSS. Additionally,
the GLMM analysis on error rates was conducted using the PROC
GLIMMIX function in SAS.
The CADM (“Congruence among distance matrices”)
(Legendre and Lapointe, 2004) and Mantel tests (Mantel, 1967;
Mantel and Valand, 1970) were conducted on the similarity
matrices using the routines CADM.global and CADM.post in
package ape (Paradis et al., 2004) in R (R Core Team, 2013). One-
tailed significance tests, corresponding to a positive association,
were conducted for both the CADM and Mantel tests, following
the procedure described in Legendre and Lapointe (2004). 99,999
permutations were conducted to assess significance for both
tests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by a grant from the Canadian
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and a Canada
Research Chair (Stephen McAdams). We wish to thank Alain
Poirier, former director of the Conservatoire National Supérieur
de Musique et de Danse de Paris, for the loan of the MIDI
harpsichord. We also thank Bennett Smith, Meghan Goodchild,
Julien Boissinot, and Harold Kilianski for their technical assis-
tance, McGill Sound Recording for permission to use their equip-
ment, and Martha de Francisco for her assistance with sound
recording.
REFERENCES
Arndt, S., Turvey, C., and Andreasen, N. C. (1999). Correlating and pre-
dicting psychiatric symptom ratings: Spearman’s r versus Kendall’s tau
correlation. J. Psychiatr. Res. 33, 97–104. doi: 10.1016/S0022-3956(98)
90046-2
Bresin, R., and Battel, G. U. (2000). Articulation strategies in expressive piano per-
formance: analysis of legato, staccato, and repeated notes in performances of the
Andante movement of Mozart’s Sonata in G Major (K 545). J. New Music Res.
29, 211–224. doi: 10.1076/jnmr.29.3.211.3092
Cheng, J., Edwards, L. J., Maldonado-Molina, M. M., Komro, K. A., and
Muller, K. E. (2009). Real longitudinal data analysis for real people: build-
ing a good enough mixed model. Stat. Med. 29, 504–520. doi: 10.1002/
sim.3775
Dalla Bella, S., and Palmer, C. (2011). Rate effects on timing, key velocity, and
finger kinematics in piano performance. PLoS ONE 6:e20518. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0020518
Dietz, E. J. (1983). Permutation tests for association between two distance matrices.
Syst. Biol. 32, 21–26. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/32.1.21
Dutilleul, P., Stockwell, J., Frigon, D., and Legendre, P. (2000). The Mantel test
versus Pearson’s correlation analysis: assessment of the differences for biolog-
ical and environmental studies. J. Agric. Biol. Environ. Stat. 5, 131–150. doi:
10.2307/1400528
Fabian, D., and Schubert, E. (2010). A new perspective on the performance of
dotted rhythms. Early Music 38, 585–588. doi: 10.1093/em/caq079
Gabrielsson, A. (2003). Music performance research at the millenium. Psychol.
Music 31, 221–272. doi: 10.1177/03057356030313002
Gingras, B. (2008). Expressive Strategies and Performer-Listener Communication
in Organ Performance. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, McGill University
(Montreal, QC).
Gingras, B., Asselin, P.-Y., Goodchild, M., and McAdams, S. (2009).
“Communicating voice emphasis in harpsichord performance,” in Proceedings
of the 7th Triennial Conference of European Society for the Cognitive Sciences of
Music (ESCOM 2009), eds J. Louhivuori, T. Eerola, S. Saarikallio, T. Himberg,
and P. S. Eerola (Jyväskylä), 154–158.
Gingras, B., Lagrandeur-Ponce, T., Giordano, B. L., and McAdams, S. (2011).
Perceiving musical individuality: performer identification is dependent on per-
former expertise and expressiveness, but not on listener expertise. Perception 40,
1206–1220. doi: 10.1068/p6891
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 14
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
Gingras, B., and McAdams, S. (2011). Improved score-performance match-
ing using both structural and temporal information from MIDI
recordings. J. New Music Res. 40, 43–57. doi: 10.1080/09298215.2010.
545422
Gingras, B., McAdams, S., Schubert, P., and Utz, C. (2010). “The performer as ana-
lyst: a case study of JS Bach’s “Dorian”Fugue (BWV 538),” in Music Theory and
Interdisciplinarity—8th Congress of the Gesellschaft für Musiktheorie Graz 2008
(Saarbrücken: Pfau-Verlag), 305–318.
Goebl, W. (2001). Melody lead in piano performance: expressive device or artifact?
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 110, 563–572. doi: 10.1121/1.1376133
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scand. J.
Stat. 6, 65–70.
Hubert, L. J. (1979). Comparison of sequences. Psychol. Bull. 86, 1098–1106. doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.86.5.1098
Huhta, V. (1979). Evaluation of different similarity indices as measures of succes-
sion in arthropod communities of the forest floor after clear-cutting. Oecologia
41, 11–23. doi: 10.1007/BF00344834
Koren, R., and Gingras, B. (2011). “Perceiving individuality in musical perfor-
mance: recognizing harpsichordists playing different pieces,” in Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Performance Science 2011, eds A. Williamon,
D. Edwards, and L. Bartel (Utrecht: European Association of Conservatoires),
473–478.
Kumari, S., Nie, J., Chen, H.-S., Ma, H., Stewart, R., Li, X., et al. (2012).
Evaluation of gene association methods for coexpression network construction
and biological knowledge discovery. PLoS ONE 7:e50411. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0050411
Laird, N., Lange, N., and Stram, D. (1987). Maximum likelihood computations
with repeated measures: application of the EM algorithm. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 82,
97–105. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1987.10478395
Laird, N., and Ware, J. (1982). Random-effects models for longitudinal data.
Biometrics 38, 963–974. doi: 10.2307/2529876
Lawson, C., and Stowell, R. (1999). The Historical Performance of Music : An
Introduction. Cambridge, UK. ; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511481710
Legendre, P. (2000). Comparison of permutation methods for the partial correla-
tion and partial Mantel tests. J. Stat. Comput. Simul. 67, 37–73. doi: 10.1080/
00949650008812035
Legendre, P., and Lapointe, F.-J. (2004). Assessing congruence among distance
matrices: single-malt scotch whiskies revisited. Aust. N.Z. J. Stat. 46, 615–629.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-842X.2004.00357.x
Legendre, P., and Legendre, L. (1998). Numerical Ecology. 2nd Edn. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Lindstrom, M. J., and Bates, D. M. (1988). Newton-Raphson and EM algorithms
for linear mixed-effects models for repeated-measures data. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
83, 1014–1022.
Littell, R. C., Milliken, G. A., Stroup, W. W., Wolfinger, R. D., and Schabenberger,
O. (2006). SAS for Mixed Models. 2nd Edn. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc.
Mantel, N. (1967). The detection of disease clustering and a generalized regression
approach. Cancer Res. 27, 209–220.
Mantel, N., and Valand, R. S. (1970). A technique of nonparametric multivariate
analysis. Biometrics 26, 547–558. doi: 10.2307/2529108
McArdle, B. H., and Anderson, M. J. (2001). Fitting multivariate mod-
els to community data: a comment on distance-based redundancy analy-
sis. Ecology 82, 290–297. doi: 10.1890/0012-9658(2001)082[0290:FMMTCD]
2.0.CO;2
Moelants, D. (2000). Statistical analysis of written and performed music. A study
of compositional principles and problems of coordination and expression in
“punctual” serial music. J. New Music Res. 29, 37–60. doi: 10.1076/0929-8215
(200003)29:01;1-P;FT037
Moelants, D. (2011). The performance of notes inégales: the influence of tempo,
musical structure, and individual performance style on expressive timing. Music
Percept. 28, 449–460. doi: 10.1525/mp.2011.28.5.449
Morrell, C. H. (1998). Likelihood ratio testing of variance components in the lin-
ear mixed-effects model using restricted maximum likelihood. Biometrics 54,
1560–1568. doi: 10.2307/2533680
Nakagawa, S., and Schielzeth, H. (2013). A general and simple method for obtain-
ing R2 from generalized linear mixed-effects models. Methods Ecol. Evol. 4,
133–142. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-210x.2012.00261.x
Newson, R. (2002). Parameters behind “nonparametric” statistics: Kendall’s tau,
Somers’ D and median differences. Stata J. 2, 45–64.
Palmer, C. (1989). Mapping musical thought to musical performance. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 15, 331–346. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.
15.2.331
Palmer, C. (1996). On the assignment of structure in music performance. Music
Percept. 14, 23–56. doi: 10.2307/40285708
Palmer, C., and Holleran, S. (1994). Harmonic, melodic, and frequency height
influences in the perception of multivoiced music. Percept. Psychophys. 56,
301–312. doi: 10.3758/BF03209764
Paradis, E., Claude, J., and Strimmer, K. (2004). APE: analyses of phylogenetics and
evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 20, 289–290. doi: 10.1093/bioinformat-
ics/btg412
Penttinen, H. (2006). “On the dynamics of the harpsichord and its synthesis,” in
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Digital Audio Effects (DAFx-
06), ed V. Verfaille (Montreal, QC), 115–120.
Popescu, M., and Dinu, L. P. (2009). “Comparing statistical similarity
measures for stylistic multivariate analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2009
International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP 2009), eds G. Angelova, K. Bontcheva, R. Mitkov, N. Nicolov,
and N. Nikolov (Borovets: Association for Computational Linguistics),
349–354.
Ramirez, R., Maestre, E., Perez, A., and Serra, X. (2011). Automatic performer iden-
tification in celtic violin audio recordings. J. New Music Res. 40, 165–174. doi:
10.1080/09298215.2011.572171
Ramirez, R., Maestre, E., and Serra, X. (2010). Automatic performer identifica-
tion in commercial monophonic jazz performances. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 31,
1514–1523. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2009.12.032
Rasch, R. A. (1979). Synchronization in performed ensemble music. Acustica 43,
121–131.
Raudenbush, S., and Bryk, A. (2002). Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and
Data Analysis Methods (Advanced Quantitative Techniques in the Social Sciences).
2nd Edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
R Core Team. (2013). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Available online at:
http://www.R-project.org/.
Repp, B. H. (1992). Diversity and commonality in music performance - an analysis
of timing microstructure in Schumann’s “Träumerei.” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 92,
2546–2568. doi: 10.1121/1.404425
Repp, B. H. (1995). Acoustics, perception, and production of legato articula-
tion on a digital piaNo. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 3862–3874. doi: 10.1121/1.
413065
Repp, B. H. (1996a). Patterns of note onset asynchronies in expressive
piano performance. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 3917–3931. doi: 10.1121/1.
417245
Repp, B. H. (1996b). The art of inaccuracy: why pianists’ errors are difficult to hear.
Music Percept. 14, 161–183. doi: 10.2307/40285716
Rosenblum, S. P. (1997). Concerning articulation on keyboard instruments: aspects
from the renaissance to the present. Perform. Pract. Rev. 10, 31–40. doi:
10.5642/perfpr.199710.01.04
Saunders, C., Hardoon, D. R., Shawe-Taylor, J., and Widmer, G. (2008). Using string
kernels to identify famous performers from their playing style. Intell. Data Anal.
12, 425–440.
Schielzeth, H., and Forstmeier, W. (2009). Conclusions beyond support: overconfi-
dent estimates in mixed models. Behav. Ecol. 20, 416–420. doi: 10.1093/beheco/
arn145
Singer, J. D. (1998). Using SAS PROC MIXED to fit multilevel models, hierarchical
models, and individual growth models. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 23, 323–355. doi:
10.3102/10769986023004323
Sloboda, J. A. (2000). Individual differences in music performance. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 4, 397–403. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01531-X
Snijders, T., and Bosker, R. (1999). Multilevel Modeling: An Introduction to Basic
and Advanced Multilevel Modeling. London: Sage Publications.
Stamatatos, E., and Widmer, G. (2005). Automatic identification of music
performers with learning ensembles. Artif. Intell. 165, 37–56. doi:
10.1016/j.artint.2005.01.007
Todd, N. (1985). A model of expressive timing in tonal music. Music Percept. 3,
33–58. doi: 10.2307/40285321
www.frontiersin.org November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 15
Gingras et al. Individuality in harpsichord performance
Van Vugt, F. T., Jabusch, H.-C., and Altenmüller, E. (2013). Individuality that
is unheard of: systematic temporal deviations in scale playing leave an
inaudible pianistic fingerprint. Front. Psychol. 4:134. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.
00134
Verbeke, G., and Molenberghs, G. (2000). Linear Mixed Models for Longitudinal
Data. New York, NY: Springer.
Wagner, C. (1974). Experimentelle Untersuchungen über das Tempo
[Experimental investigations concerning tempo]. Österreichische Musikz 29,
589–604.
West, B. T., Welch, K. B., and Galecki, A. T. (2007). Linear Mixed Models: Practical
Guide Using Statistical Software. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman and Hall/CRC Press.
Widmer, G., and Goebl, W. (2004). Computational models of expressive music per-
formance: the state of the art. J. New Music Res. 33, 203–216. doi: 10.1080/09298
21042000317804
Yona, G., Dirks, W., Rahman, S., and Lin, D. M. (2006). Effective similarity mea-
sures for expression profiles. Bioinformatics 22, 1616–1622. doi: 10.1093/bioin-
formatics/btl127
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Received: 30 June 2013; accepted: 12 November 2013; published online: 28 November
2013.
Citation: Gingras B, Asselin P-Y and McAdams S (2013) Individuality in harpsichord
performance: disentangling performer- and piece-specific influences on interpretive
choices. Front. Psychol. 4:895. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00895
This article was submitted to Cognitive Science, a section of the journal Frontiers in
Psychology.
Copyright © 2013 Gingras, Asselin and McAdams. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | Cognitive Science November 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 895 | 16
