Comparative Evaluation of Text- and Citation-based 
Plagiarism Detection Approaches using GuttenPlag 
 
Bela Gipp 
OvGU, Germany & UC Berkeley  
gipp@berkeley.edu 
Norman Meuschke 
OvGU, Germany & UC Berkeley 
nmeuschk@st.ovgu.de 
 
Joeran Beel 
OvGU, Germany & UC Berkeley 
j@beel.org 
 
ABSTRACT 
Various approaches for plagiarism detection exist. All are based 
on more or less sophisticated text analysis methods such as string 
matching, fingerprinting or style comparison. In this paper a new 
approach called Citation-based Plagiarism Detection is evaluated 
using a doctoral thesis [8], in which a volunteer crowd-sourcing 
project called GuttenPlag [1] identified substantial amounts of 
plagiarism through careful manual inspection. This new approach 
is able to identify similar and plagiarized documents based on the 
citations used in the text. It is shown that citation-based 
plagiarism detection performs significantly better than text-based 
procedures in identifying strong paraphrasing, translation and 
some idea plagiarism. Detection rates can be improved by 
combining citation-based with text-based plagiarism detection.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Clustering]: INFORMATION STORAGE AND 
RETRIEVAL – Information Search and Retrieval.  
General Terms 
Algorithms, Experimentation, Measurement, Languages 
Keywords 
Plagiarism Detection Systems, Citation-based Plagiarism 
Detection 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Plagiarism describes the appropriation of other people’s ideas, 
intellectual or creative work and passing them off as one’s own 
[4]. It is a particularly common problem among college students, 
but also prevalent among established researchers [19].  
Recently, a plagiarism case involving the German minister of 
defense, Mr. Guttenberg, gained widespread public attention. By 
chance, a law professor detected plagiarized sections within Mr. 
Guttenberg’s doctoral thesis [8]. After the popular politician 
repudiated the accusations as “abstruse”, volunteers initiated the 
GuttenPlag project [1] to crowd-source the investigation and 
determine the true amount of plagiarism present in the work.  
As of April 10th 2011, the joint efforts revealed that 371 out of 
393 main text pages in the thesis contained plagiarized fragments. 
In total about 64 % of the text lines were identified as plagiarized. 
The following barcode illustrates the findings. 
 
Figure 1: Pages containing Plagiarism (source: [1]) 
Black lines represent pages containing plagiarism from one 
source, red lines pages with plagiarism from multiple sources and 
white lines pages on which no plagiarism was found. The blue 
sections represent the table of contents and bibliography. 
As a result of this analysis, Mr. Guttenberg no longer claimed his 
thesis to be flawless. He renounced his doctorate and eventually 
stepped down from his political position. 
We applied the citation-based detection approach to Mr. 
Guttenberg’s thesis in order to demonstrate its potential for 
identifying cleverly disguised plagiarism, especially in cases of 
otherwise hard to detect translated plagiarisms. After giving an 
overview of different forms of plagiarism and the currently used 
detection methods, the concept of Citation-based Plagiarism 
Detection (CbPD) is elucidated. Afterwards, the methodology of 
the evaluation is presented. In the final section, the advantages of 
combining text-based and citation-based methods are discussed. 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
2.1 Forms of Plagiarism 
Observations of plagiarism behavior in practice reveal a number 
of commonly found methods for illegitimate text usage, which can 
briefly be summarized as follows. Copy&Paste (c&p) plagiarism 
specifies the act of taking over parts or the entirety of a text 
verbatim from another author. Disguised plagiarism includes 
practices intended to mask literally copied segments. Undue 
paraphrasing defines the intentional rewriting of foreign thoughts, 
in the vocabulary and style of the plagiarist without giving due 
credit in order to conceal the original source [3]. Translated 
plagiarism is the manual or automated conversion of content from 
one language to another intended to cover its origin. Idea 
plagiarism encompasses the usage of a broader foreign concept 
without appropriate source acknowledgement. An Example is the 
appropriation of research approaches, methods, experimental 
setups, argumentative structures, background sources etc. [5]. 
2.2 Plagiarism Detection Approaches  
Plagiarism Detection (PD) is a hypernym for computer-based 
procedures supporting the identification of plagiarism incidences. 
Existing PD systems (PDS) can be categorized into external and 
intrinsic. External PDS compare a suspicious document to a 
corpus of genuine works. Intrinsic PDS statistically examine 
linguistic features of the suspicious text, a process known as 
stylometry, without performing comparisons to external 
documents. While external PDS aim to find literally matching text 
segments, intrinsic PDS try to recognize changes in writing style 
[17].  
Different comparison strategies have been proposed for external 
PDS. The most common ones are briefly explained. Substring 
matching procedures aim to identify long pairs of identical strings. 
Such strings are treated as indicators for potential plagiarism if 
© ACM, (2011). This is the author’s preprint version of the work. It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The 
definitive version will be published in the proceedings of the JCDL 2011 conference in Ottawa, Canada.  
their share with regard to the entire text exceeds a chosen 
threshold. Most commonly suffix document models, such as 
suffix trees or arrays, have been used for that purpose [13].  
Fingerprinting methods, being the most widely used PD 
approach, aim at forming a representative digest of a document by 
selecting a set of multiple substrings from it. The set represents 
the fingerprint; its elements are called minutiae. Mathematical, 
hash-like functions can be applied on minutiae for transforming 
them into more space efficient byte strings [9].  
More than 1.000 individual style markers have been proposed for 
usage in stylometry [16]. They range from lexical features, e.g. 
average word length, to syntactic features, e.g. part-of-speech 
frequencies, to structural features, e.g. frequency of punctuation. 
Intrinsic PD systems mostly comprise an individual 
combination of multiple linguistic features [18]. 
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection (CbPD) is a fundamentally 
different approach compared to text-based similarity evaluations. 
It is especially suitable for scientific publications, since it requires 
references. In a previous paper [7] we initially proposed 
employing citation analysis for PD and evaluated its performance 
using an artificially created dataset.  
2.3 Strength and weaknesses of PD Systems 
Objective, comparative assessments of the detection performance 
of PD systems are difficult, since the used collections and 
evaluation methods differ widely. Two projects address this lack 
of comparability. Both attempt to benchmark PDS using 
standardized collections and controlled evaluation environments. 
The annual PAN International Competition on Plagiarism 
Detection (PAN-PC) was initiated in 2009, in which competitors 
present primarily research prototypes [14]. A periodic comparison 
of productive PDS is performed by a research group at the 
University of Applied Science Berlin (HTW) since 2004 [10].  
The PAN-PC evaluation corpus mainly contains artificially 
plagiarized sections that were created and partially obfuscated 
through automated methods such as translation, random shuffles, 
or semantic substitutions of terms. In addition, 4000 text segments 
that were manually obfuscated by humans instructed to simulate a 
plagiarist’s behavior are included [15]. In the HTW evaluations a 
corpus of 42 documents being manually plagiarized or original 
essays of approx. 1 to 1.5 pages of length is used. The original 
sources are known and mostly available on the internet [10, 20].  
Some results of the two competitions are presented to outline the 
characteristic strengths and weaknesses of existing PDS. 
 
Figure 2: Results of top 5 performing PDS in PAN-PC'10 [14] 
Figure 2 displays the plagiarism detection (plagdet) scores for the 
top 5 performing external PDS and the 2 intrinsic PDS of MUHR 
ET AL. and SUÁREZ ET AL. participating in PAN-PC’10 (see [14] 
for further results and references regarding individual systems). 
The plagdet score was developed to evaluate systems participating 
in the PAN-PC (see [15] for details). The scores are plotted 
according to the obfuscation techniques applied to plagiarized text 
segments. The overall plagdet score for all categories is stated in 
brackets within each legend entry. In the legend to the figure “-I” 
is attached to distinguish the system of MUHR ET AL. participating 
in the intrinsic from the one in the external task. 
The results indicate that c&p plagiarism can be detected with high 
accuracy by state-of-the-art PDS. However, detection rates for 
disguised plagiarized segments, especially those obfuscated by 
humans, are substantially lower for all systems. The organizers 
of the competition judged the results achieved in detecting cross-
lingual plagiarism to be misleading. The well-performing systems 
used automated services for translating foreign-language 
documents in the reference corpus. Those services were similar or 
identical to those used for constructing the plagiarized sections. It 
is hypothesized that the human-made translations obfuscating 
real-world plagiarism are much more complex and versatile, and 
hence less detectable by the tested PDS [14].  
The findings of the HTW comparisons are in line with those of the 
PAN-PC. Notably, none of the tested systems was able to identify 
cases of translated plagiarism [10]. That supports the assumption 
of unrealistic detection rates for translated segments in the 
PAN-PC due to the laboratory-like setup of the competition.  
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the performance of any external 
PDS depends heavily on the reference corpus available to the 
individual system. Therefore, it is not surprising that tools, which 
use the extensive indexes of internet search providers, often 
achieve the best detection results [12]. The same is true for 
manually performed queries of suspicious keywords and 
fragments. 
2.4 CITATION-BASED PD 
To our knowledge it has not been attempted, except for our 
previous study [7], to identify plagiarism by analyzing citations1 
and references. We propose the following definition: 
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection (CbPD) subsumes methods 
that use citations and references for determining document 
similarities in order to identify plagiarism. 
In the academic environment citations and references of scholarly 
publications have long been recognized for containing valuable 
semantic information about the content of a document and its 
relation to other works [6].  
Finding similar patterns in the citations used within two scientific 
texts is a strong indicator for semantic text similarity. We refer to 
citation patterns as subsequences in the citation tuples   and   
of two texts   and   that (partially) consist of shared references, 
and are therefore similar to each other.  
The degree of similarity between citation patterns depends, among 
others factors, mainly on the amount of shared references 
                                                             
 
1 Citations are short strings in the body of scientific texts representing 
sources contained in the bibliography whereas references denote entries 
in the bibliography. 
0.00
0.50
1.00
no
obfuscation
automated
(multiple)
translation paraphrasing
by humans
Kasprzak & Brandejs (0.80) Zou et al. (0.71)
Muhr et al.- E (0.69) Grozea & Popescu (0.62)
Oberreuter et al. (0.61) Muhr et al.- I (0.15)
Suárez et al. (0.04)
Plagdet Score 
(bibliographic coupling strength), and the extent to which the 
order of included citations, as well as their distance towards each 
other is similar. The idea is to calculate the probability of citation 
patterns to be the same by chance. For details on our CbPD 
algorithms, partly published as open-source, please consult [7], 
the documentation at http://sciplore.org and upcoming 
publications. 
This is an example text with references to different documents. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.This is an example text with references to 
different documents. This is one reference [1]. This is an example 
text with references to different documents. Another example. 
This is an example text with references to different 
documents.This is an example text with references to different 
documents.Another example. Another example. 
Another example. This is an example text with references [2] to 
different documents.This is an example text with references to 
different documents. Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents.Another example. Another 
example. This is an example text with references to different 
documents [1]. Another exampleThis is an example text with 
references to different documents.
This is an example text with references to different documents. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents. Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents.Another example. Another 
example. Another example. This is an example text with 
references to different documents.Another example. 
Another example [3]. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.Another example. This is another reference. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents. Example. This is an 
example text with references to different documents [2].
This is an example text with references to different documents. 
This is one reference. This is an example text with references to 
different documents [1]. Two very similar references. This is an 
example text with references to different documents.This is an 
example text with references to different documents. Another 
example. Another example [2]. 
This is an example text with references to different documents. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.
This is an example text with references to different documents. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents. Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents.Another example. Another 
example. Another example. This is an example text with 
references to different documents.Another example. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.This is an example text with references to 
different documents. Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents. Another example. Another 
example. This is an example text with references to different 
documents [3]. Another exampleThis is an example text with 
references to different documents.
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.Another example. This is another reference. 
Another example. This is an example text with references to 
different documents.Another example. This is an example text 
with references to different documents. Example. This is an 
example text with references to different documents.
Document A Document B
[1]
[3]
[2]
 
Figure 3: Identifying Citation Patterns for CbPD 
3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Test Corpus 
Artificially created evaluation corpora, such as the ones of the 
PAN-PC do not include citation or reference information. 
Moreover, they lead to unrealistically high detection rates as 
machines are not as creative in paraphrasing and disguising 
plagiarism as humans (see 2.3).  
Although the scientific value of Mr. Guttenberg’s dissertation is 
questionable, we consider it as an ideal case study for our 
evaluation purposes because it: 
 has been thoroughly investigated by hundreds of examiners; 
 was created by a human author trying to disguise plagiarism; 
 provides realistic citation information. 
 
Due to these unique characteristics, the thesis allows for 
comparative evaluation of commonly applied plagiarism detection 
and the Citation-based Plagiarism Detection approach.  
Previous evaluations (as presented in 2.3) indicate that translated 
plagiarism is especially hard to detect by conventional text-based 
PDS. Therefore, the focus of our investigation has been on 
whether CbPD is better suitable for detecting this form of 
plagiarism. At the time of our investigation the GuttenPlag project 
had identified plagiarized passages that represented appropriations 
of English sources translated to German on 31 pages within the 
thesis. Those 31 pages were analyzed for matching citations with 
their identified genuine sources. 
3.2 Test PD Systems 
To compare citation-based with traditional text-based detection 
we used three popular PDS. Ephorus, which usually scores among 
the top 3 PDS in the HTW comparisons [10], the freely available 
Ferret system [11], both systems use fingerprinting detection, and 
WCopyFind [2], a PDS that employs substring matching. Since 
the two latter mentioned systems depend on local availability of 
possible source documents, all digitally available sources 
identified by the GuttenPlag project were collected and used. 
4. EVALUATION & RESULTS 
Our results obtained for text-based PD confirm earlier findings of 
others presented in 2.3. Manually querying search engines, such 
as Google, yielded high detection rates with regard to copy&paste 
plagiarism. Depending on the invested time and selection of 
keywords, even paraphrased and translated plagiarism can be 
found.  
The text-based PDS, especially Ferret and WCopyfind, which 
work with local document comparisons, deliver good results for 
identifying copy&paste plagiarism given that the sources are 
available, as in our case. The performance of Ephorus in this case 
study was a little surprising. Only 2 % of the text in the thesis was 
found to match the sources of plagiarism. Given the large fraction 
of (almost) verbatim plagiarism in the thesis, and the fact that 77 
sources of plagiarized sections, which were identified by the 
GuttenPlag project, are available on the internet, opposed to 63 
that are not [1], this result is disappointing. Not surprisingly, all 
systems failed to identify almost all stronger paraphrased sections 
and could not detect any translated plagiarism (see Table 1 for 
details). However, these figures should be treated with care. Since 
a real thesis was used, it is uncertain whether all plagiarized 
fragments are known. Therefore, the stated detection rates might 
be too high, especially for the very hard to detect idea plagiarism. 
Figure 4 shows the citation patterns of all translated plagiarism 
fragments found by the GuttenPlag project. 
Page Sources
Bouton01
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Pream.
Guttenberg06
44 Tushnet99 no shared cit.
Vile91
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
Vile91
Guttenberg06
226 f. CenturyFnd99 no shared cit.
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
Vile91
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
Vile91
Vile91
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
Vile91
Guttenberg06
Murphy00
Guttenberg06
300 Buck1996 no shared citations
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
CRS92_Art.V
Guttenberg06
267 -
268
242 -
244
224
242 - 
244
Citation Patterns
30
39
223
225
229 -
231
232 -
233
234
235 -
239
240 -
242
242 -
244
246 -
247
Explanantion:
Boxes of the 
same color 
represent in-text 
citations of 
identical sources.
Intermediate 
blank boxes 
indicate one or 
more citations of 
non-shared 
sources.  
 
Figure 4: Citation Patterns for translated plagiarism 
The figure illustrates that the citation patterns in genuine sources 
and in Mr. Guttenberg’s translated plagiarism are often very 
similar. With exception of the pages 44, 226 and 300, all other 
pages share the same references in a similar order in the source 
document and Guttenberg’s translation. This becomes especially 
obvious after cleaning the citation sequences by removing 
citations that are not shared by both documents at their 
corresponding positions. This is exemplified at the bottom of the 
figure for the pages 242-244. 
 
Plagiarism type Text-based Citation-based 
Copy&paste ~ 70 % 
Good results even 
for short fragments 
Unsuitable as short 
fragments cannot be 
detected 
Disguised 
plagiarism  
< 10 % Depending on the 
fragments length  
~ 30 % 
Idea / structure 
plagiarism  
0 % Some cases could 
be identified 
Translated 
plagiarism 
< 5 % ~ 80 %. 13 out of 16 
fragments could be 
identified. 
 
Table 1: Comparison of detection results 
Whereas the currently used PDS were unable to detect a single 
translated fragment, the CbPD approach could identify all but 
three fragments. However, as with every PDS, the findings of 
CbPD must be carefully verified by humans, especially in cases 
where only a few citations form the pattern, for example in the 
fragments on page 30 and 224. 
The evaluation indicates to a large extent that the strength of the 
existing PD systems are the weaknesses of the new citation based 
PD systems and vice versa. Whereas the strength of existing PDS 
lies in detecting plagiarism on the sentence level in the form of 
identifying similar or identical consecutive words, the strength of 
the citation based approach lies in identifying translation- and 
idea-plagiarism or disguised paraphrasing. However, since the 
CbPD relies on citation information, it is unable to identify short 
paraphrased fragments. By combining the strength of the text- and 
citation-based approaches the detection rate clearly outperforms 
currently used techniques. 
 
5. CONCLUSION  
It was shown that text-based plagiarism and Citation-based 
Plagiarism Detection methods have different strengths and 
weaknesses. Text-based PDS convince in detecting local forms of 
plagiarism, such as short passages of copied or only slightly 
paraphrased text. In contrast, they fail, to the here proposed 
citation-based approach, to detect paraphrased and translated 
plagiarism. Applying the citation-based approach on Guttenberg’s 
thesis allowed identifying 13 of the 16 plagiarized fragments, 
whereas the text-based approaches did not identify a single 
fragment. By combining both approaches the detection rate can be 
significantly improved. 
 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Guttenplag wiki. Online Resource, 2011. Retrieved Apr. 10, 2011 
from http://de.guttenplag.wikia.com. 
[2] BLOOMFIELD, L. A. The Plagiarism Resource Site. Online 
Resource, 2011. Retrieved Mar. 20, 2011 from http://-
www.plagiarism.phys.virginia.edu. 
[3] CLOUGH, P. Plagiarism in natural and programming languages an 
overview of current tools and technologies. Tech. rep., Department of 
Computer Science, University of Sheffield, July 2000. 
[4] COCEL. Concise Oxford Companion to the English Language. 
Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[5] FRÖHLICH, G. Plagiate und unethische Autorenschaften. 
Information - Wissenschaft & Praxis 57, 2 (2006), 81–89. 
[6] GARFIELD, E. Citation Indexes for Science: A New Dimension in 
Documentation through Association of Ideas. Science 122, 3159 (July 
1955), 108–111. 
[7] GIPP, B., AND BEEL, J. Citation Based Plagiarism Detection - A 
New Approach to Identify Plagiarized Work Language Independently. In 
Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Hyptertext and Hypermedia 
(HT’10) (New York, NY, USA, June 2010), ACM, pp. 273–274.  
[8] GUTTENBERG, K.-T. F. Verfassung und Verfassungsvertrag : 
Konstitutionelle Entwicklungsstufen in den USA und der EU. Dissertation, 
Universität Bayreuth, Berlin, 2009, Retracted as plagiarism. 
[9] HOAD, T. C., AND ZOBEL, J. Methods for Identifying Versioned and 
Plagiarised Documents. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology 54, 3 (2003), 203–215. 
[10] HOCHSCHULE FÜR TECHNIK UND WIRTSCHAFT BERLIN. Portal 
Plagiat - Test von Plagiatserkennungssoftware. Online Resource. 
Retrieved Apr. 08, 2011 from http://plagiat.htw-berlin.de/software/. 
[11] LYON, C., MALCOLM, J., AND DICKERSON, B. Detecting Short 
Passages of Similar Text in Large Document Collections. In Proceedings 
of the 2001 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (2001), L. Lee and D. Harman, Eds., pp. 118–125. 
[12] MAURER, H., KAPPE, F., AND ZAKA, B. Plagiarism - A Survey. 
Journal of Universal Computer Science 12, 8 (Aug. 2006), 1050–1084. 
[13] MONOSTORI, K., ZASLAVSKY, A., AND SCHMIDT, H. Document 
Overlap Detection System for Distributed Digital Libraries. In DL ’00: 
Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on Digital libraries (New York, 
NY, USA, 2000), ACM, pp. 226–227. 
[14] POTTHAST, M., BARRÓN-CEDEÑO, A., EISELT, A., STEIN, B., AND 
ROSSO, P. Overview of the 2nd international competition on plagiarism 
detection. In Notebook Papers of CLEF 2010 LABs and Workshops, 22-23 
September, Padua, Italy (Sept. 2010), M. Braschler, D. Harman, and 
E. Pianta, Eds. 
[15] POTTHAST, M., STEIN, B., BARRÓN-CEDEÑO, A., AND ROSSO, P. An 
evaluation framework for plagiarism detection. In Proceedings of the 23rd 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010) 
(Block A, Xue Yan Building, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China, Aug. 2010), C.-R. Huang and D. Jurafsky, Eds., Tsinghua 
University Press. 
[16] RUDMAN, J. The state of authorship attribution studies: Some 
problems and solutions. Computers and the Humanities 31 (1997), 351–
365. 
[17] STEIN, B., KOPPEL, M., AND STAMATATOS, E., Eds. Proceedings of 
the SIGIR 2007 International Workshop on Plagiarism Analysis, 
Authorship Identification, and Near Duplicate Detection, PAN 2007, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, July 27, 2007 (2007), vol. 276 of CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-WS.org. 
[18] STEIN, B., LIPKA, N., AND PRETTENHOFER, P. Intrinsic Plagiarism 
Analysis. Language Resources and Evaluation (2010), 1–20. 
[19] SUN, Z., ERRAMI, M., LONG, T., RENARD, C., CHORADIA, N., AND 
GARNER, H. Systematic characterizations of text similarity in full text 
biomedical publications. PLoS ONE 5, 9 (Sept. 2010), e12704. 
[20] WEBER-WULFF, D. Test cases for plagiarism detection software. In 
Proceedings of the 4th International Plagiarism Conference (Newcastle 
Upon Tyne, 2010).
 
