Citation Pattern Matching Algorithms for Citation-based 
Plagiarism Detection: Greedy Citation Tiling, Citation 
Chunking and Longest Common Citation Sequence 
Bela Gipp 
OvGU, Germany & UC Berkeley, USA  
gipp@berkeley.edu 
Norman Meuschke 
OvGU, Germany & UC Berkeley, USA 
meuschke@berkeley.edu 
  
ABSTRACT 
Plagiarism Detection Systems have been developed to locate 
instances of plagiarism e.g. within scientific papers. Studies have 
shown that the existing approaches deliver reasonable results in 
identifying copy&paste plagiarism, but fail to detect more 
sophisticated forms such as paraphrased, translated or idea 
plagiarism. The authors of this paper demonstrated in recent 
studies [4, 15] that the detection rate can be significantly 
improved by not only relying on text analysis, but by additionally 
analyzing the citations of a document. Citations are valuable 
language independent markers that are similar to a fingerprint. In 
fact, our examinations of real world cases have shown that the 
order of citations in a document often remains similar even if the 
text has been strongly paraphrased or translated in order to 
disguise plagiarism.  
This paper introduces three algorithms and discusses their 
suitability for the purpose of Citation-based Plagiarism Detection. 
Due to the numerous ways in which plagiarism can occur, these 
algorithms need to be versatile. They must be capable of detecting  
transpositions, scaling and combinations in a local and global 
form. The algorithms are coined Greedy Citation Tiling, Citation 
Chunking and Longest Common Citation Sequence. The 
evaluation showed that common forms of plagiarism can be 
detected reliably if these algorithms are combined.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Clustering]: INFORMATION STORAGE AND 
RETRIEVAL – Information Search and Retrieval.  
General Terms 
Algorithms, Experimentation, Measurement, Languages 
Keywords 
Plagiarism Detection Systems, Citation-based, Citation Order 
Analysis, Citation Pattern Analysis 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Plagiarism describes the appropriation of other persons’ ideas, 
intellectual or creative work and passing them of as one’s own [7]. 
For including the act of self-plagiarism (see 2.1) we broaden the 
scope of the term and define academic plagiarism as using words 
and/or ideas from other sources without due acknowledgement 
imposed by academic principles.  
It is a particularly common problem among college students 
worldwide, but also notably present among established 
researchers. In a self-report study among ~82,000 students about 
40% of undergraduates and ~25% of graduates engaged in 
plagiarism within 12 months prior to the study [29]. Results of 
other studies range as high as ~90% of the subjects self-reporting 
acts of plagiarism [27]. 
In academia numerous cases of plagiarism have become publicly 
known. An automated plagiarism check of ~285,000 scientific 
texts of arXiv.org yielded more than 500 documents very likely to 
have been plagiarized. In addition, 30.000 documents (~20% of 
the collection) were found to be very likely duplicates or 
containing: “[…] excessive self-plagiarism […]” [43, p. 12].  
The existing approaches for plagiarism detection have their 
weaknesses. Using the words of Weber-Wulff, the organizer of 
regular comparisons for productive Plagiarism Detection Systems 
(PDS), the current state of available systems can be summarized 
as follows: “[…] PDS find copies, not plagiarism.” [50, p. 6]. 
The paper is structured as follows. After giving an overview of 
different forms of plagiarism, the detection approaches currently 
used and a discussion of their strength and weaknesses, the 
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection approach is briefly presented. 
Subsequently, the newly developed algorithms for Citation-based 
Plagiarism Detection are introduced, evaluated and their 
suitability for detecting different forms of plagiarism is discussed. 
Finally, the suitability of the presented approaches is 
demonstrated using real cases of plagiarism. 
2. RELATED WORK 
2.1 Forms of Plagiarism 
Observations of plagiarism behavior in practice reveal a number 
of commonly found methods for illegitimate text usage, which are 
characterized below.  
Copy&Paste (c&p) plagiarism specifies the act of taking over text 
verbatim from another author [49].  
Disguised plagiarism subsumes practices intended to mask copied 
segments [26]. Four different masking techniques have been 
identified. These are: 
· Shake&Paste (s&p) plagiarism is characterized by copying and 
merging sentences or paragraphs from different sources with 
slight adjustments necessary for forming a coherent text [49]; 
· Expansive plagiarism refers to the insertion of additional text 
into or in addition to copied segments [26];  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
DocEng’11, September 19–22, 2011, Mountain View, CA, USA. 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0863-2/11/09…$10.00. 
· Contractive plagiarism describes the summary or trimming of 
copied material [26];  
· Mosaic plagiarism encompasses the merge of text segments 
from different sources and obfuscating the plagiarism by 
changing word order, substituting words with synonyms or 
entering/deleting filling words [26, 49];   
Technical disguise summarizes techniques for hiding plagiarized 
content from being automatically detected by exploiting 
weaknesses off current text-based analysis methods e.g. by 
substituting characters with graphically identical symbols from 
foreign alphabets or inserting letters in white font color [20].  
Undue paraphrasing defines the intentional rewriting of foreign 
thoughts in the vocabulary and style of the plagiarist without 
giving due credit for concealing the original source [26].  
Translated plagiarism is defined as the manual or automated 
conversion of content from one language to another intended to 
cover its origin [49].   
Idea plagiarism encompasses the usage of a broader foreign 
concept without due source acknowledgement [28]. Examples are 
the appropriation of research approaches and methods, 
experimental setups, argumentative structures, background 
sources etc. [13]. 
Self-plagiarism characterizes the partial or complete reuse of 
one’s own previous writings not being justified by scientific goals, 
e.g. for presenting updates or providing access to a larger 
community, but primarily serving the author, e.g. for artificially 
increasing citation counts [5, 11].   
2.2 Existing Plagiarism Detection Approaches    
Plagiarism Detection (PD) is a hypernym for computer-based 
procedures supporting the identification of plagiarism incidences. 
Existing PD methods can be categorized into external and 
intrinsic approaches [26, 45].  
External PD methods compare a suspicious document to a 
collection of genuine works. Different comparison strategies have 
been proposed in this context. 
String matching procedures [2, 32, 52] aim to identify longest 
pairs of identical text strings. These strings are treated as 
indicators for potential plagiarism if the share they represent with 
regard to the overall text exceeds a chosen threshold. Suffix 
document models, such as suffix trees or suffix arrays, have 
mostly been used for that purpose in the context of PD.   
The strength of substring matching methods is their perfect 
detection accuracy with regard to literal text overlaps. Their major 
drawbacks are the relative difficulty of detecting disguised 
plagiarisms as well as the required computational effort. The 
former fact is intuitive when recalling the exact matching 
approach of the detection procedure. The later barrier results from 
the use of suffix data structures. The most space-efficient suffix 
tree [25], suffix array [24] and suffix vector [33] implementations 
allow searching in linear time and require on average ~8𝑛 of 
storage space, with 𝑛 being the number of symbols in the original 
document. String B-Trees allow searching in 𝑂(log𝑛), but also 
require multiple times the storage space of the original document 
[25]. This renders them impracticable for most large document 
collections. 
Employing vector space retrieval based on different term units 
has been proposed e.g. by [9, 40, 22]. Vector space models (VSM) 
are a standard, highly performance tuned Information Retrieval 
(IR) concept that can overcome the effort-related limitations of 
elaborate string matching. VSM consider a set of terms, which 
commonly has been extracted from the whole document or larger 
parts of the text, for similarity computation. Therefore, vector 
space retrieval methods just like string matching is classified as 
global similarity assessments [47]. 
The well-known cosine measure is a widely used similarity 
function in PD settings as it is for other IR tasks. More complex 
similarity functions tend to incorporate semantic information e.g. 
by considering word synonyms [21] or pre-computing semantic 
relations [48] between terms. The aforementioned papers show 
that such considerations can increase detection performance, at 
the cost of significantly increasing the computational effort 
required. In the experiments reported in [3] considering synonyms 
improved the F-measure of the respective detection procedures by 
2-3 times. However, the runtime required for doing so increased 
by more than 27 times.  
The detection performance of VSM based PDS is dependent on 
the individual plagiarism incidence to be analyzed and the 
parameter configuration, e.g. term unit and term selection 
strategy, of the specific detection method [18, p. 155]. However, 
the global similarity assessment of VSMs tends to be detrimental 
to detection accuracy in PD settings. Verbatim plagiarism is more 
commonly related to smaller, confined segments of a document, 
which favors local similarity analysis [47].  
Fingerprinting methods, being the most widely used PD 
approach, perform a local similarity assessment. They aim to form 
a representative digest of a document by selecting a set of 
multiple substrings from it. The set represents the fingerprint; its 
elements are called minutiae [19]. Mathematical, hash-like 
functions can be applied on minutiae for transforming them into 
more space efficient byte strings [12].  
A suspicious document is checked for plagiarism by computing its 
fingerprint and querying each minutia with a pre-computed index 
of fingerprints for all documents of a reference collection. 
Minutiae found matching with those of other documents indicate 
shared text segments and suggest potential plagiarism upon 
exceeding a certain similarity threshold [6]. 
The inherent challenge of fingerprinting is finding a document 
representation that reduces computational effort to a suitable 
dimension, while limiting the information loss incurred to achieve 
acceptable detection accuracy [31]. A number of parameters, e.g. 
the chunking strategy, chunk size (granularity of the fingerprint) 
or number of minutiae (resolution of the fingerprint), reflect that 
challenge. There is no definite answer to the question of which 
parameter combination is the best, since this choice is strongly 
dependent on the nature and size of the collection as well as the 
amount and form of plagiarism.  
Conventional fingerprinting methods implicitly encode the term 
order of a document in proportion to the length of the chosen text 
chunk. STEIN proposes an approach, termed fuzzy-fingerprinting, 
which disregards term order by using a VSM of document terms 
instead of substrings for minutia computation [44]. 
Fuzzy-Fingerprints are primarily targeted at reducing 
computational effort. Compared to fingerprinting using 
word-3-grams and a MD5 hash function they can be computed >5 
times faster, but have been shown to be inferior in detection 
accuracy [47]. 
Intrinsic PD methods, opposed to the approaches presented so far, 
do not depend on the existence of a reference corpus. They 
statistically examine linguistic features of the suspicious text, a 
process known as stylometry, without performing comparisons to 
external documents. They aim at recognizing changes in writing 
style to indicate potential plagiarism [31].  
The linguistic features to be analyzed form a style model. 
Approximately more than 1.000 individual style markers [38] 
have been proposed for stylometry, most can be classified as 
falling into one of the following categories [46]: 
• lexical features on character level, e.g. 𝑛-gram frequency, or 
word level, e.g. average word lengths or syllables per word; 
• syntactic features, e.g. word or part-of-speech frequencies;  
• structural features, e.g. average paragraph length or 
frequency of punctuation.    
Style models of intrinsic PDS are generally comprised of an 
individual combination of multiple linguistic features [31].  
Plagiarism Detection
local similarity assessment global similarity assessment
Term Occurrence 
Analysis
suffix data 
structures
VSM linguistic 
feature sets
order 
preserving
order 
neglecting
chunk 
indices
fuzzy 
fingerprints
Citation 
Pattern 
Analysis
citation 
fingerprint
Bag of 
Words 
Analysis
order 
preserving
order 
neglecting
Substring 
Matching Intrinsic PD
Fingerprinting Stylometry Citation Analysis
 
Figure 1: Classification of PD methods (inspired by: [47]) 
In previous papers [4, 15] we initially proposed employing 
citation analysis for PD and presented results of initial studies. 
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection (CbPD) is a fundamentally 
different approach compared to the text-based similarity 
evaluations described above. It is especially intended for being 
applied to scientific publications. Being substantially different, it 
is believed to be capable of overcoming some of the weaknesses 
of existing techniques. An overview classification of the PD 
approaches presented above is given in Figure 1.  
2.3 Strength and Weaknesses of PDS 
As described in [15] objective comparisons of the detection 
performance achieved by individual PDS are difficult. Authors 
proposing research prototypes tend to use different collections and 
evaluation methods. Initiated in 2009 the annual PAN 
International Competition on Plagiarism Detection (PAN-PC) 
addresses this lack of comparability. It attempts to benchmark 
PDS using a standardized collection and a controlled evaluation 
environment [36]. Results from the latest PAN-PC, held in June 
2010, are presented for pointing out the capabilities of 
state-of-the-art PD prototypes. 
Figure 2 displays the plagiarism detection (plagdet) scores of the 
top 5 performing external PDS and the 2 intrinsic PDS of MUHR 
ET AL. and SUÁREZ ET AL. participating in PAN-PC’10. The 
plagdet score is a measure developed for evaluating PDS in the 
PAN competitions. It considers the F1 measure as well as the 
granularity (gran) of a detection method. The granularity reflects 
whether a plagiarized section is detected as a whole or in multiple 
parts:  plagdet = 𝐹1  𝑙𝑜𝑔2(1 + gran)⁄  [36]. 
In Figure 2 the scores are plotted dependent on the obfuscation 
techniques applied to plagiarized text segments. The overall 
plagdet score achieved in all categories is stated in brackets within 
each legend entry. Note that in the legend “- I” is attached to 
distinguish the system of MUHR ET AL. participating in the 
intrinsic from the one in the external task. 
 
Figure 2: Results of top performing PDS in PAN-PC'10 [35] 
The results indicate that unchanged copies of text segments can be 
detected with high accuracy by state-of-the-art PDS using 
fingerprinting or bag of words analyses. Detection rates for 
segments that were plagiarized and disguised by humans are 
substantially lower for all systems. On average, 76% of those 
realistically plagiarized segments could not be identified by the 
top 5 systems. The detection scores for automatically obfuscated 
plagiarism are 2.5 to 3.7 times higher than those for manually 
plagiarized sections.  
The organizers of the competition judge the results achieved in 
detecting cross-lingual plagiarism to be misleading. The 
well-performing systems used automated services for translating 
foreign-language documents in the reference corpus to English. 
The employed services, e.g. Google Translate, are similar or 
identical to those used for constructing the translated, plagiarized 
sections. It is hypothesized that human-made translations 
obfuscating real-world plagiarism are more complex and versatile, 
and hence less detectable by the tested PDS [35].  
Intrinsic PDS performed significantly worse than systems using 
an external approach. The results are in line with those from the 
prior PAN competition in 2009 [36]. Intrinsic analyses seem to 
require larger volumes of text for working reliably [46]. 
3. CITATION-BASED PD 
In the academic environment, citations and references of scholarly 
publications have long been recognized for containing valuable 
information about the content of a document and its relation to 
other works [14]. A large volume of semantic information is 
contained in citation patterns because complete scientific concepts 
and argumentative structures are compressed into sequences of 
small text strings. To our knowledge the identification of 
plagiarism by analyzing the citations1 and references2 of 
                                                                
 
1  Citations are short alphanumeric strings in the body of scientific texts representing 
sources contained in the bibliography 
2  References denote entries in the bibliography  
0.00
1.00
no
obfuscation
automated
(multiple)
translation paraphrasing
by humans
Kasprzak & Brandejs (0.80) Zou et al. (0.71)
Muhr et al.- E (0.69) Grozea & Popescu (0.62)
Oberreuter et al. (0.61) Muhr et al.- I (0.15)
Suárez et al. (0.04)
Plagdet Score 
documents has been first described and successfully applied to PD 
in [4, 15]. In this context, we proposed this definition: 
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection (CbPD) subsumes methods 
that use citations and references for determining similarities 
between documents in order to identify plagiarism. 
Citations and citation patterns offer unique features that facilitate 
a PD analysis. They are a comparatively easy to acquire, language 
independent marker, since more or less well-defined standards for 
using them are established in the international scientific 
community. This information can be exploited to detect forms of 
plagiarism that cannot be detected with text-based approaches.  
3.1 Factors for Citation-based Text Similarity 
In the following section, factors that influence a similarity 
assessment for documents based on citations and references are 
outlined for deriving a suitable document model for CbPD.  
3.1.1 Shared References 
Absolute Number 
Having references in common is a well-known similarity criterion 
for scientific texts called bibliographic coupling [23]. The 
absolute number of shared references represents the coupling 
strength, which is used to measure the degree of relatedness. 
Relative Number 
The fraction that shared references represent with regard to the 
total number of individual references is another similarity 
indicator. Two texts, 𝐴 and 𝐵, are more likely to be similar if they 
share a larger percentage of their references. This assumption is 
supported by results of text-based PD studies [10]. 
Both the amount and fraction of shared references depend on a 
number of factors, most importantly document length and specific 
document parts to be analyzed. Comprehensive documents 
contain on average more references than short documents, or 
certain document parts, e.g. related work sections in academic 
texts contain more citations per page than e.g. summary parts.  
Considering the above factors when using reference counts for 
CbPD might improve their predictive value. 
3.1.2 Probability of Shared References 
The likelihood that two texts have references in common is not 
statistically independent. Reference co-occurrences that have a 
lower probability are more predictive for document similarity. 
The importance of shared references with regard to document 
similarity is dependent on a number of factors explained below.  
Existing citation counts have been shown to influence future 
citation counts significantly. If a document is highly cited already, 
its likelihood of gathering additional citations from other 
documents increases. The phenomenon has been termed the 
Matthew effect in science3. Imagine a document 𝐶 that has been 
widely referenced, e.g. by 500 other documents. Another 
document 𝐷, on the other hand, has been referenced much less 
frequently, e.g. by 5 other documents. In turn, document 𝐷 has a 
smaller probability of being a shared reference of two texts 𝐴 and 
𝐵, which are to be analyzed. However, if document 𝐷 represents a 
                                                                
 
3  The term refers to a line in the Gospel of Matthew 
reference shared by 𝐴 and 𝐵 this fact is a comparably stronger 
indicator for similarity than in the case in which 𝐶 represents a 
shared reference of 𝐴 and 𝐵.  
Time influences the likelihood of references. As citation counts 
tend to increase with time [34, 39], so does the probability of a 
document becoming a shared reference. If texts 𝐴 and 𝐵 have 
been published at different points in time, this fact should be 
compensated, e.g. by comparing expected citations per unit of 
time.  
The topic of research that two documents 𝐴 and 𝐵 deal with also 
influences the likelihood that 𝐴 and 𝐵 share common references. 
They are more likely to do so if the documents address the same 
or very similar topics. This assumption can be derived from 
empirical evaluations using Co-Citation analysis to identify 
clusters in academic domains [16, 41]. If strong Co-Citation 
relations exist within a certain academic field, as has been shown, 
this in turn implies that a higher number of documents share 
common references within this domain. This is intuitive, since 
references are often used to illustrate prior research or origins of 
the ideas  presented.  
Proximity of authors within a social network increases the 
probability of respective papers to be referenced. Research 
showed that a text 𝐴 is more likely to be referenced by a text 𝐵 if 
the author(s) of 𝐵 is/are personally more closely connected to the 
author(s) of A. For example, documents are referenced more 
frequently within texts written by former co-authors or researchers 
that know each other in person. This effect is sometimes referred 
to as cronyism [30]. The analysis of co-authorship networks might 
therefore increase the predictive value of reference co-occurrence 
assessments. 
3.1.3 Citation Pattern Similarity 
Finding similar patterns in the citations used within two scientific 
texts is a strong indicator for semantic text similarity and the core 
idea of CbPD. Patterns are subsequences in the citation tuples 𝐶𝐴 
and 𝐶𝐵 of two texts 𝐴 and 𝐵 that (partially) consist of shared 
references and are therefore similar to each other.  
The degree of similarity between patterns depends on the number 
of citations included in the pattern, and the extent to which their 
order and/or the range they cover is alike. Thus, literally matching 
subsequences of citations in two documents are a strong indicator 
for semantic similarity.  
The same is true for texts containing patterns that span over 
similar ranges, even if the order of citations in the pattern does not 
necessarily correspond towards each other. The width of the 
covered range can be expressed with regard to sequential 
positions of citations in the pattern, textual ranges or combinations 
of both. Measuring range width in units reflecting some 
semantics, e.g. paragraphs or sentences, is assumed beneficial 
compared to considering purely syntactic character or citation 
counts. For example, documents containing several matching 
citations, one of them within a single section, the other distributed 
over several chapters are less likely to be similar. However, if 
both share identical citations e.g. within a paragraph, then their 
potential similarity is respectively higher. Alternatively, e.g. the 
document tree may be used to identify semantic clusters in the 
form of chapters etc. 
A CbPD similarity assessment consists of two subtasks. The first 
is to identify matching citations and citation patterns. The second 
is to rate patterns with regard to their likelihood of having resulted 
from undue practices.  
The scope of this paper is limited on presenting algorithms that 
tackle the first subtask of detecting citation patterns. Results of 
experiments with regard to the second subtask of ranking 
identified patterns will be presented in an upcoming paper.   
Doc C
Doc E
Doc D
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. This is an example text 
with references to different documents for illustrating the usage of citation 
analysis for plagiarism detection. 
This is a in-text citation [1]. This is an example text with references to different 
documents for illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism 
detection. This is an example text with references to different documents for 
illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. 
Another in-text citation [2]. tThis is an example text with references to 
different documents for illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism 
detection. This is an example text with references to different documents for 
illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. This is a 
repeated in-text citation [1]. 
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. This is an example text 
with references to different documents for illustrating the usage of citation 
analysis for plagiarism detection. 
A third in-text citation [3]. This is an example text with references to different 
documents for illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism 
detection. This is an example text with references to different documents for 
illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. a final in-
text-citation[2].
References
 [1]
 [2]
 [3]
Document B
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection.          This is a in-text 
citation [1]. This is an example text with references to different documents for 
illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. Another 
example for an in-text citation [2]. 
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. 
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. This is an example text 
with references to different documents for illustrating the usage of citation 
analysis for plagiarism detection. This is an example text with references to 
different documents for illustrating the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism 
detection. 
 
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. This is an example text 
with references to different documents for illustrating the usage of citation 
analysis for plagiarism detection. Here’s a third in-text citation [3]. This is an 
example text with references to different documents for illustrating the usage of 
citation analysis for plagiarism detection. 
This is an example text with references to different documents for illustrating 
the usage of citation analysis for plagiarism detection. 
Document A
References
 [1]
 [2]
 [3]
EDCDoc A DECDCDoc B
DECDCDoc B
Ins.EIns.DCDoc A
Citation Pattern Citation Pattern
Pattern Comparison (Levenshtein Dist.)  
Figure 3: Identifying citation patterns for CbPD 
3.1.4 Challenge of Identifying Citation Patterns 
Detecting citation patterns is a non-trivial task due to the diverse 
forms of plagiarism. Copy&paste plagiarism results in different 
citation patterns than e.g. shake&paste plagiarism. Therefore, 
different algorithms are required to address the specific forms. 
The following challenges need to be considered.  
Unknown pattern constituents – Unlike e.g. in string pattern 
matching the subsequences of citations to be extracted from a 
suspicious text and searched for within an original are initially 
unknown. Citations that are shared by the two documents are 
easily identified. However, it is unlikely that all of those shared 
citations represent plagiarized text passages. For instance, two 
documents might share 8 citations, of which 3 are contained 
within a plagiarized text section and 4 are distributed over the 
length of the text and used along with other non-shared citations 
without representing any form of plagiarism. The citation 
sequences of the two documents might therefore look like the 
following:  
Original:  1 2 3 x x x 4 x x 5 x 6 x 7 8 
Plagiarism:  x x 5 x x x 4 x 3 x 1 x 2 x x 7 x 8 
Numbers 1-8 represent shared citations, the letter x non-shared 
citations. The shared citations 1-3 are supposed to represent a 
plagiarized passage. 
Transpositions - the order of citations within text segments might 
be transposed compared to the corresponding original section. 
Possible causes can be different citation styles or sort orders of the 
reference list, e.g. alphabetically opposed to sorting it by 
publication date. Assume an original text segment contains a 
sentence in the form:  
Studies show that <finding1>, <finding2> [3,1,2]. 
The semantically identical content might be expressed in the 
form: 
Studies show that <finding1>, <finding2> [1-3]. 
Scaling - occurrences of shared citations can be used more than 
once, which is referred to as being scaled. Assume an original text 
segment in the form: 
Study X showed <finding1>, <finding2> and 
<finding3> [1]. Study Y objected <finding1> [2]. 
Assessment Z proofed <finding3> [3]. 
This segment might be plagiarized as following: 
Study X showed <finding1> [1], which was objected 
by study Y [2]. Study X also found <finding2> [1]. 
Assessment Z was able to proof <finding3> [3], 
which had already been indicated by study X [1]. 
Missing alignment - potentially plagiarized sections and their 
corresponding originals need not to be aligned, but can reside in 
very different parts of the text. For instance, the first paragraph in 
the first section of an original document 𝐴 might be plagiarized in 
document 𝐵, however it may become the fifth paragraph in the 
third section of 𝐵. The division of corresponding text segments 
into paragraphs, sections or chapters might also differ 
significantly. For instance, a plagiarized text segment might be 
artificially expanded or reduced to result in a different paragraph 
split-up in order to conceal the plagiarism. 
3.2 Citation-based Similarity Functions  
Given the limited empirical knowledge base that exists for CbPD, 
it is intended to evaluate a balanced mixture of possible similarity 
functions. The goal is to include global and local similarity 
assessments as well as functions that focus on the order of 
citations opposed to functions that ignore citation order, but can 
handle transpositions and scaling. Besides designing new 
similarity functions based on the factors outlined above, testing 
well-proven similarity measures for their applicability to CbPD is 
a further objective.   
The fact that citation sequences of documents can be 
characterized as strings has been taken as a starting point for 
identifying existing similarity functions. In this context, string 
refers to any collection of uniquely identifiable elements that are 
linked in a way such that each, except for exactly one leftmost and 
exactly one rightmost element, has one unique predecessor and 
one unique successor [42]. This definition is broader than the 
most prominent connotation of the term referring to literal 
character sequences in the domain of computer science. String 
processing is a classical and comprehensively researched domain. 
Thus, multiplicities of possible similarity assessments can be 
derived from this area see e.g. [17]. 
 Global Similarity 
Assessment 
Local Similarity 
Assessment 
Order 
preserving 
Longest Common 
Citation Sequence 
Greedy Citation 
Tiling 
Order 
neglecting 
Bibliographic 
Coupling 
Citation Chunking 
Figure 4: Categorization of evaluated similarity assessments 
According to the objectives outlined above, similarity approaches 
for each category distinguishable in regard to the scope of the 
assessment (global vs. local) and consideration of citation order 
have been defined. In Figure 4, the chosen similarity assessments 
are outlined. 
3.2.1 Bibliographic Coupling Strength 
Bibliographic coupling is one of the first and best-known 
citation-based similarity assessments for academic texts. 
Similarity is quantified in terms of the absolute number of shared 
references. Order or positions of citations within the text are 
ignored. It can be interpreted as a raw measure of global 
document similarity. Solely considering bibliographic coupling 
strength is not a sufficient indicator for potential plagiarism and 
does not allow pinpointing potentially plagiarized text segments.  
3.2.2 Longest Common Citation Sequence  
The Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) of elements in a string 
is a traditional similarity measure. The LCS approach has been 
adapted to citations and comprises the maximal number of 
citations that can be taken from a citation sequence without 
changing their order, but allowing for skips over non-matching 
citations. For instance the sequence (3,4,5) is a subsequence of 
(2,3,1,4,6,8,5,9) [8, p. 4]. 
Intuitively, considering the LCS of two citation sequences yields 
high similarity scores if longer parts of the corresponding text 
have been adopted without altering the contained citations. 
Examining the Longest Common Citation Sequence has been 
chosen because the measure features a clear focus on order 
relation, opposed to bibliographic coupling. At the same time it 
offers flexibility for coping with slight transpositions or arbitrary 
sized gaps of non-matching citations.  
It is capable of indicating potential cases of plagiarism in which 
parts of the text have been copied with no changes, or only slight 
alterations in the order of citations. This can be the case for 
copy&paste plagiarism that might have been concealed by basic 
rewording e.g. through synonym replacements. If significant 
reordering within plagiarized text segments has taken place 
(shake&paste plagiarism) or a different citation style has been 
applied that permutes the sequence of citations, the LCS approach 
is bound to fail.  
3.2.3 Greedy Citation Tiling 
Greedy Citation Tiling (GCT) is an adaption of a text string 
similarity function proposed by WISE [51]. The original procedure 
called Greedy String Tiling (GST) has explicitly been designed 
for usage in PD. It has been widely adopted and successfully 
applied, foremost in PDS for software source code [1, 37].  
Greedy String/Citation Tiling aims to identify all matching 
substrings with individually longest possible size in two 
sequences. Individual longest matches refer to substrings that are 
shared by both sequences and cannot be extended to the left or 
right without encountering an element that is not shared by the 
two sequences. Corresponding individually longest matches in 
both sequences are permanently linked with each other and stored 
as a so called tile.  
A tile represents a tuple 𝑡 = (𝑠1, 𝑠2,l) consisting of the starting 
position of a longest match in the first sequence (𝑠1), the starting 
position in the second sequence (𝑠2) and the length of the match 
(l). The tiling approach is illustrated in Figure 5. Arabic numbers 
represent equal elements in the sequences to be analyzed, letter x 
extraneous elements. Individually longest matches are indicated 
by boxes around elements. Roman numbers above and below the 
boxes identify the tiles to which the matches have been assigned. 
As shown in the figure, the tiling approach is able to cope with 
arbitrary transpositions in the order of individual substrings. A 
minimum size of matching substrings can be freely chosen.  
xxx6x54xx321
6xxxx321xx54
I
III
II III
III
Tiles: I (1,5,3)   II (6,1,2)    III (8,12,1)
 
Figure 5: Citation Tiles 
The principle of the tiling algorithm is illustrated in Figure 6 
assuming a minimum match length of 2. The procedure strictly 
identifies longer tiles before shorter ones. Auxiliary arrays are 
used for keeping track of longest tiles and prevent elements from 
becoming part of multiple tiles. Elements are inserted into the 
auxiliary arrays at the moment they are assigned to a tile, thus 
they are “marked” as no longer available for matching and are 
ignored in future iterations. 
xx5x4321 766
x54x33211x
hgfedcba kji
jihgfedcba
xx5x4321 766
hgfedcba kji
x54x3321 x7661x
jihgfedc nmlkba
xx5x4321 766
hgfedcba kji
x54x3321 x7661x
jihgfedc nmlksa
1st Iteration: 
no match of 
sequence 1 to 
1st element of 
sequence 2
2nd Iteration:
match [1] 
with length < 
minimum 
match length
3rd Iteration: 
match [1,2,3] 
sufficiently 
long, no 
other, esp. no 
longer 
matches
xx5x4321 766
hgfedcba kji
x54x3321 x7661x
jihgfedc nmlkba
4th Iteration: 
match [2,3] 
ignored 
because of 
prev. 
markings
a
Legend:
Iterator position in sequence 1 / 2 at the beginning of an iteration
Iterator positions during an iteration
Match counter in sequence 1 / 2
Auxiliary arrays 
 „marked“ positions (part of a prior match)  a
minimum match length = 2
 
Figure 6: Example flow of the Greedy Citation Tiling 
algorithm. 
The algorithm performs full iterations of both sequences, meaning 
that sequence 2 is iterated for every element of sequence 1, as 
long as matches longer than or equal to the specified global 
minimum length are found in the respective iteration. This 
indicates that the worst case complexity of the algorithm is 𝑂(𝑛3).  
In each iteration only maximal matches are considered for being 
transformed into tiles. All individual longest matches identified 
during the same iteration need to be equal to or longer than the 
maximal match found in the same iteration. If sequence 2 has 
  
  
  
  
been traversed for one element of sequence 1, all identified 
maximal matches are marked in the auxiliary arrays.  
For the next iteration the current maximal match length is again 
set to equal the global minimum match length. This way, the 
“next-shorter” matches to those marked during the prior iteration 
are identified. One can see that this repetition continues until no 
more matches longer than the global minimum match length can 
be found, which results in the termination of the algorithm. If the 
minimum match length is set to 1 the GST algorithm is proven to 
produce the optimal coverage of matching elements with tiles 
[51].  
The GST algorithm has been primarily designed for identifying 
shake&paste plagiarism. It is able to identify individually longest 
substrings despite potential rearrangements. Greedy Citation 
Tiling might serve the same purpose, but opposed to the 
text-based approach also identifies paraphrased shake&paste 
plagiarism.  
The GCT approach focuses on exact equality with regard to 
citation order. Finding such patterns provides a strong indication 
for text similarity. GCT is able to deal with transpositions in the 
citation sequence that result from rearranging text segments, 
which is typical for shake&paste plagiarism. However, the 
approach is not capable of detecting citation scaling or 
transpositions resulting e.g. from the usage of different citation 
styles. For covering such cases, another class of detection 
algorithms has been designed, which is explained in the following 
section.    
3.2.4 Citation Chunking 
A set of heuristic procedures that aim to identify local citation 
patterns regardless of potential transpositions and/or scaling have 
been developed for this study. The approach has been termed 
Citation Chunking because it is inspired by the feature selection 
strategies of text-based fingerprinting algorithms. A citation 
chunk is a variably sized substring of a document’s citation 
sequence.  
The main idea of citation chunking is to consider shared citations 
as textual anchors at which local citation patterns can potentially 
exist. Starting from an anchor, citation chunks are constructed by 
dynamically increasing the considered substring of citations based 
on the characteristics of the chunk under construction as well as 
the succeeding citations.  
Chunking Strategies 
Strategies for forming chunks have been derived by imagining 
potential behaviors of a plagiarist and modeling the resulting 
citation patterns.  
Determining the starting and ending point for a chunk is not a 
trivial task. There probably does not exist a best solution that fits 
all plagiarism scenarios. Larger chunks are believed to be better 
suitable for detecting overall similarities and compensate for 
transpositions and scaling. Smaller chunks, on the other hand, are 
more suitable for pinpointing specific areas of highest similarity. 
In order to experiment with both tendencies, the following 
procedures for constructing citation chunks have been defined.  
1. Only consecutive shared citations form a chunk: 
Doc A: x,1,2,3,x,4,5,3,x,x 
Doc B: x,x,3,2,1,x,5,3,4,x 
This is the most restrictive chunking strategy. Its intention is to 
highlight confined text segments that have a very high 
citation-based similarity. It is ideal for detecting potential cases in 
which copy&paste plagiarism might have been concealed by 
rewording or translation.  
2. Chunks are formed dependent on the preceding citation. A 
citation is included in a chunk if 𝑛 ≤ 1 or 1 > 𝑛 ≤ 𝑠 
non-shared citations separate it from the last preceding shared 
citation, with 𝑠 being the number of citations in the chunk 
currently under construction: 
Doc A: x,1,2,3,x,x,4,5,x,x,x,x,x,x,6,7  
Doc B: 3,2,x,1,x,x,4,x,x,x,x,x,5,6,7,x 
Chunking strategy 2 aims to uncover potential cases in which text 
segments or logical structures have been taken over from or 
influenced by another text. It allows for sporadic non-shared 
citations that may have been inserted to make the resulting text 
more “genuine”. It can also detect potential cases of concealed 
shake&paste plagiarism by allowing an increasing number of 
non-shared citations within a chunk, given that a certain number 
of shared citations have already been included. This process aims 
to reflect the behavior that text segments (including citations) 
from different sources are interwoven. 
3. Citations exhibiting a textual distance below a certain 
threshold form a chunk. 
Chunking strategy 3 aims to define a textual range inside which 
possible plagiarism is deemed likely. Studies have shown that 
plagiarism more frequently affects confined text segments, such 
as one or two paragraphs, rather than extended text passages or 
the document as a whole. Building upon this knowledge, the 
respective chunking strategy only considers citations within a 
specified range for forming chunks.  
Since the split up of a plagiarized text into textual units, such as 
sentences or paragraphs, might be altered artificially, textual 
proximity might be analyzed in terms of multiple units. One 
possibility tested in the study has been to count the characters, 
words, sentences and paragraphs that separate individual citations. 
The respective counts have been compared to average numbers 
expected for a certain textual range. For instance, one paragraph 
might on average comprise 120 words consisting of 720 
characters. If one shared citation is separated from another by 2 
paragraphs, but less than 120 words, it will be included in a chunk 
to be formed. In this manner, even artificially created paragraph 
split-ups can be dealt with.      
Finding a suitable maximal distance for proximity of citations in 
the text is highly dependent on the individual corpus analyzed. If 
e.g. the average length of documents is rather short, and 
individual documents contain smaller number of sections and 
paragraphs, it is believed to be harder for a plagiarist to artificially 
alter the textual structure. Consequently, a comparably lower 
maximal distance should be chosen in this scenario. In contrast, it 
is believed to be easier to change e.g. the paragraph split-up in 
longer academic texts.  
The complete process of forming chunks according to the outlined 
chunking strategies is graphically summarized as a flow chart in 
figure 7. In order to experiment with larger chunk sizes, an 
optional merging step is tested (dashed box in figure 7).  
It is intended to combine supposedly suspicious citation patterns 
in order to outline longer sections of similar text e.g. as part of an 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
idea plagiarism. Chunks are merged if they are separated by 𝑛 
non-shared citations, 𝑛 <= 𝑚 with 𝑚 being the number of shared 
citations in the preceding chunk  
Iteration 1: XXX,x,XX,x,x,XXX,x,x,x,x,x,x,XX 
Iteration 2: XXXXX,x,x,XXX,x,x,x,x,x,x,XX 
Iteration 3: XXXXXXXX,x,x,x,x,x,x,XX 
Chunk XX is not merged since its distance to preceding chunks is 
too large. 
Figure 7: Forming of citation chunks 
3.2.5 Chunk Comparison 
Once chunks have been formed, they are considered in their 
entirety for comparison. That is, the order of citations within a 
chunk is disregarded during comparisons in order to account for 
potential transpositions and/or scaling. The number of shared 
citations within the units to be compared represents the measure 
of similarity.  
In the following two main strategies for comparing documents 
based on citation chunks are described. The first is to form chunks 
for both documents and compare each chunk of the first document 
with each chunk of the second. The chunk pairs having the highest 
citation overlap are permanently related to each other and 
considered a match. If multiple chunks in the documents have an 
equal overlap, all combinations with maximal overlap are stored. 
In the second scenario, chunks are constructed for one document 
only. Subsequently, each of the chunks is compared to the 
unaltered citation sequence of the second document by “moving” 
it as a sliding window over the sequence and assigning it to the 
position with the maximal citation overlap. 
3.2.6 Strength and Weaknesses of the Algorithms 
In the following, the suitability of the presented algorithms is 
classified according to their ability to detect different forms of 
plagiarism.  
 Plagiarism type LCCS GCT CitChunk 
L
oc
al
 
Identical  
(c&p segments, translations) 
- ++ + 
Transpositions 
(shake&paste) 
- - + 
Scaling - - + 
Transpositions & scaling 
(paraphrases) 
- - + 
G
lo
ba
l 
Identical ++ ++ + 
Transposition + - + 
Scaling + - ++ 
Transpositions & scaling + - ++ 
Figure 8: Overview of detection capabilities 
These classifications are a generalization and should be 
considered with care. If, for instance, a text is translated word by 
word then the order of citations will not change much. This case 
would be classified as “identical” according to the table. In cases 
of free translations or the existence of several citations within one 
sentence varying sentence structures resulting from different 
languages might lead to different citation orders. In such cases a 
translated plagiarism would be classified as “transposition”, 
“scaling” or even a combination of both. 
Moreover, in the table it is distinguished between local and global 
forms of plagiarism. Local plagiarism can be observed on 
sentence level, whereas global forms describe document wide 
plagiarism.    
242 - 
244 
CRS92_Art.V                                                             
Guttenberg06                                                             
                                                                
242 -  
244 
CRS92 Art.V                                                             
Guttenberg06                                                             
Figure 9: Example pattern identified in Guttenberg’s thesis 
[53 plagiarism]  by applying Citation Chunking 
In initial experiments, the described detection procedures have 
been applied to prominent real world plagiarism cases in doctoral 
dissertations of German politicians [15]. As the table shows, 
Citation Chunking yielded best detection results in most cases in 
our tests. However, for text segments in which large portions of 
the contained citations were adopted unaltered, e.g. in not-freely 
translated plagiarisms, Greedy Citation Tiling provided clearer 
indications for potential plagiarism. Figure 9 shows an example of 
a citation pattern identified by Citation Chunking.   
3.3 Prototype Citation-based PDS 
For evaluating the different analysis procedures we developed an 
Open Source software system in Java coined CitePlag. The 
developed prototype CbPDS consists of three main components.  
The first is a Relational Database System (RDBS) termed CbPD 
database storing data to be acquired from documents as well as 
detection results. The second is the detection software called 
CbPD Detector that retrieves data from the CbPD Database, runs 
the different analysis algorithms to be evaluated and feeds the 
resulting output back to the CbPD Database. The third 
component, the CbPD Report Generator, creates summarized 
reports of detection results for individual document pairs based on 
adjustable filter criteria. The three-tier-architecture is illustrated in  
Figure 10.  
CbPD Detector
CbPD 
Database
detection
results
CbPDS
CbPD Report
Generator
document
data
detection
results
 
Figure 10: CbPDS system architecture 
4. CONCLUSION 
Previous studies have shown that CbPD is suitable for detecting 
forms of plagiarism that remain undetectable for the currently 
used text-based approaches. This paper has presented three 
algorithms for identifying citation patterns that have been 
observed in real-world plagiarism cases. The algorithms are 
coined Greedy Citation Tiling, Citation Chunking and Longest 
Common Citation Sequence.  
These algorithms are able to detect citation transpositions, citation 
scaling and their combinations in cases of local and global 
plagiarism. The algorithms have been evaluated using several 
plagiarized documents such as the doctoral thesis of Guttenberg 
and by applying them to the PubMed Central Open Access Subset 
(PMC OAS). In [15] it was shown that the proposed algorithms 
could identify 13 out of the 16 sections containing translated 
plagiarism in the Guttenberg thesis. The tested text-based PDS 
were unable to detect any of them.  
5. REFERENCES 
[1] AHTIAINEN, A., SURAKKA, S., AND RAHIKAINEN, M. Plaggie: 
GNU-licensed source code plagiarism detection engine for Java 
exercises. In Proceedings of the 6th Baltic Sea conference on 
Computing education research: Koli Calling 2006 (New York, 
NY, USA, 2006), Baltic Sea ’06, ACM, pp. 141–142. 
[2] BAKER, B. S. A Program for Identifying Duplicated Code. 
In Computing Science and Statistics: Proceedings of the 24th 
Symposium on the Interface (1992). 
[3] BAO, J. P., LYON, C., LANE, P. C. R., AND JI, WEI, M. J. A. 
Comparing Different Text Similarity Methods. Tech. rep., Science 
and Technology Research Institute, University of Hertfordshire, 
May 2007. 
[4] BELA GIPP, AND JOERAN BEEL. Citation Based Plagiarism 
Detection - A New Approach to Identify Plagiarized Work 
Language Independently. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM 
Conference on Hyptertext and Hypermedia (HT’10) (New York, 
NY, USA, June 2010), ACM, pp. 273–274. 
[5] BRETAG, T., AND MAHMUD, S. Self-Plagiarism or 
Appropriate Textual Re-use? Journal of Academic Ethics 7 
(2009), 193–205. 
[6] BRIN, S., DAVIS, J., AND GARCIA MOLINA, H. Copy 
Detection Mechanisms for Digital Documents. In Proceedings of 
the 1995 ACM SIGMOD international conference on 
Management of data (New York, NY, USA, May 1995), 
M. Carey and D. Schneider, Eds., ACM, pp. 398–409. 
[7] COCEL. Concise Oxford Companion to the English 
Language [electronic resource]. Oxford Reference Online. 
Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[8] CROCHEMORE, M., AND RYTTER, W. Jewels of Stringology. 
World Scientific Publishing, 2002. 
[9] DREHER, H. Automatic Conceptual Analysis for Plagiarism 
Detection. Information and Beyond: The Journal of Issues in 
Informing Science and Information Technology 4 (2007). 
[10] ERRAMI, M., HICKS, J. M., FISHER, W., TRUSTY, D., WREN, 
J. D., LONG, T. C., AND GARNER, H. R. Déjà vu—A study of 
duplicate citations in Medline. Bioinformatics 24, 2 (2008). 
[11] ERRAMI, M., SUN, Z., LONG, T. C., GEORGE, A. C., AND 
GARNER, H. R. Déjà vu: a database of highly similar citations in 
the scientific literature. Nucleic Acids Research 37, suppl 1 
(2009), D921–D924. 
[12] FINKEL, R. A., ZASLAVSKY, A. B., MONOSTORI, K., AND 
SCHMIDT, H. W. Signature extraction for overlap detection in 
documents. In Computer Science 2002, Twenty-Fifth Australasian 
Computer Science Conference (ACSC2002), Monash University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, January/February 2002 (Darlinghurst, 
Australia, 2002), M. J. Oudshoorn, Ed., vol. 4 of Conferences in 
Research and Practice in Information Technology, Australian 
Computer Society Inc., pp. 59–64. 
[13] FRÖHLICH, G. Plagiate und unethische Autorenschaften. 
Information - Wissenschaft & Praxis 57, 2 (2006), 81–89. 
[14] GARFIELD, E. Citation Indexes for Science: A New 
Dimension in Documentation through Association of Ideas. 
Science 122, 3159 (July 1955), 108–111. 
[15] GIPP, B., MEUSCHKE, N., AND BEEL, J. Comparative 
Evaluation of Text- and Citation-based Plagiarism Detection 
Approaches using GuttenPlag. In Proceedings of 11th 
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL’11) 
(Ottawa, Canada, June 2011). 
[16] GRIFFITH, B. C., SMALL, H. G., STONEHILL, J. A., AND DEY, 
S. The Structure of Scientific Literatures II: Toward a Macro- and 
Microstructure for Science. Science Studies 4, 4 (1974), p 339. 
[17] GUSFIELD, D. Algorithms on Strings, Trees, and Sequences: 
Computer Science and Computational Biology. Cambridge 
University Press, New York, NY, USA, 1997. 
[18] GUTBROD, M. A. Nachhaltiges E-Learning durch sekundäre 
Dienste. Dissertation, Technischen Universität Braunschweig 
Institut für Betriebssysteme und Rechnerverbund, Jan. 2007. 
[19] HOAD, T. C., AND ZOBEL, J. Methods for Identifying 
Versioned and Plagiarised Documents. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology 54, 3 (2003). 
[20] KAKKONEN, T., AND MOZGOVOY, M. Hermetic and Web 
Plagiarism Detection Systems for Student Essays—An Evaluation 
of the State-of-the-Art. Journal of Educational Computing 
Research 42, 2 (2010), 135–159. 
[21] KANG, N., GELBUKH, A., AND HAN, S. PPChecker: 
Plagiarism Pattern Checker in Document Copy Detection. In Text, 
Speech and Dialogue, P. Sojka, I. Kopecek, and K. Pala, Eds., 
vol. 4188 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 661–667. 
[22] KASPRZAK, J., AND BRANDEJS, M. Improving the Reliability 
of the Plagiarism Detection System - Lab Report for PAN at 
CLEF 2010. In Notebook Papers of CLEF 2010 LABs and 
Workshops, 22-23 September, Padua, Italy (2010), M. Braschler, 
D. Harman, and E. Pianta, Eds. 
[23] KESSLER, M. M. Concerning some problems of intrascience 
communication. Lincoln laboratory group report, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Lincoln Laboratory, 1958. Cited 
according to: B.H. Weinberg. BIBLIOGRAPHIC COUPLING: A 
REVIEW. Information Storage Retrieval, 10: 189-196, 1974. 
[24] KO, P., AND ALURU, S. Space Efficient Linear Time 
Construction of Suffix Arrays. In Combinatorial Pattern 
Matching (2003), R. Baeza-Yates, E. Chávez, and 
M. Crochemore, Eds., vol. 2676 of Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, pp. 200–210. 
[25] KURTZ, S. Reducing the Space Requirement of Suffix Trees. 
Software-Practice and Experience 29, 13 (1999), 1149–1171. 
[26] LANCASTER, T. Effective and Efficient Plagiarism 
Detection. PhD thesis, School of Computing, Information Systems 
and Mathematics South Bank University, 2003. 
[27] LIM, V. K. G., AND SEE, S. K. B. Attitudes Toward, and 
Intentions to Report, Academic Cheating Among Students in 
Singapore. Ethics & Behavior 11, 3 (2001), 261–274. 
[28] MAURER, H., KAPPE, F., AND ZAKA, B. Plagiarism - A 
Survey. Journal of Universal Computer Science 12, 8 (Aug. 
2006), 1050–1084. 
[29] MCCABE, D. L. Cheating among college and university 
students: A North American perspective. International Journal for 
Academic Integrity 1, 1 (2005), 1–11. 
[30] MEHO, L., AND YANG, K. Impact of data sources on citation 
counts and rankings of LIS faculty: Web of Science vs. Scopus 
and Google Scholar. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology 58, 13 (2007), 2105–25. 
[31] MEYER ZU EISSEN, S., AND STEIN, B. Intrinsic Plagiarism 
Detection. In Advances in Information Retrieval 28th European 
Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2006, London, UK, April 10-
12, 2006. Proceedings (2006), M. Lalmas, A. MacFarlane, S. M. 
Rüger, A. Tombros, T. Tsikrika, and A. Yavlinsky, Eds., 
vol. 3936 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 565–569. 
[32] MONOSTORI, K., ZASLAVSKY, A., AND SCHMIDT, H. 
Document Overlap Detection System for Distributed Digital 
Libraries. In DL ’00: Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on 
Digital libraries (New York, NY, USA, 2000), ACM, p. 226. 
[33] MONOSTORI, K., ZASLAVSKY, A., AND SCHMIDT, H. Suffix 
vector: space- and time-efficient alternative to suffix trees. Aust. 
Comput. Sci. Commun. 24, 1 (2002), 157–165. 
[34] PHELAN, T. A compendium of issues for citation analysis. 
Scientometrics 45 (1999), 117–136. 10.1007/BF02458472. 
[35] POTTHAST, M., BARRÓN CEDEÑO, A., EISELT, A., STEIN, B., 
AND ROSSO, P. Overview of the 2nd International Competition on 
Plagiarism Detection. In Notebook Papers of CLEF 2010 LABs 
and Workshops, 22-23 September, Padua, Italy (Sept. 2010), 
M. Braschler, D. Harman, and E. Pianta, Eds. 
[36] POTTHAST, M., STEIN, B., EISELT, A., BARRÓN CEDEÑO, A., 
AND ROSSO, P. Overview of the 1st International Competition on 
Plagiarism Detection. In PAN09 - 3rd Workshop on Uncovering 
Plagiarism, Authorship and Social Software Misuse and 1st 
International Competition on Plagiarism Detection (2009), 
B. Stein, P. Rosso, E. Stamatatos, M. Koppel, and A. Eneko, Eds. 
[37] PRECHELT, L., PHILIPPSEN, M., AND MALPOHL, G. JPlag: 
Finding plagiarisms among a set of programs. Technical Report 
2000-1, Universität Karlsruhe, 2000. 
[38] RUDMAN, J. The State of Authorship Attribution Studies: 
Some Problems and Solutions. Computers and the Humanities 31 
(1997), 351–365. 
[39] SEGLEN, P. O. Why the impact factor of journals should not 
be used for evaluating research. BMJ 314, 7079 (1997), 497. 
[40] SI, A., LEONG, H. V., AND LAU, R. W. H. CHECK: A 
Document Plagiarism Detection System. In SAC ’97: Proceedings 
of the 1997 ACM symposium on Applied computing (New York, 
NY, USA, 1997), B. Bryant, J. Carroll, J. Hightower, and K. M. 
George, Eds., ACM, pp. 70–77. 
[41] SMALL, H., AND GRIFFITH, B. C. The Structure of Scientific 
Literatures I: Identifying and Graphing Specialties. Science 
Studies 4, 1 (1974), pp. 17–40. 
[42] SMYTH, B. Computing Patterns in Strings. Pearson 
Addison-Wesley, Harlow, England; New York, 2003. 
[43] SOROKINA, D., GEHRKE, J., WARNER, S., AND GINSPARG, P. 
Plagiarism Detection in arXiv. Technical report computer science, 
Cornell University TR2006-2046, Dec. 2006. 
[44] STEIN, B. Fuzzy-Fingerprints for Text-Based Information 
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the I-KNOW ‘05, 5th International 
Conference on Knowledge Management, Graz, Austria (July 
2005), K. Tochtermann and H. Maurer, Eds., vol. Special Issue of 
Journal of Universal Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Know-
Center, pp. 572–579. 
[45] STEIN, B., KOPPEL, M., AND STAMATATOS, E., Eds. 
Proceedings of the SIGIR 2007 International Workshop on 
Plagiarism Analysis, Authorship Identification, and 
NearDuplicate Detection, PAN 2007, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
July 27, 2007 (2007), vol. 276 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 
CEUR-WS.org. 
[46] STEIN, B., LIPKA, N., AND PRETTENHOFER, P. Intrinsic 
Plagiarism Analysis. Language Resources and Evaluation [Online 
Resource] (2010), 1–20. 
[47] STEIN, B., AND MEYER ZU EISSEN, S. Near Similarity Search 
and Plagiarism Analysis. In From Data and Information Analysis 
to Knowledge Engineering Proceedings of the 29th Annual 
Conference of the Gesellschaft für Klassifikation e.V. University 
of Magdeburg, March 9–11, 2005 (2006), M. Spiliopoulou, 
R. Kruse, C. Borgelt, A. Nürnberger, and W. Gaul, Eds., Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 430–437. 
[48] TSATSARONIS, G., VARLAMIS, I., GIANNAKOULOPOULOS, A., 
AND KANELLOPOULOS, N. Identifying free text plagiarism based on 
semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the 4th International 
Plagiarism Conference (2010). 
[49] WEBER WULFF, D. Copy, Shake, and Paste - A blog about 
plagiarism from a German professor, written in English. Online 
Source, Nov. 2010. Retrieved Nov. 28, 2010 from: http://copy-
shake-paste.blogspot.com. 
[50] WEBER WULFF, D. Test cases for plagiarism detection 
software. In Proceedings of the 4th International Plagiarism 
Conference (Newcastle Upon Tyne, 2010). 
[51] WISE, M. J. String Similarity via Greedy String Tiling and 
Running Karp-Rabin Matching. Online Preprint, Dec. 1993. 
Retrieved from: http://vernix.org/marcel/share/RKR_GST.ps. 
[52] ZHAN SU, BYUNG-RYUL AHN, KI-YOL EOM, MIN-KOO 
KANG, JIN-PYUNG KIM, AND MOON-KYUN KIM. Plagiarism 
Detection Using the Levenshtein Distance and Smith-Waterman 
Algorithm. In Innovative Computing Information and Control, 
2008. ICICIC ’08. 3rd International Conference on (June 2008), 
pp. 569 –569. 
[53 plagiarism]   GUTTENBERG, K.-T. F. Verfassung und 
Verfassungsvertrag : Konstitutionelle Entwicklungsstufen in den 
USA und der EU. Dissertation (Retracted as plagiarism), 
Universität Bayreuth, Berlin, 2009. 
 
 
