Content and Style Features
for Automatic Detection of Users’ Intentions
in Tweets
Helena Gómez-Adorno1, David Pinto2, Manuel Montes3, Grigori Sidorov1, and
Rodrigo Alfaro4 ?
1Centro de Investigación en Computación,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico
helena.adorno@gmail.com, sidorov@cic.ipn.mx
2Facultad de Ciencias de la Computación,
Benemérita Universidad Autonóma de Puebla, Mexico
dpinto@cs.buap.mx
3Coordinación de Ciencias Computacionales,
Instituto de Astrof́ısica, Óptica y Electrónica, Mexico
mmontesg@ccc.inaoep.mx
4Escuela de Ingenieŕıa Informática,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparáıso, Chile
rodrigo.alfaro@ucv.cl
Abstract. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the use of content and
style features in automatic classification of intentions of Tweets. For this
we propose different style features and evaluate them using a machine
learning approach. We found that although the style features by them-
selves are useful for the identification of the intentions of tweets, it is
better to combine such features with the content ones. We present a set
of experiments, where we achieved a 9.46 % of improvement on the over-
all performance of the classification with the combination of content and
style features as compared with the content features.
Keywords: Short Texts, Text Classification, Twitter, Detection of In-
tention
1 Introduction
Nowadays, social networks have become an important interaction media among
worldwide users. Among the most used social networks is Twitter, a microblog-
ging social network, with over 200 million users and about 400 million posts per
? This work was done under partial support of the Mexican Government (CONACYT-
134186, CONACYT grant #308719, SNI, COFAA-IPN, SIP-IPN 20144274) and
FP7-PEOPLE-2010-IRSES: “Web Information Quality Evaluation Initiative (WIQ-
EI)” European Commission project 269180
2 H. Gómez, D. Pinto, M. Montes, G. Sidorov, R. Alfaro
day [1]. Twitter is used for various purposes by a large number of users, which
may found themselves overwhelmed with the constantly growing amount of re-
ceived messages. In our personal experience, this is a major problem when the
messages are accessed via mobile devices.
Some studies of Twitter identify that people use microblogging to talk about
their daily activities and to seek or share information [2], making it a rich source
for text analysis in several areas. Therefore, classification of tweets is an ac-
tive research field. There are numerous research works on this social network in
the area of sentiment analysis [3,4,5], predicting box office revenues [6] or the
outcome of political elections [7], among others.
The classification of Twitter users intentions [8] is becoming a new opportu-
nity area of research. Our aim is to identify intention or purpose of users typing
a tweet. “Intention” is defined as an “agent’s specific purpose in performing
an action or series of actions, the end or goal that is aimed at” [9]. The auto-
matic classification of tweets into intention categories may improve navigation
and search for twitter users, especially when using a mobile device. In order to
classify the user intention we use a taxonomy of 8 categories of the main user
intentions in Twitter proposed in [10]. This taxonomy allows to classify messages
in categories such as News Report (NR), News Opinion (NO), Publicity (PU),
General Opinion (GO), Share Location/Event (SL), Chat (CH), Question (QU)
and Personal Message (PM).
Most of the systems and approaches implemented to automatically detect
the intention of the twitter message use a content based representation (raw
word representation, user meta-information ) as features to build a model for
intention detection [10,11]. The contribution of this paper consists in analyzing
the relevance of content and style attributes for this task. Based on tasks such
as Authorship Attribution [12], Profiling [13] and Sentiment Analysis [5,14] we
consider that the style plays an important role and complements the content
information. The style information depends on the presence of pronouns, adjec-
tives, verbal time, url and hashtags. We build a tweet representation extracting
a set of content (words, words n-grams) and style (presence of hashtags, pres-
ence of emoticons, POS tags) features, which are subsequently used in a machine
learning algorithm in order to built a classifier based on several labeled examples.
The obtained results show that the models created with the content and style
features together overcome the results of the models using only words as features.
Besides, the models created with the style features are domain independent, since
they are no longer based on specific words but only on the language structure.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First we present an overview of
related works on twitter text classification in Section 2. In Section 3 we explain
our strategy for feature selection. In Section 4 the experimental setup is described
and the obtained results are discussed. Finally, conclusions and future work
directions are given in Section 5.
Content and Style Features for Detection of Users’ Intentions in Tweets 3
2 Related Work
There are a lot of research work in topic text classification (e.g. health, edu-
cation, politics), hashtag recommendation, sentiment analysis; but there are a
lack of studies where user intentions in Twitter are identified. In [2] the authors
analyze the aggregate behavior across communities of users to describe a com-
munity intention. They also propose a user intention taxonomy based on the
link structure of a community network. Even though, it does not propose an
automatic methodology, this work laid the foundations of the task of detection
of user intentions in Twitter.
In [15] the authors classify the tweets based on their content in 9 different
twitter content type categories. They study in which way the tweets’ content
varies according to the users activity, personal networks and usage patterns. In
the same way, in [8] the authors present a taxonomy of tweets purposes. Their
aim was to identify user purposes in writing single tweets. Although, both works
present an interesting taxonomy for detection of user intention in writing single
tweets, none of them present an automatic method for classification.
With the purpose of improving of information filtering, in [11] the authors
classify tweets in 5 general types of content (related to intention). They propose
an automatic method using a set of domain-specific features extracted from the
author’s profile and text. In addition, they claim that corporate and personal
Twitter users have different intentions. Such features, in comparison to the style
features proposed here require external resources and user profile information.
In [10] the authors define a user intention taxonomy and an automatic clas-
sification model. They transform the tweets into a Vector Space Model, where
the words are the features represented by the (“exists” or “does not exists”)
boolean values. Their results show that the tweets emitting an opinion were eas-
ily confused and consequently achieve low classification performance. There is a
high overlap between two categories, thus leading to confusion of the classifier,
given that the News Opinion tweets contain much of the content that the News
Report expresses. By analyzing this phenomenon we propose the use of the style
features which will be useful in this problem, since it has been proven to be
helpful features in some related problems [16,11].
Another related problem is addressed in [16], where the authors use fea-
tures related to certain content keywords in order to identify real-time intentions
tweets. For this binary problem (tweet express or does not express an intention)
the authors use a classification algorithm with the content keywords features,
certain verbs, temporal expressions and POS tags with their position with re-
spect to the content keywords. The POS features used in this task were useful,
when they are employed in conjunction with other features.
3 Feature Selection
The aim of this work is to evaluate content and style features to identify user
intentions when writing a single tweet. The features were selected taking into ac-
count the way in which each of them may represent certain classes. For example,
4 H. Gómez, D. Pinto, M. Montes, G. Sidorov, R. Alfaro
Twitter users express themselves differently when sharing a Personal Message
(PM) or Chats (CH) than when posting News Reports (NR) or Publicity (PU).
In general, PM tweets tend to have mentions to other users and emoticons, while
NR tweets are written in a clear form and usually using URLs to complement
the news. In this sense a feature for discriminating PM tweets may be the use of
mentions and emoticons, and viceversa the absence of such features will possibly
discriminate NR tweets.
Let us consider the use of POS tags in tweets. For example, for the intention
Share Location/Event (SL), we observe that the use of the verb in the gerund
form is used frequently. Hence, we decided to label the tweets with their POS
tags. The POS tags provide grammatical information of the words in the mes-
sages; in this way the classifier may be able to identify, say, SL messages by
the presence of verbs in gerund forms among others. Interrogative pronouns are
also identified by the POS tagger. Such words are useful for the identification of
Question Messages (QU).
For the case of the opinion tweets (News Opinion and General Opinion),
our hypothesis is that the presence of adjectives to express an opinion is very
important. Therefore, these classes can be identified by the presence of such
grammatical category. In the same way, function words (pronouns, prepositions,
conjunctions, determiners, auxiliary verbs ) have been effectively used for cap-
turing author style in the task of authorship attribution [17]. We believe that
function words tags may also be helpful features for the identification of user
intentions in tweets.
Formally, tweets are represented as a vector V = {f1, f2, f3, ..., fn}, where n
is the total number of features fi. The set of features is divided into two subsets
V1, V2 ⊂ V where V1 represents the content features and V2 represents the
style features. An explanation of the details for each subset follows.
3.1 Subset of Content Features
The content features are represented by the words in the message, so we use
bag-of-words and n-grams representations for these features. In order to assign
weights to each feature, we have evaluated three different weight schemata: the
term frequency (TF), the term frequency/inverse document frequency (TF/IDF),
and the term presence (TP). Nevertheless, the performance of the classifier is
practically the same for all types of values, probably due to the length of the
tweet, which is 140 characters maximum. Hence, we decided to use the TP for
the values of each feature; the presence of a word is identified with the value 1
and it’s absence with the value 0.
3.2 Subset of Style Features
In this section we present the style features used in this work. For this purpose
we extracted 4 style features, which were previously used in the related task of
sentiment analysis [4]. For each tweet we identify: (a) initial mentions (presence
of @user at the beginning of the tweet), (b) mention inside the message (presence
Content and Style Features for Detection of Users’ Intentions in Tweets 5
of @user inside the tweet), (c) URL, and (d) Emoticons. The four previous
features have binary values (BF, binary features), in the sequel 4BF, so the
presence or absence of each one is identified with the values 1 or 0 respectively
in the feature vector. Words and punctuation marks are also included in the
features vector in the same way as the 4 previously explained features, indicating
their presence and their absence with 1 and 0, respectively.
In addition, tweets are grammatically tagged using Freeling1 for Spanish,
obtaining the Part-Of-Speech (POS) tags of each word in the tweet. Freeling uses
the EAGLES2 Standard in order to represent the grammatical information of
words. Each label is composed of at most 8 digits, where the first digit represents
the grammatical category and the rest of the digits represent the attributes of
each grammatical category. The total number of POS tags used was 240. The
POS tags become additional features in the feature set, and the presence or
absence of each one is indicated with the values 1 or 0 in the feature vectors,
respectively.
4 Experimental Results
In this section we describe the experimental setup and the results obtained when
evaluating the different features considered in our approach.
4.1 Experimental Setup
The dataset used in this study is the one described in [10]. The dataset consists
of 5,209 messages manually classified by the authors of [10] into the following
classes: News Report (NR), News Opinion (NO), Publicity (PU), General Opin-
ion (GO), Share Location/Event (SL), Chat (CH), Question (QU) and Personal
Message (PM). The class distribution given in Figure 1. The tweets are written in
Spanish and contain mentions referring to: Banco Santander (a bank), Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Valparáıso (a university), El Mercurio (a newspaper),
La Tercera (a newspaper), Movistar (a telecommunication company) and a set
of random tweets.
We used seven different configurations for our test dataset. First, we evalu-
ated the classification performance when using only the content features (only
words unigrams or words + word bigrams + word trigrams). Second, the classi-
fication performance was evaluated with the style features (only 4BF or POS +
4BF or POS + POS bigrams + POS trigrams + 4BF). Finally, we have mixed
the content and style features, obtaining two different feature sets: words + POS
+ 4BF or Word POS + Word POS bigrams + Word POS trigrams + 4BF. So,
each feature type was evaluated independently in order to determine which one
is most suitable for this task. Thereafter, the combination of the types of fea-
tures was evaluated in order to assess whether they complement each other to
improve the classification accuracy.
1 http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/
2 http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/doc/tagsets/tagset-es.html
6 H. Gómez, D. Pinto, M. Montes, G. Sidorov, R. Alfaro
2421
414
334
96
315 374
658 597
NR PU QU NO GO PM SL CH
Fig. 1. Class distribution in the dataset.
For the classification process we used a machine learning approach. The ex-
periments were conducted using the SVM algorithm provided in the WEKA3
data mining tool. The training phase was performed on the entire data set us-
ing tenfold cross-validation. The evaluation metrics used were the F1 and F1µ
measures :
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
(1)
F1µ = 2 ·
precisionµ · recallµ
precisionµ + recallµ
(2)
where:
tp =number of true positives (correct class prediction),
tn =number of true negatives (correct negative prediction),
fp =number of false positives (incorrect class prediction),
fn =number of false negatives (incorrect negative prediction),
i = number of classes,
precision =
tp
tp + fp
, (3)
recall =
tp
tp + fn
, (4)
precisionµ =
∑|c|
i=1 tpi∑|c|
i=1 tpi + fpi
, (5)
recallµ =
∑|c|
i=1 tpi∑|c|
i=1 tpi + fni
. (6)
3 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/
Content and Style Features for Detection of Users’ Intentions in Tweets 7
4.2 Evaluation
In this section we present the evaluation of the classification using the above-
mentioned seven feature sets. With this experiment we aimed to assess the ben-
efits of using style features such as POS and POS n-grams over content features
such as words and word n-grams.
As mentioned in section 3, in Figure 2 the label 4BF refers to the four fea-
tures previously presented: initial mention, mention inside the message, URL,
emoticons. The labels “words and words n-gram” refer to the entire set of words
of the corpus and the n-gram of words, with n = 1, 2, 3. The labels “POS and
POS n-grams” refer to the set of POS tags corresponding to the words and
the n-grams of such POS tags with n = 1, 2, 3. Finally, the label “(Word POS)
n-grams” refers to the combination of a word and its POS tag as one feature.
The results presented in Figure 2 depict the F1µ measure of the classification
over the data sets. The Figure shows that the use of the 4BF by themselves does
not outperform the performance of the classification when using the content
features. On the contrary, POS + 4BF features improves the performance by
6.49% over the words’ features. Besides, the combination of a word with its POS
tag plus the 4BF achieves a 9.46% of improvement over the Words features.
77.98 76.64
63.56
84.47 85.16
87.10 87.44
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Words Words n-grams
(1,2,3)
4BF POS tags + 4BF POS n-grams
(1,2,3) + 4BF
Words + POS +
4BF
(Words_POS) n-
grams + 4BF
F1
-m
ea
su
re
 (
%
)
Fig. 2. Classification performance obtained with different feature sets
Table 1 presents the detailed results, in F1 measure terms, for each type of
feature sets per class. We can observe that the 4BF by themselves do not identify
the tweets in the classes Publicity, Question, News Opinion and General Opinion.
On the other hand, such features are able to identify the classes News Report
and Chat with 81.4% and 68.1% of F1 measures, respectively. In addition, the
8 H. Gómez, D. Pinto, M. Montes, G. Sidorov, R. Alfaro
style features (POS n-grams + 4BF) outperform the content features (words and
word n-grams) in almost all classes, with the exception of the General Opinion
and Publicity classes. The class that benefits the most from the style features is
Question, achieving an F1 measure of 87.5% with such features and only 53.6%
with the content features. Other classes such as News Report, Personal Messages,
Share Location and Chat also benefit from the style features. On the contrary,
such classes as Publicity, News Opinion, and General Opinion need both the
content features and the style features in order to improve the classification
performance.
In Table 1, is observed that the use of POS features for the classes Publicity,
News Opinion, and General Opinion did not result in an improvement of the
classification. It is possible that the tagger does not identify well the grammatical
tags due to the use of an informal language in tweets. These phenomena may
bring as a result a decrease of the classification accuracy.
Table 1. F1 measures obtained with the different configuration of the feature set
Features NR PU QU NO GO PM SL CH
Words 88.6 80.0 53.6 49.7 39.4 48.6 94.8 62.9
Word n-grams 87.8 79.5 41.5 40.9 22.6 48.5 93.7 62.0
4BF 81.4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 58.1 24.2 68.1
POS tags + 4BF 93.4 71.7 87.6 48.7 34.3 62.4 95.7 80.3
POS tag n-grams + 4BF 94.4 74.9 87.6 40.0 44.0 63.5 96.7 80.3
Words + POS tags + 4BF 95.4 80.4 88.0 53.6 48.7 68.4 96.9 81.4
(Word POS) n-grams + 4BF 95.6 80.7 88.0 55.6 46.3 68.4 97.1 82.9
5 Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented an approach for automatic classification of tweets taking into
account user intention categories. We used style and content features of tweets.
This kind of classification can be used for filtering out tweets by user interests
and facilitate queries and navigation.
Experimental results show that the POS features improve the performance
of the classification as compared with only the words features. Besides, the com-
bination of the word with its POS tag performs significantly better with this set
of classes.
We are currently working on the selection of new features that could improve
the classification of certain classes such as News Opinion, General Opinion and
Personal Message. For example, we consider other style features, such as syn-
tactic n-grams, that were successfully used in the task of authorship attribution
and author profiling [18].
Content and Style Features for Detection of Users’ Intentions in Tweets 9
References
1. Wickre, K.: Celebrating #Twitter7. Twitter Blog:
https://blog.twitter.com/2013/celebrating-twitter7 (2013)
2. Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., Tseng, B.: Why we twitter: Understanding mi-
croblogging usage and communities. In: Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st
SNA-KDD 2007 Workshop on Web Mining and Social Network Analysis, ACM
(2007)
3. Agarwal, A., Xie, B., Vovsha, I., Rambow, O., Passonneau, R.: Sentiment analysis
of Twitter data. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages in Social Media,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL (2011)
4. Pandey, V., Iyer, C.: Sentiment analysis of microblogs. Technical report (2009)
5. Jain, H., Mogadala, A., Varma, V.: Sielers : Feature analysis and polarity classi-
fication of expressions from Twitter and SMS data. In: Second Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the
Seventh International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), ACL
(2013)
6. Asur, S., Huberman, B.A.: Predicting the future with social media. In: Proceedings
of the 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence and
Intelligent Agent Technology. Volume 1., IEEE Computer Society (2010)
7. Diakopoulos, N.A., Shamma, D.A.: Characterizing debate performance via aggre-
gated Twitter sentiment. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2010)
8. Alhadi, A.C., Staab, S., Gottron, T.: Exploring user purpose writing single tweets.
In: WebSci’11: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Web Science,
ACM (2011)
9. Website: Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intention
(2014)
10. Martis, M., Alfaro, R.: Clasificación automática de la intención del usuario en
mensajes de Twitter. In: I Workshop en procesamiento automatizado de textos y
corpora, Sausalito, Viña del Mar (2012)
11. Sriram, B., Fuhry, D., Demir, E., Ferhatosmanoglu, H., Demirbas, M.: Short text
classification in Twitter to improve information filtering. In: Proceedings of the
33rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval, ACM (2010)
12. Stamatatos, E.: A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. J. Am. Soc.
Inf. Sci. Technol. 60(3) (2009)
13. Rangel, F., Rosso, P.: Use of language and author profiling: Identification of gender
and age. Natural Language Processing and Cognitive Science (2013)
14. Barbosa, L., Feng, J.: Robust sentiment detection on Twitter from biased and
noisy data. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Posters, ACL (2010) 36–44
15. Naaman, M., Boase, J., Lai, C.H.: Is it really about me?: Message content in social
awareness streams. In: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, ACM (2010)
16. Banerjee, N., Chakraborty, D., Joshi, A., Mittal, S., Rai, A., Ravindran, B.: To-
wards analyzing micro-blogs for detection and classification of real-time intentions.
In Breslin, J.G., Ellison, N.B., Shanahan, J.G., Tufekci, Z., eds.: Proceedings of
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, The AAAI Press
(2012)
10 H. Gómez, D. Pinto, M. Montes, G. Sidorov, R. Alfaro
17. Zhao, Y., Zobel, J.: Effective and scalable authorship attribution using function
words. In: Proceedings of the Second Asian Conference on Asian Information
Retrieval Technology. AIRS’05, Springer (2005) 174–189
18. Sidorov, G., Velasquez, F., Stamatatos, E., Gelbukh, A., Chanona-Hernández, L.:
Syntactic n-grams as machine learning features for natural language processing.
Expert Syst. Appl. 41(3) (2014)
