STYLISTIC STRATEGIES WITHIN A GRAMMAR OF STYLE 
Robin Tolmach Lakoff 
Department of Linguistics 
University of California 
Berkeley, California 94720 
Interpersonal behavior is frequently regarded as unpredictable and 
spontaneous. We do not feel that we are following rules or even a preor- 
dained pattern in the way we talk to others, move, respond emotionally, 
work, think-all the varied aspects of what, following Shapiro (1965) we 
can call personal style. Indeed, some of us might be horrified at the idea 
that, in all our actions, we are governed by implicit rules, just as Chomsky 
(e.g., 1968) has shown we are in our linguistic behavior (and has thereby 
himself aroused horrified responses), and are as little aware of it. In this 
paper, assuming the validity of the assumption of generative grammar that 
linguistic behavior is rule-governed, I want to extend that claim to a variety 
of other kinds of behavior that can be subsumed under terms like 
“character,” “personality,” or “personal style.” I will argue that the same 
kind of evidence that indicates a need for grammatical rules relating two 
levels of linguistic structure exists for this wider range of human function- 
ing. Needless to say, the argument that implicit rules guide our behavior 
denies us neither autonomy nor creativity: these rules are predictive 
schemata, descriptive rather than prescriptive. In this paper, drawing on 
previous work, I use as a principal example the distinction between men’s 
and women’s typical personal style, in American middle-class culture; but 
the argument holds for the behavior of any individual or group that is felt 
by its members and by outsiders to function as a cohesive unit. 
The reader may wonder whether there is any justification-beyond my 
personal whim and the convenience of having previous work to draw 
upon-for using women’s language as a paradigm or model for the purpose 
of illustrating the more general thesis of the existence of a grammar of style. 
To this I would make the rejoinder that it is as good as ’my, and I must 
choose one. Thus, Chomsky (1965) chose the modal auxiliary system of 
English as his example attesting to the need for a grammar of the transfor- 
mational type, although other examples might as well have been used. 
But even more to the point, women’s language is accessible to every 
member of this culture as a stereotype. Whether the stereotype is equally 
valid for all women is certainly debatable; but the fact of its existence, overt 
or subliminal, affects every one of us and its assumptions are generally 
agreed on. Hence it provides an especially clear case. And while women’s 
language, and women’s style, have long been recognized and commented 
upon as an aggregate of traits, not much has been done toward accounting 
for why these particular traits cluster together- that is, toward construct- 
ing an explanatory, as opposed to a merely descriptive, mode. I shall at- 
tempt a beginning of such a systematization: that is, I shall try to make pre- 
53 
ooii-a923/i9/032ioos3 soi. is/2 0 1 ~ 9 .  NYAS 
54 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
dictions, show that there are constraints on co-occurrence, that there are ex- 
planations for the existence of some phenomena and the absence of 
others-in short, to construct a predictive system of rules for style, to 
establish for style something analogous to what linguists construct for 
language in the form of a grammar. 
To talk really convincingly about style, one should examine all aspects 
of a person’s functioning, much as Shapiro investigated several of the 
aspects of four or five recognized neurotic styles to show how each formed a 
coherent system, each trait being predictable on the basis of certain 
postulates. His basic determinant of style was the mode of attentiveness. 
Obsessive-compulsive style, for instance, involves a need to pay very close 
attention to small details one at a time, whereas hysterical style works just 
the opposite way:-a person with such a style perceives the universe as a 
kind of large undefined blur in which everything is seen at once, and 
nothing is singled out as outstanding. Shapiro shows how these basic ways 
of perceiving the world are involved in one’s mode of cognition, learning 
and processing new information; in perception; in ways of using one’s body 
physically; and in one’s style of social interaction. This interaction, like the 
grammar of a language one speaks, is something the normal participant 
knows about unconsciously or implicitly. So, seeing that X is concerned 
with details in his work, seldom looking at the larger issues but confining 
himself to tiny aspects of the problem, an observer will expect, consciously 
or otherwise, to find that X is very precise in his linguistic expression, that 
he will be very concerned with using just the right word, and that he is apt to 
be conservative, politically and socially, feeling uncomfortable with sur- 
prises of any sort. We can then informally state, as a rule, “If there is con- 
cern for details, then there will be avoidance of surprises.” If this is borne 
out in future encounters with X, and, further, with Z and W, the observer 
feels comfortable-his rule works, he is in controI. If, on the other hand, 
X-or W, or Z-turns out to be flighty in his political affiliations and fuzzy 
in his choice of expression, the observer may be puzzled, and may feel and 
or even remark to others that that person is a paradox, you can not figure 
him out. Similarly, if the observer finds that X on one occasion is bound up 
with niggling details, he comes to expect this sort of behavior of X on subse- 
quent occasions, and will likewise be surprised if on their next meeting X af- 
fects an extremely general and undefined Weltanschauung. So our rules are 
predictive across modalities (that is, from one aspect of behavior to 
another) as well as across time (from one encounter to  the next). I will call 
these predictabilities by the names, respectively, of coherency and con- 
sistency, and assume that for something to  be recognized as a personal style 
it must possess both these attributes. (I assume that personal style may, as a 
result of the vicissitudes of life, through conscious motivation or otherwise, 
change in several of its salient aspects over time, but typically rather slowly 
and not too radically. I leave open here the question of how much style-or 
character, or personality-may really change.) 
Stylistic coherency, then, is the predictability of one component of per- 
sonal style from another, on the basis of more or less apparent similarities 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 55 
between them, genetically or dynamically. This notion, as I suggested 
above, is reminiscent of the basic linguistic concept of co-occurrence as a 
criterion for grammaticality. Syntactic rules tell us, among other things, 
which words, or other elements, may occur side by side with others. If these 
constraints are violated an uninterpretable, or at least unacceptable, 
sentence results. Such a constraint may involve semantic criteria, as in the 
well-known example 
in which the problems arise because semantic categories are juxtaposed con- 
trary to universal meaning constraints. They may also involve syntactic 
criteria, as in 
where the use of the future tense conflicts with the use of yesterday, refer- 
ring to past time, or 
Of course, we might as legitimately call the last two semantic violations, il- 
lustrating a fact that most linguistic theorists have come to accept, with sor- 
row: levels of grammar cannot be dealt with as separable entities. We are 
dealing with parallel problems when we want to define normal style. Thus, 
we would like to express, in precise and possibly even formal notation (an 
attempt that has been made in linguistic theory for some time, and though it 
has never really been successful, it has been valuable as a learning ex- 
perience for linguists), the intuitively correct generalization that certain 
modalities of human behavior can be reasonably expected to co-occur, and 
others cannot. As an example, within the linguistic sphere of style alone, we 
can state a few co-occurrence constraints: 
(a) A person given to pontification on large and abstract issues of great 
universal and philosophical relevance, most likely, will employ an 
elaborately Latinate and convoluted vocabulary as well as a rather Ger- 
manic syntax wherewith to express these thoughts: there is an expected 
co-occurrence of lexical, syntactic, and semantic material. 
(b) A person given to asking questions where others might use 
declaratives can be expected also to employ euphemistic modes of 
speech on any topic that might be embarrassing, and might further 
engage in a lot of linguistic hedging (I guess; sorta; y’know). Here we 
find co-occurrence of syntactic and lexical patterns. 
Exceptions occur, of course, but we tend to remember them particularly 
as they are so striking. (“Mary is so polite whenever she wants you to do 
anything; how come she uses four-letter words?”) Such exceptions, notable 
and memorable as they may be, are the exception rather than the rule, com- 
parable to the uses of poets who employ locutions like “A grief ago,” or 
“the fog comes in on little cat feet,” thereby violating the rules of linguistic 
co-occurrence discussed previously, and thereby creating particularly 
memorable strings of words, typically called “poetry.” I do not want to im- 
ply that such stylistic incompatibilities are subsumable under the rubric of 
behavioral poetry; but it is perhaps not beside the point to suggest that, 
(1) Colorless green ideas sleep furiously 
(2) John will leave for Rome yesterday 
(3) The boys is here 
56 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
when extreme, they are assigned to a special category to which there is given 
a special name, namely “schizophrenia.” The relationship between 
schizophrenic behavior and poetic behavior is frequently if inadequately 
commented upon by workers in many fields. 
Additionally, co-occurrence constraints on style pertain between dif- 
ferent modalities: 
(A) Someone who dresses conservatively and very carefully can be ex- 
pected to use language carefully and equally precisely. 
(B) Someone who divides humanity into black and white also, 
cognitively, divides ideas into right and wrong, with no gray areas in either 
case. Again, there are people who violate these expectations, but they are 
experienced as aberrant. If the aberration is clearly purposeful, for effect, it 
is comic: much of Woody Allen’s humor, for example, depends on incom- 
patibilities of stylistic modalities. But if it seems unintentional, we consider 
it indicative of serious psychopathology-schizophrenia again. 
Co-occurrence constraints are but one aspect of grammatical rules. Syn- 
tactic theory devised over the last couple of decades makes other assump- 
tions about human linguistic capacities, capacities that are assumed on the 
basis of excellent evidence to be found in all human languages. We might 
well ask how far to carry the generalization. We know that language is a 
form of communication of thoughts and emotions, perhaps (though not 
certainly) the form of communication par excellence. But there are other 
modes employed by normal persons. Language is surely the principal con- 
scious and intentional mode; but that does not mean it is the most impor- 
tant or the most frequent or the best-understood. Rather, all sorts of 
arguments and evidence have been adduced of late that language is but a 
sort of frosting on the cake; when conflict exists between what a speaker is 
expressing linguistically and what he is communicating, generally uninten- 
tionally, by means of other modalities, other participants in the com- 
munication tend, generally unconsciously, to interpret the nonlinguistic 
communication as the genuine or truthful one.’ But to say this is to  assume 
that, not only do these sophisticated interpreters of discourse (i.e., you and 
I and everyone else) employ their implicit rules in the interpretation of 
linguistic structures (as we have been perfectly well aware for quite some 
time), but that we use the same system for what is sometimes called extralin- 
guistic or paralinguistic functioning, and we detect mismatches by our ap- 
plication of these rules. Woe betide anyone caught in a mismatch (Richard 
Nixon is a notorious example). I take it, then, as proved that nonlinguistic 
style is as much rule governed behavior as is linguistic style, and I would 
further venture-it is not yet proved by any means-that the same kinds of 
rules, the same basic devices, are operative in all human behavioral systems. 
Style is a unity, not only in its superficial manifestations in the normal in- 
dividual, but also in its basic mechanisms. 
I The work of Paul Ekman is particularly interesting in this regard, indicating that subjects, 
when forced to decide between conflicting interpretations of a contribution based on facial ex- 
pression and verbal statement, will opt for the truth of the former. 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 57 
It is therefore incumbent on the linguist determined to give evidence for 
this last contention to show that those traits ascribed to the linguistic gram- 
mar can be justified and indeed are essential as parts of a wider stylistic 
grammar. If this should be provable, we can be content in that we have 
given yet another instance of the working of Occam’s razor: after all, 
doesn’t it make sense that the human mind should function with as little 
baggage as it can get away with? If it can be shown to need only one general 
rule system, from which all forms of psychic behavior can be derived, isn’t 
this preferable to a theory that requires separate theories, and thus separate 
rules, for each subtype of behavior? But even if the former is ideal, it 
naturally remains to be proved. I do not intend to make a watertight case 
for psychic economy here, but merely to give some preliminary arguments 
showing that a unified system is tenable. I use linguistic theory as my 
template, and more specifically a kind of generalized theory derived from 
various realizations of generative grammar. The reason I do so is partly that 
I am trained as a linguist, so it comes naturally to me, but also because it is 
the only attempt at formalization of psychic structure that I know, the only 
attempt, I should say, at a predictive rather than a merely taxomonic or 
classificatory framework, such as are found in many psychological theories 
of character. 
To return to the point: linguistic theory assumes a bipartite syntax (here 
I am oversimplifying considerably, but the complexities are not important 
for our purposes). In such a syntactic model, two levels of syntactic struc- 
ture are relevant: a superficial level, which is the utterance as it appears in 
spoken or written form; and the underlying or deep structure, which is 
related to the meaning of the sentence, and contains in a form accessible to 
inspection all the elements needed to account for the meaning of the 
sentence. Since every sentence in a language that is found in superficial 
form can be related to  an underlying form, we must assume a set of 
transformational rules, relating these two levels, explaining formally the 
relation between the sentence as it appears on the surface and what it 
“means.” For often, if we are asked what a sentence means, how its com- 
ponent parts are related, to answer that question properly we will have to 
refer to elements that are not present on the surface, but can be inferred 
from the properties of the rest of the sentence. It is frequently assumed that 
transformational rules exist to make sentences easier to understand or 
quicker to utter; this is true some of the time, although by no means 
always.* So if we want to argue for parallelism between linguistic and other 
levels of psychic functioning, we shall have to give evidence for these two 
levels in stylistic behavior, and a set of rules linking them, stating, for in- 
stance, in effect, that Surface Structure A always corresponds to Underly- 
ing Structure B, through the application of Transformational Rule C. 
Arguments for transformational rules as processing strategies were first advanced by Bever 
and Langendoen in their 1972 paper, “The interaction of speech perception and grammatical 
structure in the evolution of language,” in Linguistic Chunge and Cenerutive Theory, R.P. 
Stockwell & R.K.S. Macaulay, Eds. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind. 
58 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
The most persuasive evidence for this duality of stucture in language is 
in the existence of ambiguity and paraphrase relationships between 
sentences, which could not otherwise be explained. A sentence is ambiguous 
if it has different meanings depending on the contexts in which it is uttered: 
such a surface structure can be explained as being related by two different 
transformational routes to two different underlying structures. So for in- 
stance with (4): 
In one derivational history, we start from an underlying structure roughly 
equivalent in meaning to ( 5 )  -not itself an underlying structure: 
and in the other, to (6): 
In each of these underlying structures, something is deleted to produce the 
superficial sentence (4), but in each case something different is deleted. 
Hence, starting from structures with different meanings, we end up with 
identical structures. 
On the other hand, sometimes we find two quite different superficial 
sentences that are very similar in meaning. Such sentences are paraphrases 
of one another. Examples (7) and (8). and (9) and (10) are illustrative. 
(4) Visiting relatives can be a nuisance. 
( 5 )  Relatives who visit can be a nuisance. 
(6) For one to visit relatives can be a nuisance. 
(7) The ball was hit by the boy. 
(8) The boy hit the ball. 
(9) John threw the garbage out. 
(10) John threw out the garbage. 
The members of each pair originate as very similar underlying structures, 
but they undergo different sets of transformational rules, leading to two 
different superficial representations. Since the underlying structures of each 
pair are closely similar, the meanings of the sentences in each pair are simi- 
lar as well; the surface forms are different because each has a different syn- 
tactic history.) Just as the existence of these types of relationships in gram- 
mar is evidence for the duality of grammatical structures, if we could find 
evidence of a similar duality in other modalities of human behavior, we 
would have persuasive evidence that a similar duality should be postulated 
to explain these other modalities, 
I have given evidence elsewhere (1977) of the existence of such relation- 
ships. To summarize, I have suggested that women’s language and (typical- 
ly male) academese function for the same underlying or deeper purpose, 
that of evading responsibility for what is being said; but they do it by dif- 
ferent superficial means, which incidentally are given very different values 
by our culture; and these then are essentially paraphrases of one another, 
like the examples of sentences (7) - (10) above; and that women’s style and 
children’s style, although superficially similar in many of their aspects, are 
actually used with rather different aims and arise from very different 
’ I am oversimplifying greatly here, and probably distorting the facts more than I ought. 
The basic premise is true, but the discussion of  the intricacies involved in the differences of 
meaning and usage in the members of each pair, however valid, would take us far afield. 
Lakoff A Grammar of Style 59 
psychic situations, so that they can be said to have different meanings, dif- 
ferent underlying structures, corresponding to similar surface structures, 
and thus are stylistically ambiguous. These arguments imply that many if 
not all the modalities of human behavior are dualistic in their functioning, 
and therefore, are best interpreted as governed by rules at the least 
analogous to, and perhaps identical to, the kinds of rules that have been 
identified as existing in linguistic structures. 
We can in fact give arguments that, in the various aspects of human 
style, there are analogous processes to those of language. Linguistic rules 
are implicit, or unconscious: a speaker follows them, using them to produce 
as well as to distinguish grammatical utterances of his language without be- 
ing able to state the form of these rules, and typically without even knowing 
that such rules exist. Linguists know that there exists a syntactic rule 
relating sentences like (8) and (9); but even linguists, with their special 
knowledge, cannot give the correct form of this rule; “nahe speakers,” 
even worse off in this respect, may be interested to learn in an elementary 
syntax course that they have access to such rules. Yet the naYve speaker has 
no trouble using and processing passive sentences. Similarly we correlate the 
various aspects of our style, we determine whether or not a new piece of 
behavior on the part of an acquaintance surprises us, we decide whether the 
range of a person’s behaviors in the course of an evening or a month or a 
year is reasonable fluctuation or evidence of serious psychopathology; we 
do all this on the basis of some internal mechanism, a predictive device that 
we may perfectly accurately refer to as a grammar of style, a set of stylistic 
rules. (It should not be necessary to point out that these unconscious rules, 
linguistic and behavioral, are descriptive and predictive, rather then 
prescriptive: they tell us, in effect, what will be encountered on the basis of 
what has been found, rather than telling us what we ought to do to act 
right.) In talking informally about behavior, we make reference to distinc- 
tions between intention and execution, or intention and perception, which 
are analogous to the underlying/superficial structure dichotomy of 
linguistics. 
Linguistics as a scientific methodology has very real relevance to the 
methods of the other social sciences. While it is true that they have achieved 
far more success with quantification of their data than has linguistics, len- 
ding credence to the notion that that the latter is unscientifically soft-nosed, 
nonetheless linguistics alone among the social sciences has attempted to 
represent the data it uncovers in terms of formal rules-predictive and 
simplifying generalizations. While generative grammar has not been 
tremendously successful in writing rules that actually work, nonetheless, we 
recognize that mechanisms of the sorts devised by theorists in this field must 
exist and will ultimately function as we might desire. But linguistics il- 
lustrates for other social sciences the importance of devising grammars, 
predictive rather than merely taxonomic models. So when I speak of a 
grammar of style, I mean that we are to transfer the concepts devised for 
linguistic theory-rules, co-occurrence constraints, ungrammaticality, and 
so forth- to the description of other forms of human behavior, a system 
60 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
that if adequate will not only categorize what is actually extant, but will also 
indicate what does not exist, in normal persons on the one hand, and in 
general on the other. 
With this definition in mind, let us turn to  the examination of stylistic 
behavior. I have said that, to be a style, behavior must be able to be seen as 
both coherent across modalities and consistent across time, and that one 
form of stylistic pathology may lie in the failure to  be either coherent or 
consistent, or both. Further, a style assumes a match between dual levels of 
structure-the one that is superficially accessible to participants in an in- 
teraction, and the other, the level of intention, which itself may be 
multileveled and accessible not at all or in varying degrees to participants in 
their interactions. Also, participants generally assume a one-to-one rela- 
tionship between intention and execution: if I perform Behavior A, my in- 
terlocutor is apt to assume that I have intended to communicate B. There is 
some possibility for ambiguity, even as there is in language, but as with 
language, in actual practice the context, for normal individuals, tends to 
disambiguate most potential ambiguities. So for instance if a female partici- 
pant does something others will interpret it one way; if a male, 
another-since “female” and “male” are different contexts. As also with 
language, some users are much better at realizing that two readings might 
exist, and determining which is the one that is correct in that context. And 
the fact that many people apparently are not capable of doing this efficient- 
ly causes great difficulty in interpersonal relationships-difficulty that is 
particularly troublesome because participants are seldom aware of its cause, 
or even of its precise form. 
While Shapiro described one contributor to  style-the nature and degree 
of attentiveness-style has many other potential points of differentiation. 
We could think of it as a grid, with Shapiro’s distinctions being one column 
of many. This makes sense, in that we do  not typically consider a person 
completely classified when we have labeled him or her, as, say, hysterical or 
obsessive-compulsive. We also define such an individual as demure or asser- 
tive; as reticent or loquacious; and so forth ad infiniturn. Another point of 
differentiation is the mode of rapport: the relative importance for the in- 
dividual of making the content of the communication clear, versus 
establishing a personal relationship with others, where this choice must be 
made; and, where the latter is determined to be important, how rapport is to 
be effected, what mode of presentation of self the individual chooses to 
adopt. There are obvious correlations between Shapiro’s attentiveness- 
oriented and my rapport-oriented categorizations, so that the grammar 
should allow us to predict one category of behavior from another: e.g., 
someone who tends toward diffuse attentiveness is apt to display rapport- 
related behavior. But on the other hand, a person whose attention tends to  
be highly constricted and confined will impress others as being unwilling to  
establish rapport. 
Shapiro talks about these relationships, in fact, noting that hysterical 
characters, people utilizing diffuse attentiveness, tend toward a quick if 
shallow emotional rapport, the appearance of intimacy; while a contrastive 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 61 
type, obsessive-compulsive characters, tend toward impersonal relation- 
ships and aloof politeness. But we should like to know why this is so; what it 
is in the individual that necessitates these co-occurrence relationships, which 
we assume are not coincidental. I am suggesting that Shapiro’s taxonomies 
can be expressed as parts of a grammar, i.e., made into a predictive system. 
We want to explain why we encounter these juxtapositions and not others, 
as character types. And while extremes of these two types are far from 
“normal,” and may even be considered psychotic at the farthest reaches, 
they are found. 
In another way too character style is reminiscent in its logic of linguistic 
grammar. Looking at language, we can place any string of words on a scale, 
from “fully grammatical, normal, and acceptable,” like (1 1) through “in- 
telligible but peculiar,” like (12), to “bizarre and uninterpretable, mean- 
ingless,” like (13). 
(1 1) The boy hit the ball. 
(12) Won’t you please get the hell out of here. 
(13) Two boys elapsed. 
The determination as to whether the sentences are acceptable and mean- 
ingful, or the degree to which they are so judged, rests on the co-occurrence 
relations of items in the sentence. In (ll), there is no problem. In (12), we 
have a pragmatic conflict: “please” correlates with social situations in 
which we are trying to be polite and gentle, “the hell” with contexts where 
we are willing to be brusque and rude, and so it is in some sense inap- 
propriate for both to occur together. But the meaning of the sentence is not 
impaired, only its emotional content. In (13), however, a concrete noun 
serves as subject for the verb elapse, which semantically can refer only to 
abstract subjects, and more specifically, expressions of time (cf. the perfect- 
ly appropriate and intelligble, Two hours elapsed.) The breaking of co- 
occurrence constraints in (13) is analogous to that in (12), but of a deeper 
and more serious order, affecting meaning. 
Character types, too, may reasonably be looked at as linguists interpret 
sentences: the more bizarre a personality seems to us, the more serious is the 
violation of the stylistic co-occurrence rules that creates it. So (1 1) is similar 
to a more or less normal person in terms of the interplay of relevant 
characteristics: (12) to, let us say, a hysteric-we are not quite sure what to 
make of the behavior, it is not what we expect, but we can learn to make 
allowances; (13), to a schizophrenic, whose behavior may be totally uninter- 
pretable, and frightening to us as the hysteric’s is not, for just that reason. 
Further, just as with linguistic rules, we have an implicit notion of 
stylistic rules and recognize when they are violated, even though we usually 
are at a loss to say what it is that we recognize. Perhaps the most striking in- 
stance of this unconscious recognition of character co-occurrence is found 
in literature: in the novel, and perhaps most crucially in drama. What 
distinguishes a good novelist or playwright, as well as a good actor or direc- 
tor, perhaps above all else, is the creation of credible characters. And what 
62 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
we mean by “credible” has largely to do with the co-occurrence of stylistic 
traits, traits drawn from the repertoire of the personality as a whole. A 
writer, a director, and an actor probably perceive this intuitive coherence in 
different ways, or at least make different use of their intuitions: but what 
distinguishes the great from the second-rate is an almost uncanny sense of 
which combinations are plausible, which not. 
These observations that I have made on style can be described in terms 
of a theory of communicative competence such as I have discussed in 
somewhat different form elsewhere (1977). What is relevant to the present 
discussion is the part of the system that describes how participants deter- 
mine the appropriate mode of presentation of self in discourse with others, 
on the basis of their own personal habits, the relationship between par- 
ticipants, and the subject matter under discussion. On the basis of this in- 
tuitive judgment, the speaker selects-fluent speakers, generally un- 
consciously-a matching strategy, dictating the point on the scale shown in 
FIGURE 1 that is deemed appropriate by the speaker’s subculture for the 
type of interaction in which the speaker assesses himself or herself to be 
engaged. It is the Rules of Communicative Competence that enable 
speakers to make judgments as to the use and interpretation of sentences. 
And, like the latter, the implicit Rules I am describing here function as 
models both for production and interpretation of the contributions of 
others, so that-a significant point, as we shall see later-one understands 
the contributions of others only in terms of one’s own internalized 
strategies. But it is important to bear in mind that the named points on the 
continuum represent strategies, or modalities, of interaction, rather than 
Rules: the rules themselves, then, can be seen as meta-strategies. The 
modalities themselves, and the relationships among them, are universal; but 
the statement of the Rules about which point is appropriate in a particular 
context-as well as the decision as to how the context itself is to be inter- 
preted-differs from cuiture to culture as well as from individual to in- 
dividual. These differences are the basic determinants of personal style. The 
strategies themselves and their interrelationships can be expressed in 
schematic form as in FIGURE 1.
CLARITY __+DISTANCE +DEFERENCE +CAMARADERIE 
least relationship most relationship 
between participants between participants 
FIGURE 1. 
The strategies are named in terms of the kind of relationship each assumes 
as ideal. The relationship-based continuum illustrated as FIGURE 1 cor- 
relates with Shapiro’s model, enabling us, for instance, to superimpose the 
characteristic linguistic preferences which this theory of Communicative 
Competence presupposes upon Shapiro’s attentiveness continuum. To 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 63 
speak of a continuum from least to most explicit relationship between 
speakers is not to imply that necessarily, when one strategy is selected by the 
participant as appropriate, they disavow entirely the extistence of any sort 
of relationship between them indicated by another strategy. What is at issue 
is what is explicit-whether or not the speaker affirms, by something in the 
communication proper (whether strictly linguistic or not)-that there is 
another person involved in the discourse, not just the facts that are being 
communicated themselves. 
The continuum represents, from left to right, an increasing awareness of 
the addressee’s presence as explicitly manifested by the speaker. A situation 
requiring Clarity will entail a rather colorless contribution: lexical items will 
be selected that are emotionally drab and associated with the deliberative or 
consultative registers of speech: neither oratorical, nor poetic, nor 
slang-essentially safe speech, which does not identify its speaker as a par- 
ticular and individual human being, and which does not make any.overt 
assumptions about the character or needs of the addressee. So the par- 
ticipants themselves are not made noticeable: the message itself, the infor- 
mation conveyed, is what is important, and the aim of Clarity-based 
discourse is to express this information as clearly and succinctly as possible. 
H.P. Grice’s Conversational Maxims (1975) can be thought of as exemplary 
of the expectations of ideal behavior in this framework (though not, as we 
shall see, under other assumptions). So when Clarity is involved, there is no 
indirectness, circumlocution, or redundancy. 
Clarity is often thought of as the ideal mode of discourse, at least in this 
culture at the present time. Hence there has been a great deal written 
popularly of late bemoaning its apparent demise: it is claimed that people 
are becoming less able to speak and write clearly, and it is generally assumed 
that it really is a matter of inability, that people would express themselves in 
accordance with Clarity if only they could think clearly, as they used to be 
able to do. But as I have argued elsewhere (1976), in fact the reason that 
people do not communicate directly and forcefully is that they do not 
choose to; that such a mode of expression is no longer viewed as indicative 
of our culture’s good human being; that, given the choice between seeming 
(to oneself as well as others) fuzzy-minded and seeming impersonal, most 
contemporary speakers would opt for the former. But at the same time, 
older standards, still in force, assert that the person who does not speak in 
accordance with Clarity is not to be taken seriously, at least in a profes- 
sional milieu. So conflicts arise, which are seldom completely conscious. 
The crucial question is what people view as the main aim of an interac- 
tion. If, as is frequently assumed, the transmission of factual or real-world 
information is the ultimate purpose of any linguistic discourse, we would 
have to make some rather surprising judgments. Since Clarity is the only 
mode of communicative competence that is specifically concerned with the 
transmission of information, and since only what is transmitted in confor- 
mity with the statements of Clarity is maximally informative, we would, 
given such an assumption, have to view any failure to use Clarity as a bi- 
zarre, unintelligible, or pointless contribution. And we would find that a very 
64 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
large percentage of conversations fell into this category. What we discover 
in fact is that only a relatively few contexts are appropriate for Clarity- 
based contributions, and that anyone who makes use of Clarity under other 
conditions, or at any rate does so persistently, is considered-not a par- 
ticularly admirable member of the culture, still less an extremely effective 
communicator-but rather, someone distinctly aberrant, or at worst 
psychotic. We obviously have to rethink the notion that being clear is 
always best, or even always good. 
Distance, the next discrete point to the right, appears to invite even more 
impersonality than does Clarity, but only superficially. When Clarity en- 
joins us to “Be clear,” Distance says “Remain aloof.” But to talk of 
aloofness and distancing is to assume that the relationship between the par- 
ticipants is of interest, even if that relationship consists of statying as far 
apart as possible. So the use of this strategy ensures that participants will 
tread on each other’s toes as little as possible-and therefore assumes each 
has toes to be trodden on. Here we find formal politeness, the rules of eti- 
quette, diplomatic language, bureaucratese and professional jargons of all 
kinds-all sytems designed to maximize the distance between the par- 
ticipants-and at the same time, to impute authority to the speaker, 
whether through status or expertise. Hence what is being communicated is 
particularly hard for anyone else to question. While Clarity is unemotional, 
Distance is anti-emotional: the form of expression is chosen partly on the 
grounds that there is something covertly present in the intended com- 
munication that may be unpleasantly emotion-provoking and therefore 
needs to be neutralized by the speaker. On the other hand, Clarity assumes 
that participants are dealing with cold facts, and there is nothing to conceal. 
So as Clarity is the language of news broadcasts and classroom lectures, 
Distance is the mode of communication of the more defensive-the politi- 
cian, the bureaucrat, the academic delivering a paper. Both Clarity and 
Distance lend an air of uninvolvement to a communication. 
Distance uses technical terminology, formal polite language, and overly 
correct diction and grammar-the opposite of the colloquial. All this makes 
it hard to understand, precisely because we do some of our intellectual 
understanding through our emotions, and the denial of emotionality makes 
it very hard for us to figure out what really is being said, and how we ought 
to respond to it. Because of the safety in Distance, people are more apt to 
lapse into it the more they are afraid of the repercussions of what they are 
saying, whether because they fear what they say is unpopular, or because it 
may be incorrect. Distance is, furthermore, a means of avoiding respon- 
sibility for what one is saying, while claiming the authority and power 
necessary to say it. So bureaucratese and its relatives frequently make those 
who are exposed to them nervous, much though their users seek to 
placate-or rather, narcotize. And the use of Distance, since it implies that 
the speaker holds power over the person addressed, is abrasive as the other 
modalities are not. 
Deference too establishes a relationship between participants. But this 
modality explicitly recognizes the existence of both participants and their 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 65 
relationship, where Clarity ignores these issues and Distance denies them. 
Using Deference, the speaker is following the injunction: “Don’t im- 
pose-give options.” Thus, its use implies that decisions as to  the inter- 
pretation and outcome of the exchange are in the hands of the addressee, 
whether actually or merely conventionally. Even if the deference is mere 
convention, however, the very fact that the speaker chooses to adopt that 
convention is a mark of courtesy, as most people prefer conventional 
deference to outright and real brusqueness. Deference apparently leaves the 
important decisions up to the addressee-although the speaker really knows 
perfectly well what he intends to achieve by his contribution, and gives plen- 
ty of instructions overtly or covertly to the addressee to indicate the desired 
response. In fact, sometimes the use of Deference creates friction between 
participants precisely because the speaker seems to be giving with one hand 
and taking with another, offering autonomy but in fact retaining power as 
instanced by the very ability to offer autonomy. Then the addressee is often 
faced with the impossible task of determining which of the levels of com- 
munication to recognize-the overt offer, or the covert injunction? Either 
way is risky. Where Distance avoids uncomfortable topics by the pretense 
of intellectual uninvolvement, that is, by denying the emotive force of the 
contribution, Deference denies the cognitive content, conventionally of 
course. (or else understanding could not take place), saying in effect, “It’s 
up to you to translate my message: if you decide we’re talking about THAT, 
we are.” Hence euphemism is characteristic of this modality. 
Camaraderie, necessitating as it does direct confrontation, is the modali- 
ty least in accord with what we usually think of as “politeness.” For 
Camaraderie explicitly acknowledges that a relationship exists and is impor- 
tant, whether one of friendliness or of hostility. Camaraderie is the level of 
direct expression of orders and desires, colloquialism and slang, first names 
and nicknames-much that is considered good and typical contemporary 
American behavior. 
The strategies have been described as points on a continuum partly 
because they can be used in isolation or in combination: a contribution can 
be pure-Distance, or mostly Distance, with a little Deference, or half of 
each. Some people are very formal, distant, and aloof; others less so; still 
others, hardly at all. FIGURE 1, however, makes some combinational 
possibilities hard to visualize: a situation such as that exemplified in FIGURE 
2 is no problem-a style falling between Distance and Deference, which are 
contiguous, 
CLARITY - DISTANCE + DEFERENCE -CAMARADERIE 
FIGURE 2.
but this diagram would make it impossible to represent, say, a combination 
of Distance and Camaraderie, which is just as theoretically possible. One 
way of avoiding these difficulties in FIGURE 3, with the left-right axis main- 
66 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
tained intact, but some means of indicating that combinations between any 
of the modalities are possible. We still cannot graphically represent com- 
binations of three and four modalities, but FIGURE 3 is at least a step toward 
more accurate representation. A specific linguistic entity-whether a lexical 
item, an intonation pattern, or a syntactic formula-is typically 
categorizable as assigned to one of the named points on our diagram, while 
the overall stylistic behavior on the part of individuals can fall at nodal 
points or between them. So FIGURE 1 can still be thought of as an ap- 
propriate model for the subcomponents of which style is composed, but 
FIGURE 3 seems a better representation of a style as a whole. 
\- CAMARADERIE 
DISTANCE 
CLARITY/ - 
-------DEFERENCE / 
FIGURE 3.
As an example of the operation of this system, let us examine the dif- 
ferences between women’s and men’s ideal styles in this culture. It is impor- 
tant to remember at the outset that, when two types of behavior are put in 
contrast by a society, they will tend to be polarized-to be perceived and 
stereotyped as more different than they probably are. But these exaggerated 
stereotypes must, to be intelligible, be based on real differences. 
Let us think for convenience of people who typify our masculine and 
feminine idealizations-say, Clark Gable or Marilyn Monroe, who perhaps 
seem particularly exemplary to us now since we have had time to  abstract 
their images from reality. If we were to place these people-in their official 
Hollywood personalities-on our chart, I think we would place Gable 
somewhere on the Clarity-Distance axis, and Monroe along Deference- 
Camaraderie-about as far away from each other as they could be. Gable is 
perceived as the strong, silent type-he says just as much as necessary to get 
information across, and is somehow withdrawn into himself, almost 
reclusive. Think of Rhett Butler saying, “Frankly, my dear, I don’t give a 
damn,” as the epitome of the ideal masculine style that most of us have 
come to maturity assuming. When such a man speaks, his contribution is in- 
cisive, precise, and to the point-utterly straightforward-and tells us as lit- 
tle as possible about the speaker’s state of mind and his attitude toward the 
addressee. We expect here, too, an even and low pitch, flat intonation, 
declarative rather than interrogative sentence structure, no hedging or im- 
precision, and lexical items chosen for their pure cognitive content, not their 
emotional coloration. If such a person shows emotion, it will be anger 
rather than tenderness or grief. Anger is expressed, ideally, not by raising 
the loudness or pitch of the voice, but by becoming ever more precise, soft- 
spoken, withdrawn-an exaggeration of the silent characteristics. As a 
contemporary example of the type, we can think of Walter Cronkite, at 
least in his public person. Not for nothing is he the “most trusted man in 
America.” He is trusted because his style is the very epitome of the current 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 67 
ideal. Cronkite’s style is probably perceived as somewhat closer to Clarity 
than Distance on the scale, where Gable’s was the reverse, but they are 
otherwise similar. 
By contrast, Monroe’s public presentation of self was profoundly im- 
precise. There is always a sense that the audience does not really know what 
she is talking about (nor does she), but that she is very concerned with 
whomever she is talking to, concerned with whether he is interested in her, 
and whether his needs are being met. Here we have the reverse of Gable- 
Cronkite style: Clarity is entirely absent, and there is no evidence of Distan- 
cing behavior. In contrast to Gable’s characteristic poker face, we have 
Monroe either smiling or looking sensuous, but certainly wearing an iden- 
tifiable facial expression. She uses interjections and hedges freely and her 
dialog is sprinkled with ‘‘I guess” and “kinda” in distinction to Gable’s 
unembellished “yup’s.’’ Her sentences seem not to end, but rather to be 
elliptical, as if in invitation to the addressee to finish them for her-classic 
feminine deference. 
These diverse styles are also classifiable on Shapiro’s scale 
-Gable/Cronkite’s as representative of obsessive-compulsive style, 
Monroe’s of what Shapiro terms hysterical. More accurately, we would 
want to place truly neurotic examples of stylistic behavior farther along our 
lines than any of these more or less normal examples, but certainly it is 
arguable that this culture’s paradigmatic masculine style shares a great 
many traits with a “neurotic” obsessive-compulsive style; and our pro- 
totypical example of femininity is exemplary in many of its aspects of 
neurotic hysterical style. Shapiro shows too how the communicative 
behaviors I have just discussed correlate with cognitive, perceptual and 
motoric forms of functioning to produce the coherency we call personal 
style. 
Now we are faced with some interesting observations. I have remarked 
that those linguistic traits that are characteristic of men in our society cor- 
relate with a form of functioning that verges on the obsessive-compulsive; 
and, feminine traits correlate with hysterical behavior. It is a truism among 
psychological theorists that hysterical traits of character are predominantly 
found in women, so that it has sometimes been thought they were exclusive- 
ly the province of women. And similarly though less strikingly a correlation 
has been claimed between obsessive-compulsive style and masculine 
behavior. 
Students of style in general, and linguistic behavior more specifically, 
have tended to talk in terms of women’s behavior, women’s style-as op- 
posed to a more general notion, people’s style. Women have always been 
classified as the other, the not-quite-human, whether by medieval theo- 
logians who claimed women had no souls, or by more modern psychologists 
(as demonstrated in the Broverman, 1970, study) who would claim that a 
“healthy woman” and a “healthy man” are characterologically very dif- 
ferent things: a “healthy man” is identified with a “healthy human being” 
or “healthy person,” while a “healthy woman” is not. This extremely 
dangerous prejudice infects much of our scholarly behavior implicitly or ex- 
plicitly. There is nothing wrong with talking about women’s style or 
68 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
women’s language as long as it is not covertly opposed to “everyone’s 
style” or “normal language.” The chart I have sketched indicates quite 
clearly that both the prototypically masculine and prototypically feminine 
variants of stylistic behavior are representable as points at one or another 
end of the continuum; each is equally far from the ideal middle, or norm, 
which presumably is rather rare in actuality. We have several prejudices to 
overcome here: that women’s special manifestations are further from the 
norm than men’s, which in this system of thought is the norm; and that 
anything nonnormal and hence nonmasculine is worse, weaker, or 
degenerate. Both of these covert (sometimes embarrassingly overt) assump- 
tions color our perceptions of the stylistic differences in the behavior of the 
sexes. If indeed we are brainwashed into believing that anything on the 
Deference-Camaraderie end is no good, we will object strenuously to the 
very idea that there is a women’s style, distinct from men’s. But if we can 
see that there is no difference in degree or  validity between behavior at the 
two ends of the continuum, perhaps we can study both as interesting en- 
tities. In the same way our society rewards behavior on the “masculine” or 
obsessive-compulsive side as being in keeping with the work ethic, logical 
thought, and so on and disavows the other end as irrational, lazy, or 
nonserious. It is common to counter these attacks by claiming the difference 
does not exist; but there is another way, to  say that it does but that neither 
side constitutes the more virtuous human being. Further, both sides could 
gain from moving a bit closer to the center at least some of the time. 
It seems rather natural, indeed inescapable, that neurotic characteristics 
should pattern as they do: for obsessive-compulsive style is merely an exag- 
geration of our culture’s preferred masculine mode of presention of self; 
and similarly, hysterical style is an exaggeration of the feminine.‘ We might 
say that neurotic behavior is not just randomly aberrant behavior; but 
rather, one tends to become neurotic by exaggerating and calcifying the 
mode of response to the environment one would be using normally. As 
Shapiro and others define neurosis as inflexibility in adjusting behavior to 
the environment, this reasoning seems to make sense. Then it further 
follows that more women will be classified as neurotic than will men, since 
neurosis is defined as departure from a preferred norm; and the norm is 
defined in terms of masculine behavior. So for a man to be diagnosed as 
obsessive-compulsive, he must exaggerate those characteristics even beyond 
how a man (i.e., a healthy human being) in this culture is supposed to 
display them: but to be a hysterical woman, one need only be a “good” 
‘ It is true that obsessive-compulsive style is more prevalent among women than hysterical 
style is, or has ever been, among men. As far as I know, no reason for this is advanced in the 
literature dealing with neurosis. One possible line of explanation is suggested here: if neurosis 
is another term for the inflexible adherence to a cultural target, it makes more sense to cling to 
a target that is given some respectability, than one which is ridiculed. There is a sort of hierar- 
chy, perhaps, in the selection of a neurotic style: first, choose the one that is the exaggeration 
of one’s own group’s preferred strategy; failing that, for whatever reason, choose what is 
culturally valued. So a woman would most naturally select hysteria, second, obsessional 
neurosis. A man presumably has only the latter option. 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 69 
woman-the more hysterical, the better. But the better a hysteric, the worse 
a human being by the androcentric definition of that term. By this reason- 
ing, a woman finds herself stylistically in a double bind. She cannot be 
rewarded at once for being feminine and being human as a man can for be- 
ing both masculine and human. It is a problem, and really not her problem, 
but her culture’s (Lakoff, 1975). 
We can say, then, that a culture has implicitly in its collective mind a 
concept of how a good human being should behave: a target for its 
members to aim at and judge themselves and others by. Members of the 
culture over the age of adolescence (perhaps earlier; in the past, certainly 
earlier)-at least male members-are expected to behave accordingly. Out- 
siders, marked typically by their accented speech, a badge of outsiderhood, 
are excused from some of the rules, although the behavior of members of 
other societies is nonetheless judged by the criteria of the culture doing the 
judging: thus we may say, for instance, that the Japanese are “deferential,” 
i.e., employ the rule of Deference more than a male in our culture would, 
and the Germans are “arrogant,” meaning more or less that they use 
Distance more than we would. We get impressions of foreigners as if they 
were members of our own culture. So rather than saying to ourselves (un- 
consciously, of course), “Although he presents the appearance of ar- 
rogance, I don’t consider him arrogant because that is normal behavior 
within the context of being a German, which he is,” we say, “He’s ar- 
rogant, but that’s what I expect from someone who speaks with a German 
accent; they don’t know any better, so 1’11 overlook it.” WhiIe superficially 
this may seem to be a hairsplitting distinction, it has considerable import, 
especially as regards feelings about feminine behavior. 
For just as German are aliens in the American culture, because they have 
a different target for relating to others, so are women in this male-centered 
or androcentric culture which identifies “healthy human beinghood” with 
the masculine stereotype. Woman are the other, just as surely as are Ger- 
mans or Japanese, and are similarly stereotyped in joke and folklore: 
women are fuzzy-minded, women are not precise, women are overly polite 
and careful in their speech and actions. We have no comparable stereotypes 
for men, even as we have no jokes based on stereotypical male behavior 
(analogous to “woman driver” or “mother-in-law” jokes) nor expectations 
based on necessarily male roles. (Compare the prevalence of assumptions 
about widows, or for that matter divorcees, in our culture past and present, 
with that of widowers and divorced men. It is significant that the spoken 
form “divorc6(e)” will almost certainly, unless clearly disambiguated by 
context, be interpreted as feminine.) 
1 have already mentioned the paradox that a woman cannot at once be a 
healthy woman and a healthy human being: the stylistic ideals are directly 
contradictory. There is an additional problem as well, deriving from 
another stereotypical view of women prevalent through the ages: women are 
manipulative, deceitful, do not say what they mean; people cannot figure 
them out, they do not play by the rules. Whether or not this stereotyping is 
fair, whether it represents reality, is not relevant here. It is important, 
70 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
however, to acknowledge the prevalence of this stereotype, in our culture 
and throughout the world. To change it, we must understand its prevalence, 
and give a reason why people (including many women) have clung to it so 
tenaciously. It is convenient because it represents still another way in which 
women are categorized as “the other, the non-human.” For we do not have 
an analogous deleterious stereotype of men, although parallels could no 
doubt be constructed. But the crucial question is whether there lurks a reali- 
ty  behind the stereotype. For stereotypes are important to study only in- 
sofar as they are representations of reality. And I would argue further that 
societies only create and maintain those stereotypes that their members feel 
hold a mirror up to reality-though it be a fun-house mirror. Then to tell 
members of a group that their stereotypical image of an outsider is 
unrealistic is to say something pointless or meaningless; even if they profess 
beliefs to please you, they will not really abandon the stereotype that so well 
suits their thinking. So our task is to go behind the female stereotype to see 
why it has the form it does. 
I have already discussed the distinction between real and conventional 
use of strategies. It is possible to be truly deferential, to really have as one’s 
main concern what the other person wants, and to really have one’s own 
choice of what to think or do depend on the other’s-and equally possible 
to be conventionally so, as when someone knows perfectly well whether, for 
instance, he (or she) wishes to go to the opera (or bowling) and says meekly, 
“It’s up to you, dear.” The same duality of interpretation exists in the en- 
forcement of the other strategies as well: the politician’s apparent Clarity, 
the diplomat’s Distance, the salesman’s Camaraderie-all are conventional. 
And indeed, conventional application of all these rules is found to a less 
pronounced degree in all our behavior. We need not sneer or protest our 
total sincerity: were it not for conventional politeness and our willingness to 
use it and interpret it kindly, civilization would likely dissolve in no time at 
But conventional application of a strategy occurs only in case that 
strategy is seen as the target for an individual in a particular cultural con- 
text. For the Japanese, male and female, conventional Deference is com- 
mon, where for the German it is not. For the traditional American male, 
Distance/Clarity has been the target, and so we find in this group’s 
behavior much conventional Distance and Clarity. But Deference is not 
targeted, and is not conventionally expected, of a male in this culture. And 
even when overt Deference occurs, we still do not find the extra-linguistic 
indicators of Deference in the behavior of a normal American man-e.g. 
downcast eyes, giggle, an attitude of general helplessness-although we do 
find such behavior among Japanese males, as we might expect. We might 
interpret this discrepancy as showing that the extralinguistic devices are the 
most apt to be used, and interpreted, as conventional. So these are good 
a11.5 
The same point is made about the social utility of disclaimers of action (e.g., the same sorts 
of hedges and indirections discussed here) by Roy Schafer in his A New Language for 
Psychoanalysis (1976), Yale University Press, New Haven and London. 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 71 
tests of the targeted politeness for a group-what indirect, and therefore 
perhaps not entirely conscious or intentional, indicators of a strategy are 
employed. 
Now if a strategy is the target for a particular group, a member of that 
group will know that behavior in accordance with that strategy may be in- 
terpretable either as real, or as conventional. But for nontarget strategies, 
only real behavior can be inferred. And although one might think that peo- 
ple might learn that other groups make different strategies their targets and 
so apply them conventionally, people generally seem to be unable to trans- 
cend their own systems: participants can interpret others’ strategies conven- 
tionally only in case they themselves could use them conventionally (because 
their group makes them targets). People who retain perspective and flex- 
ibility in interpretation better than others are felt to  have special understand- 
ing of groups and cultures other than their own, but they are admired as the 
exception rather than the rule. 
American women’s traditional target is Deference as men’s is Dis- 
tancelclarity. So we find certain kinds of conventional behavior based on 
these strategies in women’s behavior, which men do not normally adopt. 
This is the reason why men are in general unable to interpret feminine 
behavior as conventional, rather than real, and hence regularly misinterpret 
women’s intentions. And then, when women respond to their misapprehen- 
sions by acting, apparently, unpredictably this gives rise to the stereotype of 
women as fickle, deceitful and untrustworthy, and illogical-all valid 
perceptions from the standpoint of male-centered strategies. Since, how- 
ever, these are tacitly or explicitly recognized as the strategies, women 
themselves have often, shamefacedly or gleefully, gone along with the im- 
plied definition of womanhood as perversity. This view is neatly summa- 
rized by the male cry of consternation: What do women want? 
The reader might object that what is said here about men’s inability to 
accurately interpret women’s style must surely have a parallel in women’s 
inability to interpret men’s style. To a limited extent this parallelism indeed 
exists: It is unlikely that women understand men much better than men 
understand women. But there the similarity ends. For women do not make 
the assumption that their ways are the healthy and good ones, or the only 
ones. So women do not, on the basis of their misunderstanding, construct 
stereotypes of men as irrational, untrustworthy, or silly; they merely assume 
that men’s behavior is beyond their poor comprehension. Thus, women’s 
inability to understand men does not cause them to derogate men, as men’s 
inability causes men and women both to form unfavorable stereotypes of 
women. Although in reality the inability of men and women to interpret 
each other’s style is totally parallel, because men’s style is defined as the 
norm, only women’s is interpreted as aberrant and only women’s is subject 
to stereotyping and being considered as a curiosity worthy of study. 
If the American male’s conventionalized style is best distinguished as 
Distancing, how are we to describe styles that seem to belong even further to 
this strategy? For example, to the American, the typical German-male or 
female-seems stereotypically aloof and unemotional, not to say arrogant 
72 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
and brusque. Is this not quintessential Distance? Yet to the American, the 
German stereotype seems light-years away from his. 
This is, I think, but a seeming contradiction. It does illustrate the con- 
ceptual difficulty inherent in thinking of style as a two-dimensional con- 
tinuum. For there are various aspects of behavior intertwining here, which 
we must sort out if we are to resolve the difficulty. 
The styles of two different cultures may differ from each other for any 
of severd reasons within this framework. The cases already discussed are 
those in which the targets themselves differ: women prefer Deference, men 
Distance. But styles can be differentiated in other ways. Within a group, 
participants adhere to the idealized target up till a certain point in a relation- 
ship. Then, more or less implicitly, they may drop the conventionalization 
and behave toward one another as they “really” feel. Some cultures have 
explicit institutionalized means of effecting this switch: Germans, for in- 
stance, have a ceremony called Bruderschuft, in which the participant of 
higher status invites a more lowly acquaintance of long standing to use du 
rather than Sie as the term of address. With this use of the familiar pronoun 
go other marks of familiarity-first-naming among them. In American 
society, first-naming is normal for most relationships within a very short 
period of acquaintance, and between persons of very different statuses. The 
implication is that in American society, Distance is the normal and conven- 
tionalized strategy only under some circumstances-very early indeed in a 
relationship, and an impersonal relationship at that. Camaraderie takes 
over quite early in a friendship for most people. So it might be that 
American Distance is just as distant as its Germanic equivalent, but shows 
up in fewer kinds of relationships because Americans drop the convention 
earlier. 
Another interpretation of the difference might be that, in fact, the mix- 
ture is different, or that two or more strategies are conventionalized in one 
culture, corresponding to one in the other. The range of situations covered 
in Germanic culture by Distance alone is partially covered, for the 
American man, by Distance, partially by conventionalized Camaraderie. 
The superficial result of either of these two hypotheses would be the same: 
to the casual observer, in many circumstances the American would appear 
to be open and sociable when his German equivalent would appear aloof. 
But the first theory says this is true because the American becomes truly 
friendlier faster, the second because he adopts conventional friendly 
behavior where the German does not have this option. 
Finally, differences can arise because what one culture classifies as ap- 
propriate Distance behavior, another may consider suitable for 
Camaraderie, or, more likely, Deference or Clarity. Refusing a second help- 
ing of food may, for one group, be a form of conventional Deference: it 
means that the other person now can take charge, do the urging; the eater 
will not express his or her own desires. In this case, the expectation will be 
that, upon urging, the second helping will be accepted, perhaps with a show 
of reluctance. But refusing seconds may also be seen as Distancing, real or 
conventional-a refusal to show pleasure, to react to the feeder’s attempts 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 73 
at interaction through food. To refuse a second helping is tantamount to 
saying, “I don’t want anything from you. Don’t bother me.” Of course, if 
the feeder is following the first pattern and the eater the second, or vice ver- 
sa, bewilderment and outright anger are apt to ensue. 
The contrast between the German and the American male seems best 
described by the second of these three possibilities. Americans appear to use 
a split strategy where Germans use a unified one. This difference may occur 
because there is motion in the American culture where there is none, or a 
much less perceptible one, in the German. There would seem to be some in- 
teresting evidence for this position. 
In the last generation or so, the target for American men has been subtly 
shifting from DistanceIClarity, still prevalent in older people and people 
raised in traditional milieux, to Camaraderie, which is the preferred mode 
of presentation of self in younger people. It is probably true that this change 
originated in the West and is spreading East, with California as usual at the 
forefront: normal male behavior in California seems very informal and at 
least superficially intimate, compared with Eastern mores; there is a quicker 
transition to first names and nicknames, people seem more ready to discuss 
intimate facts of their lives, and there is a good deal more touching and feel- 
ing not only countenanced among men, but indeed expected. This is fast 
becoming the conventionalized target everywhere.6 Just as Distance-related 
behavior was conventional when it was the target, so Camaraderie is con- 
ventionalized. The new intimacies are really no more intimate than the old 
uninvolvements were truly uninvolved. 
If this is indeed the case, we have another argument for assuming that 
stylistic behavior is rule-governed and analogous to a linguistic grammar. 
Just like the latter, its rules change; or, more accurately, what happens in 
both cases is that the context, the environment, in which a rule is 
applicable,changes with time. Camaraderie used to be applicable only in 
relationships of comfort and long standing, in which case, not being a 
target, it was real: when someone called you by your first name, you knew 
you were at an intimate stage in your relationship. While this is still 
marginally normal behavior in the East (or so I am told), the use of title-last 
name is obsolescent in the Bay Area in almost any relationship. It is becom- 
ing common, for instance, for doctors to insist on mutual first-name ad- 
dress with their patients, and the use of mutual first-name is, I am told, 
almost de rigueur among psychotherapists where I live, although I am 
similarly told that it is much less obligatory in the East. Obviously, this kind 
of camaraderie is pure convention since there is no mutuality or intimacy 
elsewhere in the relationship.’ 
Cf. the essay in Time magazine of July 11, 1977: “A Nation Without Last Names,” by 
Lance Morrow @. 43). 
’ Actually, the decision as to whether patient and therapist are to reciprocally use first 
names or title-last names may have more to do with the type of therapy than its geographical 
locale, with psychoanalytically-oriented types tending toward the latter and human potential or 
radical psychiatry practice toward the former. However, the point remains valid as the 
psychotherapeutic method of choice seems closely related to geographical region as indicated, 
undoubtedly by no coincidence. 
74 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
Just as the rules of the linguistic grammar change over time, back and 
forth, but are perpetually in flux, so there is some interesting evidence that 
these Rapport rules have changed over time: this is not the first time that we 
have switched our targets. This is an important point, since one might 
otherwise think that the shift from Clarity/Distance to Camaraderie was an 
unprecedented step in human behavior, induced by the media, greater 
mobility, and so forth. It is undoubtedly true that it is harder to live com- 
fortably in an era where the rules are in flux, as is the case in this society at 
present, than in a relatively stable order-say, Victorian Europe. But our 
present situation is by no means unique; indeed, just like the linguistic 
grammar, stylistic grammar must shift and always is partially in flux, 
although the changes are seldom evident to a contemporary member of the 
culture. 
There is an interesting illustration of an earlier period of rule-change in 
Philippe Arib’s book (1962). Although Arits does not address the issue 
directly, much of what he talks about can be interpreted in terms of Rap- 
port rules and change in target. During the thirteenth century various 
stylistic modalities were in flux in Europe. People were beginning to develop 
a notion of privacy: they began building houses with separate rooms, wear- 
ing more constraining and concealing clothing. About this time too, I 
believe, last names were being devised and used. All of these work toward a 
Distancing form of rapport. So we can infer from this sort of evidence that 
European society during this era was shifting from a target of Camaraderie 
to one of Distance. We would expect in such a period of flux to find more 
discomfort than usual among people as they realized their old internalized 
rule-systems were inappropriate but did not know yet what was expected of 
them in the new. And so it is not surprising to find in Ar ib  a discussion of 
the vogue of etiquette books, in the form of so-called “courtesy manuals,” 
in this historical period. Courtesy manuals played a crucial part in the 
medieval educational system, and these etiquette books, judging from 
Aries’s excerpts, are designed to teach Distancing behavior: they contain 
rules like “Don’t touch yourself in public, nor other people”; “don’t be too 
familiar in address”; “dress modestly”; “don’t tell your dreams to 
people.” The aim is to appear as unobtrusive and unintrusive as 
possible-clearly, the establishment of conventions of Distance. 
It is true that similar Distancing etiquette manuals have remained 
around up till the present, but seldom have they been accorded the impor- 
tance that they were during this period. There will always be some residual 
insecurity about the correct formulas for achieving the idealized and con- 
ventiona1 mode of rapport, but never so much as when the targets 
themselves are shifting. 
Then if it is true that we are now in just such a state of flux, we should 
expect to find a similar desperate emphasis on etiquette manuals. If we 
think only of Emily Post-type etiquette, we shall be disappointed: no one 
seems terribly concerned with the right oyster fork any more. But indeed we 
do have a veritable outpouring of Camaraderie advice in books, magazine 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 75 
and newspaper columns, TV and radio talk shows, and so on: the contem- 
porary analog of the medieval etiquette manual is the psychological self- 
help book. All of these “manuals” have to do with becoming a good human 
being in a Camaraderie strategy. No longer are we concerned with being 
unobtrusive and uninvolved. Rather, our present-day etiquette rules offer 
injunctions about how to be assertive but not aggressive, how to show you 
care, how to show you like others and how to be liked-all Camaraderie 
behavior. So our present situation is parallel to the one in effect several hun- 
dred years ago, only in reverse. At that time the target was going from 
Camaraderie to Distance; now it is going in the opposite direction. But our 
behavior in the midst of such a change is apparently not significantly dif- 
ferent from that of our forebears: we feel insecure and look to authorities to 
instruct us in the new propriety. 
An enlightening sidelight, relevant to the larger issue of this paper, has 
to do with who writes the etiquette manuals; who are the social arbiters. In 
the earlier period of flux, the writers of these books as well as their users 
were men: etiquette was considered crucial enough for men to bother with 
and take responsibility for. But as it importance waned over the centuries, 
women became the dominant figures in the world of etiquette: just as with 
other concerns that are deemed by a society to be peripheral to survival, like 
fashion and grammar, manners gradually came to be a feminine province so 
that, most recently, virtually all the arbiters of correct deportment have 
been women. Interestingly, the trend is now reversed. As the new etiquette 
is felt to be important and necessary to one’s survival, it has become the 
province of men at least as much as of women: men are no longer ashamed 
to be reading and writing instructions for proper human behavior. Here 
again we have evidence that we are in a period of flux, because the learning 
of the new system is considered important enough to be the business of 
men. 
Earlier in this paper I correlated the use of Clarity/Distance with 
obssessive-compulsive symptomatology, noting (as has been frequently 
pointed out) that this form of neurotic behavior has been common among 
men in our society, just as hysterical character correlated with Deference 
and Camaraderie, has been prevalent among women. More recently, within 
the last generation, it has been remarked that these “classical” 
neuroses-the symptoms on the basis of which psychoanalysis was devised, 
and for which it is considered particularly effective-have become com- 
paratively uncommon. First in their symptomatic and more recently in their 
characterological forms, they have lost ground as presenting symptoms. 
Psychotherapists are seeing more of so-called “narcissistic characters.” (In 
this connection, there is a most interesting article by Christopher Lasch, 
1976.) Just as the obsessional neurotic’s form of rapport is an exaggerated 
Distance and Clarity, and the hysteric’s, Deference (which manifests itself 
in seductiveness and the fuzziness of attention discussed by Shapiro), the 
narcissistic person’s is conventional Camaraderie. Since narcissism, as 
discussed by psychoanalytically-oriented writers, involves an inability to 
empathize with or form deep relationships with others, we might be inclined 
76 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
to consider it the very opposite of Camaraderie, But in fact superficial 
friendliness and interest in others-as long as they serve one’s purposes-is 
associated with the narcissistic character, who is desperately concerned with 
his reception by others and therefore must feign interest in others. Hence, 
too, the linguistic correlates: nicknames, four-letter words, slang, at least 
superficial directness. And just as obsessional Clarity is a false clarity, 
meant to mask perception rather than enhance it, so narcissistic 
Camaraderie is merely superficial show, and is thus particularly apt to func- 
tion as conventional behavior. If indeed neurotic symptoms are merely ex- 
aggerations of an individual’s-or a society’s- ideal mode of presentation 
of self, and it is true that contemporary Americans perceive these traits as 
desirable, in contradistinction to those of Distance and Deference, this fact 
merely provides evidence for our targeting of Camaraderie. For if all this 
camaraderie has become the new target of rapport, then it all fits together 
perfectly; narcissism is the obvious choice of neurosis for a Camaraderie- 
based culture. 
If we accept this idea that society is becoming Camaraderie-oriented, 
there is still one question to be answered: we have been evading the issue of 
whose system is changing. It is clear that the male stereotype of 
Clarity/Distance is yielding to Camaraderie; but what is happening with 
women? I said earlier that one thing that makes it particularly hard to be 
female in this culture at this time is the fact that one cannot be a good 
woman (using Deference/Camaraderie) and a good human being (defined, 
androcentrically, in terms of Clarity/Distance) at once. What then is hap- 
pening to women’s style here at this time, and if there is a change, what does 
it augur? 
There are several possibilities. First, women’s style may be coming 
closer to pure Camaraderie as men’s becomes so too. In this case our culture 
would end up looking in a curious way analogous to that of contemporary 
Japan. For the Japanese, Deference is the target for both sexes-but a dif- 
ferent sort of Deference, and under more conditions, for women. Although 
the requirement for exaggerated Deference still makes women subservient 
to men, nonetheless it may allow the Japanese woman to experience fewer 
confusions in defining her ideal role: it may well be possible in Japanese 
culture, as it is not in ours, to be an ideal woman and an ideal human being 
at once, without paradox. As another alternative women’s style may stay 
the same, with men’s moving around it; and a third, while men’s style shifts 
in one direction, women’s might shift in another-to Distance, or Clarity, 
for instance. In the third case, we might expect to find in time that Clarity 
was no longer viewed as the embodiment of all that is rational and human; 
and women, having tried to gain acceptance as human beings by adopting 
the “healthy human being” behavior would find themselves once again on 
the losing end of the stick, since ideal human behavior would still be defined 
in terms of men’s behavior. If the second option is the one that is occurring, 
we might expect no significant change in women’s image and perception of 
themselves. If in fact both sexes are changing to be more alike, then we may 
have a chance to see real changes in the way women are regarded and regard 
Lakoff: A Grammar of Style 77 
themselves. Ideally, the members of a society should allow for pluralism 
and flexibility in style, should be able to realize that various modes of 
presentation of self may be appropriate, and none by itself defines a human 
being. But, realistically, this is not apt to happen, and we can only hope for 
change in women’s image as women become more like men, in this case 
both changing to a new mode of behavior. 
What evidence exists in media representations suggests that the first op- 
tion is winning out, and I think it is the healthiest possible choice. Just as 
women are becoming freer in the extent and types of self-expression open to 
them, so-perhaps more slowly-are men. Showing care and concern, cry- 
ing, and expressing a wide range of emotion have not been characteristic of 
men’s style, as they are the antithesis of Clarity/Distance. By the same 
token, wearing severe man-tailored suits and having the latest stock market 
quotations at one’s fingertips have not been permissible for women as users 
of DeferenceKamaraderie. But both are becoming common, despite the 
denunciations and expressions of apocalypse that issue from the conser- 
vative press. We shall have to be patient and await the final outcome of the 
stylistic reorganization that we see occurring around us, just as our 
forebears had to wait many centuries to see the final result of the change in- 
itiated during the medieval period. 
To say that style is changing for all of us implies a grammar of style that 
we unconsciously utilize; to say that men’s and women’s styles are becom- 
ing more similar is to make a less theoretical point, but one of great 
significance for our future as men, women, and people. In any event, what 
we observe about the times in which we are living can tell us a great deal 
both about human psychological capacities and about what we are striving 
to become. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The preparation of this paper has profited from my discussion of its contents 
with many people, as well as numerous opportunities to present its ideas in various 
stages, to many groups. In particular I would like to thank Linda Coleman for her 
very helpful suggestions leading to the final form of the stylistic continuum as it ap- 
pears here; and Deborah Tannen for innumerable valuable improvements in both 
style and content. 
REFERENCES 
ARIBS, P. 1%2. Centuries of Childhood. Knopf, New York. 
BROVERMAN, I.K. et ul. 1970. Sex-role stereotypes and clinical judgements of mental 
CHOMSKY, N. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. The M.I.T. Press. Cam- 
health. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology X 1 ,  1-7. 
bridge, Mass. 
- 1968. Language and Mind. Harcourt, Brace & World. New York. 
78 Annals New York Academy of Sciences 
GRICE, H.P. 1975. Logic and conversation. I n  Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech 
LAKOFF, R. 1975. Language and Woman’s Place. Harper & Row. New York. 
Acts. P. Cole & J.L. Morgan, Eds. Academic Press. New York. 
- 1976. Why you can’t say what you mean: a review of Strictly Speaking, by 
Edwin Newrnan. Centrum IV:2.151-170. 
- 1977. Woman’s language as paradigm in a grammar of style. Language and 
Style, December, 1977. 
LASCH. C. 1976. The Narcissist Society. The New York Review of Books, September 
30, 1976. 
SHAPIRO. D. 1%5. Neurotic Styles. Basic Books. New York. 
