© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
 
IJES
UNIVERSITY OF MURCIA 
International Journal 
of 
English Studies 
www.um.es/ijes
 
 
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship 
Identification 
 
     
VICTORIA GUILLÉN-NIETO, CHELO VARGAS-SIERRA, MARÍA PARDIÑO-JUAN, PATRICIO 
MARTÍNEZ-BARCO, ARMANDO SUÁREZ-CUETO* 
Universidad de Alicante 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Back in the 1990s Malcolm Coulthard announced the beginnings of an emerging discipline, 
forensic linguistics, resulting from the interface of language, crime and the law. Today the 
courts are more than ever calling on language experts to help in certain types of cases, such 
as authorship identification, plagiarism, legal interpreting and translation, statement analysis, 
and voice identification. The application of new technologies to the analysis of questioned 
texts has greatly facilitated the work of the language scientist as expert witness in the legal 
setting, and contributed to the successful analysis and interpretation of style providing 
statistical and measurable data. This article aims at presenting linguists and researchers in 
forensic linguistics with an exploration of the strengths, limitations and challenges of state-
of-the-art software for forensic authorship identification. 
 
 
KEYWORDS: Forensic linguistics, language, crime, law, software for forensic authorship 
identification. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
*Address for correspondence: Victoria Guillen-Nieto. Departamento de Filología Inglesa. Campus de San Vicente del 
Raspeig. Ap. 99 E-03080 Alicante, Spain.. Tel.: 34 965909318. Fax: 34 965903800. E-mail: victoria.guillen@ua.es 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
2 
I. THE AIM OF THIS DISCUSSION 
 
Over the last decade it has become evident that linguists can be of service to the law, and 
courts, especially in Common Law countries, are calling on language experts more and more 
to help in certain types of cases, such as authorship identification, voice identification, 
plagiarism, legal interpreting and translation, statement analysis, etc.  
Undoubtedly, the application of new technologies to the analysis of questioned texts 
has significantly facilitated the work of the language scientist as expert witness in the legal 
setting, by enhancing the scientific reliability of descriptive linguistic analysis with 
measurable data, and reducing the time-consuming task involved in the observation, 
description, analysis, and counting of the data. 
The aim of this discussion is to present language experts and researchers with an 
exploration of the strengths, limitations, and challenges of state-of-the-art software for 
forensic authorship identification. For the purpose of analysis, this article will be divided 
into two main parts: 
Part one will be devoted to forensic linguistics as an up-and-coming discipline within 
the field of applied linguistics. Our discussion in this first part will provide the reader with 
essential background information to understand forensic language researchers’ recent, 
healthy interest in new techniques and methods that may help the language expert explain 
linguistic findings in statistical terms, and be consistent with the current scientific reliability 
standard that is demanded for linguistic evidence by the judiciary, especially in Common 
Law countries. 
Part one will be further divided into three sections. Firstly, we will offer the reader a 
brief overview of authorship identification and the birth of forensic linguistics. Secondly, we 
will look at stylistic analysis as an approach to forensic authorship identification. And lastly, 
we will consider the problems faced by the language scientist as expert witness in the legal 
setting, after the Federal Rules of Evidence in the USA providing the new standard for 
admitting expert scientific testimony in a federal trial came into force (Daubert v. Merrell 
Dow Pharmaceuticals 92-102, 509 U.S., 579, 1993). A consideration of a major challenge to 
forensic linguistics, as seen in latest developments of the discipline, will bring part one to an 
end. 
Part two will concentrate on new advances in software for quantitative data analysis 
used in forensic authorship identification by examining a selected sample of state-of-the-art 
tools. 
Finally, the concluding remarks section will bring together the most relevant 
conclusions as to the role played by software for quantitative analysis in forensic authorship 
identification, and suggestions for further development will be given as to the main 
challenges in this field. 
 
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
3
PART ONE 
II. FORENSIC AUTHORSHIP IDENTIFICATION AND THE BIRTH OF 
FORENSIC LINGUISTICS 
 
The emergence of forensic linguistics as a discipline is closely related to two prominent 
cases of disputed authorship in police statements in the UK. For many the discipline of 
forensic linguistics came into being with Svartvik’s (1968) publication of his 
groundbreaking study into the altered police statements in the Timothy John Evans case. On 
analysing textual modification, Svartvik demonstrated the presence of two different registers 
in Evan’s statements by using a pioneering technique combining language description and 
statistical analysis. The linguistic evidence provided by Svartvik in his expert testimony was 
considered to be crucial in the posthumous pardon of Evans, who had been hanged in the 
1950s. 
Some years later, in April 1988, Rieber and Stewart (1990: 1-4), acting under the 
sponsorship of the New York Academy of Sciences, organized a workshop on the role of the 
language scientist as expert in the legal setting, in which they reached the conclusion that the 
general trend toward the increased use of language experts was running parallel to the 
specific development of linguistic knowledge and methodology within those areas that were 
formerly dealt with by judges and lawyers. “The traditional language training and intuitive 
abilities of law practicioners (…)”, claimed Rieber and Stewart (1990: 3), “(…) are no 
longer a match for the theoretical analytical advances that are from such linguistic subfields 
as syntax, semantics, and discourse analysis”. Until then the use made of language scientists 
by the legal profession had been largely limited to the area of substance, namely 
comparisons of samples of handwriting and of tape-recorded voices for authorship 
identification, a process requiring highly technical instrumentation and skilled knowledge.  
Shortly after, in the 1990s, Coulthard introduced a pioneering analytical approach, 
for which he coined the term forensic discourse analysis, to the alleged statement of Derek 
Bentley who, like the ill-fated Evans, had also been hanged in the 1950s. In his approach to 
disputed authorship, Coulthard combined insights from different linguistic fields, namely 
speech act theory, pragmatics, discourse analysis, psycholinguistics, and statistical analyses 
(Coulthard, 1992: 242-258). The linguistic evidence provided by him in his expert testimony 
was also decisive in Derek Bentley’s posthumous pardon. By that time, criminal justice 
professionals had begun to realise that linguists could be of service to the law by helping 
those who had been treated unjustly in the past. 
Over the last decade, many linguists have indeed explored the interface between 
language, crime and the law at the investigation level, and forensic linguistics is ripe for 
debate and argument, as shown in the discipline’s major journal The International Journal 
of Speech, Language and the Law, which is the official journal of the International 
Association of Forensic Linguistics and the International Association for Forensic Phonetics 
and Acoustics, and in the proliferation of publications in the field (Alcaraz-Varó, 2005: 49-
66; Coulthard, 1992, 1993: 86-97, 1994, 2005: 249-274; Gibbons, 2003; McMenamin, 2002, 
2004; Olsson, 2004; Shuy, 2005: 43-64; Tanner & Tanner, 2004; Turell [ed.], 2005 etc ). 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
4 
Similarly, courts all over the world, especially in Common Law countries—and more 
than ever in Roman Law countries, are calling on language experts to help in forensic cases 
of authorship identification, plagiarism, mode identification, legal interpreting and 
translation, transcribing verbal statements, the language and discourse of courtrooms, 
language rights, statement analysis, forensic phonetics, textual status, etc. 
All in all, forensic linguistics as a science is young and so “(...) nothing is yet cast in 
stone” (Olsson, 2004: 7). Therefore, a lot of research is still to be done on the part played by 
universities in this field as regards the development of new techniques and methods.  
Having presented this short overview of the birth of forensic linguistics, we will now 
move on to consider stylistic analysis as a well-established methodological approach to 
forensic authorship identification. 
 
 
III. STYLISTIC ANALYSIS AS AN APPROACH TO FORENSIC AUTHORSHIP 
IDENTIFICATION 
 
Forensic linguistics has benefited to a large extent from the application of descriptive 
linguistics to the analysis of forensic texts. (Coulthard, 2005: 249-274; Shuy, 2005: 19-48; 
Turell, 2006: 43-64).  
Stylistic analysis as an approach to authorship identification in literary contexts is 
based on the assumption that it is possible to identify, describe and measure a writer’s 
individual style or idiolect by careful linguistic observation and analysis of his/her unique 
set of linguistic choices.  
Forensic text analysis makes use of stylistics to reach a conclusion and opinion 
related to the authorship of a questioned writing in the context of litigation (McMenamin, 
2002: 163-164). For example, a typical case of disputed authorship involves comparing or 
contrasting the questioned writing with a set of known writings of one or more candidate 
authors. Such an analysis is accomplished by analysing the writing style of the two sets of 
texts, the questioned and the known writings. Results of this analysis may lead the language 
expert to any of the following options: (a) authorship attribution, (b) authorship 
identification, (c) determination of the resemblance of questioned writings to known 
writings, (d) elimination of one or more suspect authors, and (e) neither elimination nor 
identification because the investigation is inconclusive as not enough linguistic evidence has 
been found to support either hypothesis.  
 
 
IV. FORENSIC STYLISTICS AND SCIENTIFIC EXPERT TESTIMONY 
 
Recent changes in the criteria for reliability and evidence, especially in the USA (Daubert v. 
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals (92-102), 509 U.S. 579, 1993), have laid emphasis on the 
heuristic requirements of the scientific method traditionally used in the natural sciences, and 
highlighted the need to provide quantitative or measurable probability as regards the 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
5
admission of linguistic evidence at court. The underlying reason for this is that for many 
non-quantitative results do not constitute scientific knowledge. 
This poses a major threat to the language scientist as expert witness in the legal 
setting, since the methods of inquiry in the humanities and social sciences are unavoidably 
more relative than those in the natural sciences. On top of that, to account for quantitative or 
measurable probability is not always possible in forensic linguistic reports for a variety of 
reasons: 
Firstly, some linguistic features may be difficult to identify as discrete units, such is 
the case of style markers like the overall design of pages, socio-pragmatic aspects, 
interferences from other languages, etc. Secondly, the linguistic significance of an identified 
variable may not always be captured by counting. Thirdly, a variable may be linguistically 
significant because it rarely occurs in the language, but it does not occur frequently enough 
in the data to be meaningfully counted. Fourthly, there may not be sufficient data for valid 
quantification. Last but not least, in a given case of disputed authorship there may be no set 
of known texts for comparison to a set of questioned texts.   
Considering the fact that there are disciplines like forensic stylistics in which it is not 
always possible to count or measure the evidence, concepts such as “inductive probability” 
(Cohen, 1977) or “nonmathematical but structured sense of probability” (McMenamin, 
2002: 129) have been suggested. In both proposals, probability is based on a comparative or 
ordinal gradation rather than on a quantitative or measurable one.  
In connexion with the problem posed by the new standard for scientific expert 
testimony, other problems facing language experts today are: a lack of training in statistical 
analysis, and the fact that counting, if not done automatically, is time-consuming, labour 
intensive, expensive, and too slow for the urgency required in most law enforcement and 
criminal justice investigations. 
In spite of the above-mentioned problems and limitations, many linguists share the 
opinion that the present emphasis on quantification is important for two reasons: (a) it meets 
current methodological requirements for the study of linguistic variation (hypothesis testing 
and verification), and (b) satisfies external requirements for expert evidence as imposed by 
the judiciary (McMenamin, 2002: 174). 
From the above short discussion on the new requirement for scientific expert 
testimony, two important ideas emerge as to the need to develop an interdisciplinary stylistic 
approach to have the best of both worlds, qualitative and quantitative analyses, so as to be 
able to measure linguistic variation and quantify the writing and language data of cases. 
We will now move on to the second part of our discussion, the aim of which is to 
present linguists and researchers in forensic linguistics with an exploration of the strengths, 
limitations and challenges of software for their work and research in forensic authorship 
identification. 
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
6 
PART TWO 
V. STATE-OF-THE-ART SOFTWARE FOR RESEARCH IN FORENSIC 
AUTHORSHIP IDENTIFICATION 
 
For the purpose of analysis, ten state-of-the-art tools have been selected. These may be 
broadly classified into two main groups: (a) software for plagiarism detection and historical 
authorship investigations, and (b) software for general purpose text analysis. Whereas the 
former covers software such as JVocalyse v 2.05, CopyCatch Gold v 2, and Signature 
Stylometric System v 1.0, the latter includes WordSmith Tools (WST) v 4.0, Simple 
Concordance Program v 4.09, Textanz v 2.4.1.0, AntCone v3.2.1, Yoshikoder v.0.6.3-
preview.1 Build 13, Lexico v 3, and T-LAB Pro 5.4. 
The evaluation results for each of these tools are shown in the Appendix. However, 
due to space restrictions, only four of the ten selected tools will be fully discussed in the 
following pages. These are: JVocalyse, CopyCatch Gold, Signature Stylometric System, and 
WordSmith Tools (WST). 
As shown in the Appendix, the Result Template was adapted from EAGLES (1995) 
and expanded to include the identification and quantification of style markers at all linguistic 
levels found in eighty authorship cases, as well as some relevant statistics (McMenamin, 
2002: 216-231). 
The Result Template consists of eleven well-defined parts: (1) User interface, (2) 
Product documentation and user help, (3) User interface elements, (4) Tool PageRank, (5) 
Text selection and result presentation, (6) Qualitative analysis (Identification of style 
markers at all linguistic levels), (7) Quantitative analysis of style markers, (8) Statistical 
tests for significance of variables, and (9) Measures of authorship discrimination. 
Once we have applied this Result Template to the selected sample of state-of-the-art 
software, we will present the reader with the most important findings in the next 
subsections. (See Appendix for a detailed evaluation of the whole sample). 
We will begin our discussion by reviewing software for plagiarism detection and 
historical authorship investigations, namely JVocalyse, CopyCatch Gold, and Signature 
Stylometric System. After that, we will examine software for general purpose text analysis, 
that is, WordSmith Tools (WST).  
 
 
V.1. JVOCALYSE V 2.05 
 
JVocalyse v 2.05 is a product developed by David Woolls (2003: 102-112) of CFL Software 
Development, in association with members of the Corpus Forensic Linguist group at the 
University of Birmingham, to which the renowned forensic linguist Coulthard belongs.  
As shown in Figure 1 below, the initial screen of JVocalyse enables the language 
researcher to carry out a number of basic operations by clicking on the following buttons: 
Select Files, Read Files, Save the data, Clear, and Language (this allows access to a built-in 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
7
list of 450 English function words, although it is possible to work with lists in other 
languages).  
 
 
Figure 1: Initial screen of JVocalyse v 2.05 
 
JVocalyse makes use of lexically based measures. Table 1 summarises the style 
markers and statistics available in the tool for measuring the richness of the vocabulary used 
by the author. 
 
Tokens The total number of words in each text (Full text). 
Types The total number of different words used (Vocabulary). 
Hapax Legomena Once-occurring words. 
Hapax dislegomena Twice-occurring words. 
Core Number of content words which are included on the Core list. The words on 
this list are the most common content words which have appeared in writing 
for children over the last century. They are included because empirical 
testing has shown that they appear with different total frequencies in a wide 
range of writing, and that the different usage is frequently associated with 
authorship. 
Token/Type Ratio Standard division of all the words in the texts (Tokens) by the vocabulary 
used (Types), to give an average word usage value.  
 
Vocabulary Richness Three measures of Richness are calculated. Content Richness and Content 
Only are designed for use with short forensic texts by discounting the effect 
of the function words. 
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
8 
Twice Ratio This is the vocabulary used twice as a percentage of the full vocabulary.  
Core percentage This is the percentage of all the content words represented by the total 
occurrences of the words on the Core vocabulary list.  
 
Abridgement This function produces an abridgement, i.e. a set of sentences in text order. 
A selected sentence contains links with at least two other sentences at word 
level. 
Hapax distribution This page allows the selection of a sample or the examination of the number 
of content words which occur just once in the whole text for successive 
Word Frames in the texts. 
Full text mark up This page shows the full text with words coloured as follows: Bold red 
(Content word which occurs just once), Light red (Function word which 
occurs just once), Light Blue (Content word which occurs twice), Italic 
light blue (function word which occurs twice), and Black italic (Content 
words used more than twice).  
 
Table 1: Summary of the actions JVocalyse v 2.05 provides 
 
V.1.1. Strengths 
 
On looking at the most remarkable strengths of JVocalyse as software for forensic 
authorship identification, we may highlight the following: 
Although the tool is not designed to undertake statistical authorship identification in 
itself, it does supply measurable data with which the language expert may provide a 
quantitative analysis of an individual’s writing style.  
It allows the rapid analysis of suspect documents, producing statistical, vocabulary 
and phrasal information about the texts.  
It lets the user see how different texts have different ratios of content to function 
words both at the full text (Token) level and at the vocabulary (Type) level. 
It facilitates the identification of word strings, either lexical phrases or function 
phrases, which might reveal linguistic patterns of word use. These listings may be 
particularly useful when looking for authorial habits or unexpected repetitions. 
It allows regularity of patterns to be examined in a full text or in a sample in long 
texts.  
The Full text mark up page shows the patterns of word use in different colours, to 
give a visual representation of the distribution of the vocabulary frequency through the text.  
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
9
V.1.2. Limitations 
 
JVocalyse only involves lexically based measures (content words, function words, the hapax 
legomena, the hapax dislegomena, the type-token ratio, etc.). This means that other 
linguistic style markers that have proved to be relevant in the clarification of some cases of 
disputed authorship are necessarily overlooked. This is is the case, for example, of markers 
such as text format, spelling, errors and omissions, punctuation, capitalization, numbers and 
symbols, abbreviations, word couplets, functional variation of language use, variation in 
syntax, variation in discourse, and interference features from other languages. 
Consequently, JVocalyse, despite its unquestionable value for forensic text analysis, 
seems to be a more appropriate tool for authorship attribution of anonymous or doubtful 
literary texts, considering the objective lexical style markers it uses for identifying the 
potential author of questioned writings. 
 
 
V.2. COPYCATCH GOLD V 2 
 
CopyCatch Gold v 2 is also software for forensic text analysis developed by David Woolls 
(2003: 102-112) of CFL Software Development in association with members of the Corpus 
Forensic Linguist group at the University of Birmingham. Since 2007 JVocalyse and 
CopyCatch Gold have been assembled into a single package: CopyCatch Suite – 2007. 
The main function of CopyCatch is to detect plagiarism and collusion between 
students by comparing submitted documents and calculating the proportion of words and 
phrases held in common.  
As shown in Figure 2 below, the initial screen is divided into two main boxes. In 
each one, the language researcher is able to carry out a number of basic working operations, 
such as Select Work Files, Select Comparison Files, CopyCatch, Compare with Work Files, 
Clear Work files, and Clear Comparison Files.  
The initial screen also shows other relevant buttons like Language, which allows the 
user to load a list of functional words, together with specific technical words as functional 
for particular subjects; Help, which provides a user-friendly manual in English; and 
Threshold, which restricts the number of pairs on show by establishing a previously-defined 
similarity threshold between two sets of texts. 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
10
 
Figure 2: Initial screen of CopyCatch Gold v 
 
The approach of CopyCatch Gold to plagiarism detection also involves lexically 
based measures, and allows the identification and quantification of content words, function 
words, phrases and sentences that are found in common between two sets of texts in a fully 
contextualized way. More accurately, by clicking on the top buttons, the user will be able to 
perform the following actions: 
 
Sentences Top left listing. It shows the results in ascending order of 
percentage of similarity. Percentages are calculated on the 
total similarity between the texts. Top right listing.  It 
shows the sentences which contain three or more content 
words in common. Sentences are shown in related pairs, i.e. 
Informant 1 [P3 S2], Informant 2 {P5 S4} 
Sentence colouring. Black text shows the words that are 
different. Red text shows the words that are the same in 
each sentence.  
MarkUp by sentence Sentences which have been found to have phrasal elements 
in common are shown.  
MarkUp by vocabulary used Vocabulary which has been found in common is shown. 
Red text indicates that words are shared once. Blue text 
means that the words have used more than once across the 
two texts. 
Saving The files generated can be saved as html or rtf by clicking 
on the appropriate radio button. 
Statistics The statistics show the breakdown of the texts as 
occurrences of each type of text. Each file is shown in total 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
11
numbers of content and function words, together with the 
number of words which are shared between the two files 
and the number of words shared once only. Adding the two 
percentages together for each file gives the total amount of 
similarity.  
Table 2: Summary of the actions CopyCatch Gold v 2 provides 
 
 
V.2.1. Strengths 
 
Copycatch Gold is specifically designed for use with forensic texts, the length of which may 
range from short writings to long documents, particularly in the area of historical 
investigation of anonymous texts.  
The Language button on the Files tab allows the user to not only modify language 
but also change to a longer or shorter function word list in any language.  
CopyCatch Gold shows all the matching sentences between two sets of texts, cross-
referenced by the paragraph/sentence indicator at the end of the sentence. In addition, it 
allows the user to see words, phrases and sentences where groups of sentences from either 
text are found in both, and whether they have been kept together in the other text or moved 
around. The user may also see the work file in full but only the matching sentences from the 
comparison document. 
Forensic linguists may find the Statistics included particularly interesting for their 
research purposes, namely the statistical analysis of the data in terms of the quantity and 
frequency of words, phrases, and sentences shared between two sets of texts. 
 
 
V.2.2. Limitations 
 
The main limitation of CopyCatch Gold as software for forensic authorship identification is 
inherent in the different purpose for which it was primarily designed. “The tools were built”, 
explains Woolls (2003: 108), “to allow examination of the structure of the texts, and to give 
pointers to further phrasal and vocabulary analysis, not to give a swift answer to the question 
‘Did X write it?’ That is not to say that it is the only way they can be used, but that was the 
intent behind them”. 
Consequently, relevant style markers for authorship identification that may appear at 
other language levels are simply not considered for purposes of analysis (text format, 
spelling, errors and omissions, punctuation, capitalization, interference features from other 
languages, etc.).  
In both authorship identification and plagiarism, the language researcher looks for 
matching style markers that will serve to demonstrate that two sets of texts were not 
produced independently. However, there are some fundamental differences between 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
12
detecting plagiarism and identifying the author of disputed forensic texts in criminal cases 
that are often missed.  
The first difference relates to the genre and register of writing texts. Whilst in 
plagiarism the disputed text may be parallel to the plagiarised text in terms of genre and 
register, in authorship identification, not including authorship attribution of anonymous 
literary texts, the disputed text, which may well be a suicide letter, a ransom note, an 
anonymous letter, etc, may exhibit a completely different style to that–or those—of the texts 
that are known to have been produced by an individual. Moreover, the anonymous author 
involved in a criminal case will do his best to “mask” or “disguise” his writing style as much 
as possible in order to hide his true identity. 
The second difference relates to text length. Whereas in plagiarism detection—and in 
historical authorship investigations—the language researcher may have to analyse texts of 
similar length, in authorship identification, text length may vary considerably from text to 
text, and be significantly reduced in a judicial case. Hence, the analysis of the richness of the 
vocabulary used by the questioned author may sometimes be of little use.  
CopyCatch Gold may report similarity but makes no judgements on the reasons for 
the similarity. In this case, quantitative similarity may be used as supportive evidence for 
forensic authorship identification. But it may also be the case that the software does not find 
enough evidence to support similarity between two sets of texts. In this case, the findings 
may not be reliable enough to rule out possible candidates for the authorship of disputed 
texts, since, as said above, an individual’s writing style and text length may vary 
considerably from genre to genre, and from register to register.  
 
 
V.3. SIGNATURE STYLOMETRIC SYSTEM V 1.0 
 
Signature Stylometric System v 1.0 is freeware for educational use designed by Peter 
Millican (University of Leeds). The aim of this tool is to facilitate stylometric analysis, with 
special emphasis on authorship identification. More specifically, the tool enables the 
language researcher to compare the styles of different writers, as well as to analyse disputed 
literary texts and explore authorship identification.  
Signature Stylometric System makes it possible to load different files at the same 
time and build up a single corpus. Additionally, single texts can be divided into halves.  
As the reader can see from Figure 3 below, Signature Stylometric System projects 
two-dimensional or three-dimensional graphs with the results (percentages or absolute 
frequencies) corresponding to the measurement of style markers such as word length, 
sentence length, paragraph length, the number of letters, and the number of punctuation 
marks for the selected files.  
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
13
 
Figure 3: Sample graph displaying percentages in Signature Stylometric System v 1.0 
 
 
Furthermore, Signature Stylometric System has a Statistics option that performs a 
Chi-square significance test.  This test is used to evaluate relative homogeneity of multiple 
variables expressed as actual frequencies in various questioned writings.  
 
 
Figure 4: Sample of Chi-Square Significance Test in Signature Stylometric System v 1.0 
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
14
As Figure 4 portrays, the actual Chi-square value is shown in the upper red circle, 
while the sentence in the lower red circle gives the user an idea about the significance of the 
difference found between two texts, and displays the standard value against which the actual 
value can be compared. Since the frequency of language patterns in texts may have more 
variation than the scientific phenomena for which statistical tests are commonly used, 
linguists must exercise caution in dealing with the results obtained. 
Signature Stylometric System allows the user to introduce a new list apart from the 
available Wordlist or indicate which words (keywords) are the most useful for a given case 
of authorship identification under the Wordlists menu. 
 
 
V.3.1. Strengths 
 
On considering the strengths of Signature Stylometric System for forensic authorship 
identification, the following features emerge: 
Firstly, files can be made into a single text. This facility is particularly useful when 
dealing with short texts, which is the usual case in forensic authorship identification.  
Secondly, this software does not make use of lexically based measures exclusively 
but rather examines other relevant style markers such as letter and punctuation frequencies. 
Thirdly, the analytical approach provides full comparison of all the results obtained 
and graphic output.  
Fourthly, the software package includes a Chi-square significance test to evaluate 
relative homogeneity of multiple variables expressed as actual frequencies in various 
questioned writings.  
Fifthly, the tool provides the forensic language researcher with a remarkable sample 
of disputed texts for forensic linguistic analysis. 
Lastly, Signature Stylometric System seems to be quite suitable for historical 
authorship investigations. 
 
 
V.3.2. Limitations 
 
Although the current version of Signature Stylometric System was released in May 2003, the 
tool seems to be in a stage of development; however, no new version has become available 
since then. Concerning the limitations, the forensic linguist may find at the present stage of 
development, we might suggest the following: (a) Statistics should be expanded so as to 
include linguistic correlation and appropriate graphic output, (b) word concordance and 
phrase recognition should be added to the already existing Word search facility, (c) text 
filtering mechanisms should be developed for removing unwanted textual artefacts, (d) the 
tool should be adapted to non-standard alphabets and punctuation, (e) Unicode could be 
included to enable texts to be processed and displayed appropriately in a wide variety of 
languages, (f) a user manual should be available in different languages—presently there is 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
15
only a PowerPoint slide show in English, and (g) the Text display facility could be 
improved. 
 
 
V.4. WORDSMITH TOOLS V 4.0 
 
WordSmith Tools (WST) v 4.0 —the new version 5.0 will come out soon—is a suite of 
computer programs developed by Mike Scott (University of Liverpool) and may be defined 
as a quantitative analysis program for exploring the way grammatical and lexical features 
behave in their natural setting, namely the text.  
The current version of WST (Figure 5) consists of three core tools (Concord, 
KeyWords, and Wordlist) and eight utilities. Within each of these tools there are different 
instruments and functions for analyzing texts and getting statistical support.  
 
 
Figure 5: Initial screen of WordSmith Tools v 4.0 
 
 
The utilities complement the core tools mentioned. There is one intended for re-
formatting the texts by doing search-and-replace operations (Text Converter); one to convert 
data from WST old formats to the current version (Data Converter); one designed to split 
one text into smaller ones (Splitter); one to build up a corpus of texts downloading them 
directly from the Internet (Webgetter); there is one to view a text with words of interest 
highlighted and do sentence or paragraph alignment of two texts, which is extremely useful 
for comparing two versions of the same text (Viewer and Aligner); one intended for finding 
pairs of words which are minimally different from each other (Minimal Pairs); one for 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
16
selecting/changing the language of texts to be processed (Languages Chooser); and one to 
determine the frequencies of individual characters in text files (Character Analyser). 
Next, we would like to present briefly the most outstanding characteristics and 
functions of Wordlist, Concord, and Keywords.  
As its name suggests, WordList (Figure 6) generates word listings in alphabetical and 
frequency order, enabling the linguist to compare texts at a lexical level.  
 
 
Figure 6: Screen of WordList showing the frequency list 
 
 
The Statistics tab provides information about the text(s)—size, number of running 
words (tokens), number of types (distinct words), type/token ratio (TTR), standardized TTR 
(STTR), length of words, number of sentences/paragraphs, among others. Needless to say, 
this information provides valuable help to measure a writer’s individual style and to 
quantitatively contrast a set of texts. Regarding TTR, it is expressed as a percentage and 
obtained by dividing the total number of types (distinct words) by the total number of tokens 
(running words) in text(s). A high value means that the texts under study contain a high 
number of different tokens. In contrast, a low value implies a high number of word 
repetitions, which can be interpreted for authorship identification purposes by indicating that 
the text is less rich or varied in terms of lexical density. However, TTR is sensitive to the 
length of the text, and this is the reason why it is not the best method to be used when 
contrasting texts of different lengths, since a longer text may contain more word repetition 
and then its value could be lower. In contrast, the STTR calculates the TTR at regular 
intervals and is used to neutralize the influence the length of the text exerts when calculating 
the TTR; longer texts usually have more word repetition and, consequently, lower values are 
obtained. The STTR results in a higher average value as it does not count the repetition of 
words occurring in other parts of the text. This measure can be extremely useful when 
comparing lexical density across texts, since it can be used as an indicator of an individual’s 
writing style. 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
17
The tool Concord (Figure 7) has been designed with a twofold purpose in mind. On 
the one hand, it generates concordances, namely a list which shows every instance of a given 
search word (also called key word, base or query word) along with its linguistic context (co-
text). And on the other hand, it gives collocation information by implementing four 
association scores (MI, Z score, MI3, and Log-likelihood). The query word can be a single 
unit, part of it, or several units. 
 
 
Figure 7: Screen of Concord 
 
 
In forensic linguistics, particularly in authorship investigations (Collins, Kaufer, 
Vlachos, Butler & Ishizaki, 2004; Coulthard, 1993, 1994), concordances have proved their 
usefulness. By observing lexical concordances, the language researcher may analyze a word, 
part of a word, a group of words, a phrase, or expression, etc. in their linguistic context and 
consequently, discover such features as recurring lexical patterns, idiosyncratic usages of a 
word or expression, and word meaning. 
The remaining tool to be described is KeyWords (Figure 8), whose function is to 
compare two word lists. One of these lists is considered to be the reference corpus, which is 
the baseline for comparison during analysis. The other has to be created with the text the 
linguist wants to investigate, that is the study corpus. The comparison between the two 
wordlists results in a new listing of keywords, namely words whose frequencies are 
significantly different in the study corpus in comparison with the reference corpus.  
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
18
 
Figure 8: Screen of KeyWords 
 
 
To calculate the frequency of the keyword, the user can choose between two 
statistical measures: Chi-square and Log-likelihood. The latter, according to Scott (2003: 
75), “gives a better estimate of keyness, especially when contrasting long texts or a whole 
genre against your reference corpus”.  
A keyword list has clear application for work in forensic linguistics since a general-
purpose corpus (like BNC, Bank of English, etc.) may be used to establish norms of 
frequency and usage against which individual texts can be measured and contrasted, 
allowing the language researcher to accomplish a number of actions such as making a cross-
register comparison, recognizing the lexical similarities or differences between two sets of 
texts, and discovering an author’s stylistic preferences. 
 
 
V.4.1. Strengths 
 
WST is a powerful, reasonably priced tool for exploring language uses, and excels in the 
number of research features and functions it offers. Among its numerous strengths, we find 
its capacity to generate useful statistical data, to support different input formats, languages 
and character sets, to handle multiple tagged or untagged texts at the same time, and to 
export the results to different file formats, excel spreadsheet included. Moreover, pre-
indexing of the texts is not necessary and different kinds of settings can be adjusted to fit a 
particular research interest. 
The variety of ways the package provides for searching a corpus is also one of its 
strengths. Users may search for words, parts of them, strings, patterns and tags, as well as 
expand the context or call up the whole text at their convenience. 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
19
It should also be noted that albeit WST was not originally designed for forensic 
linguistics issues, it contains a wealth of features and functions that offer valuable, empirical 
output for statement analysis, historical authorship investigation, authorship identification, 
and plagiarism detection. As already mentioned, in forensic linguistics the descripion of 
written language is the first means of discovering, analyzing, and interpreting style. In this 
respect, WST provides the language expert with automatic identification of what forms—
words, concordances, collocations and clusters are used by a writer, and how and why they 
are used. The second important issue in forensic linguistics is the measurement of style. 
WST allows automatic quantification of how much and how often forms are used by a writer 
and other relevant quantitative measures such as vocabulary richness.  
 
 
V.4.2. Limitations 
 
Bearing in mind that WST was not developed to work specifically in forensic authorship 
identification, it has few shortcomings that once overcome will render this versatile software 
extremely useful not only for forensic linguistics but also for other applied linguistics fields.  
On the quantitative side, the lack of some measures for authorship identification is 
justified by the fact that it was not primarily designed for forensic purposes. On the 
qualitative side, WST’s main weakness is found in its exclusive use of lexically based 
measures. The lexical orientation toward text analysis of WST may pose a problem to the 
forensic linguist, since, as mentioned above when evaluating JVocalise and CopyCatch, 
significant style markers appearing at other language levels may not be captured by the 
system.  
In our view, WST would certainly be improved as a tool for forensic authorship 
identification, if it were able to preprocess the text(s) to be analyzed. By preprocessing we 
mean tagging. Along the lines of other dictionary-based tagging programs and parsers, 
tagging may enable the language expert to advance forensic text analysis, particularly the 
evaluation of an individual’s set of unique linguistic choices and patterns. Conclusively, 
considering its powerful search and visualization possibilities, this tagging function could 
make WST a more influential tool in the field of forensic linguistics. 
 
 
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 
To the best of our knowledge, the vast majority of the tools that are available on the market 
today for forensic text analysts were not primarily designed to solve the types of cases 
involved in forensic authorship identification, the techniques and methods of which have 
been developing ad casum so far. 
With the exception of Signature Stylometric System, none of the sampled tools 
reviewed in this article were originally designed for authorship identification purposes. 
However, they are extensively used by researchers in forensic linguistics, since they provide 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
20
language experts with the possibility of measuring linguistic variation and quantifying the 
writing and language data of cases, which is an essential requirement for providing scientific 
evidence at court today, especially in Common Law countries. 
Despite considerable interest in forensic linguistics, we share the feeling that 
universities need to invest more resources in the design of specific tools to facilitate 
automatic authorship identification. 
Hitherto most research has been focused on designing suites of programs for 
plagiarism detection, text genre detection, and attribution of disputed authorship of literary 
texts (Stamatatos, Fakotakis & Kokkinakis, 1999: 158-164).  
The most important approaches to authorship attribution involve lexically based 
measures, and so a number of style markers have been proposed for measuring the richness 
of vocabulary used by the disputed author, namely content words, function words, the hapax 
legomena, the hapax dislegomena, the type-token ratio, etc.  
However, as mentioned in part two of our discussion, an approach to automatic 
authorship identification should not only be based on lexical style markers, which have 
nevertheless proved to be quite reliable for plagiarism detection and authorship attribution of 
anonymous literary texts. After all, an individual’s idiolect is made up of the unique set of 
linguistic choices that s/he makes at all linguistic levels. 
Needless to say, no tool in the world, at least at present, would be able to provide an 
answer to the question: “Who is the author of this set of questioned texts?” But today, as has 
already been discussed in part one, recent changes in the criteria for admitting scientific 
evidence at court demand more than ever the quantification of an individual’s style and 
measurable probability, especially in the USA. 
The design of the “ideal tool” for forensic authorship identification would be 
possible provided that language researchers and software engineers put their heads together, 
to combine the best of both worlds, namely language description (qualitative analysis) and 
the quantification of an individual’s style (quantitative analysis). 
This ambitious enterprise would involve an interdisciplinary approach to the design 
of a suite of user-friendly programs. These should have interactive interfaces, available in 
different languages, that would enable linguists to conduct their linguistic research, and 
decide on the style markers that are not only recurrent in a set of questioned texts but also 
prominent features of an individual’s writing style. These prominent features would 
ultimately serve to draw a linguistic profile.  
The “ideal tool”, as an extension of the language researcher (Hall, 1976: 25-40), 
should be able to carry out automatic search for style markers at all linguistic levels (text 
format, phonological, morpho-syntactical, lexico-semantical and discourse), assist the 
language expert in marking up prominent features in the text(s), and quantify the data and 
their distribution across sets of texts–the questioned texts and the known texts.  
The “ideal tool” should facilitate statistical tests for the significance of variables 
without having to import the data produced by the software to a spreadsheet or other 
statistical packages, namely evaluation of potential relationship among variables expressed 
as means in comparison writings, standard error of difference (sD), t-Test (t), analysis of 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
21
variance (F), evaluation of potential relationship of variables expressed as percentages in 
comparison writings, and so on.  
 Finally, the “ideal tool” should be able to provide the measure of authorship 
discrimination (intra-author vs. interauthor variation in stylometry, principal component 
analysis, correspondence analysis, discriminant analysis, and multivariate analysis). 
This article thus ends in an open-ended way, since it is not our purpose to overcome 
the difficulties found in forensic authorship identification, but rather to highlight the many 
problems which exist and which need to be addressed.  
In an age in which interdisciplinary enquiry is becoming ever more necessary, 
forensic linguistics does indeed entail crossing many disciplinary borders to make real 
advances, and automatically involves us in interdisciplinary research. With this idea in mind, 
the authors of this article, a group of linguists and computer engineers at the University of 
Alicante, have embarked on the design of advanced software for forensic authorship 
attribution and identification. Hopefully our research in progress will be discussed in detail 
in a further article. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alcaraz-Varó, E. (2005). La lingüística legal: el uso, el abuso y la manipulación del lenguaje 
jurídico. In Mª T. Turell (Ed.), Lingüística forense, lengua y derecho. Conceptos, 
métodos y aplicaciones. Barcelona: IULA, pp. 49-66. 
 
Cohen, L. J. (1977). The Probable and the Provabable. Oxford: Clarendon. 
 
Collins, J., Kaufer, D., Vlachos, P., Butler, B. & Ishizaki, S. (2004). Detecting 
collaborations in text: Comparing the authors' rhetorical language choices in the 
Federalist Papers. Computers and the Humanities, vol. 38:1, 15-36. 
 
Coulthard, M. (2005). Algunas aplicaciones forenses de la lingüística descriptiva. In Mª T. 
Turell (Ed.), Lingüística forense, lengua y derecho. Conceptos, métodos y 
aplicaciones. Barcelona: IULA, pp. 249-274. 
 
Coulthard M. (1994): On the use of corpora in the analysis of forensic texts. The 
International Journal of Speech Language and the Law, vol 1:1, 27-43. 
 
Coulthard, M. (1993). On beginning the study of forensic texts: corpus concordance 
collocation. In M. Hoey. (Ed.), Data, Description and Discourse: Papers on the 
English Language in Honour of John McH Sinclair. London: Harper Collins, pp. 86-
97. 
 
Coulthard, M. (Ed.) (1992). Advances in Spoken Discourse Analysis. London and New 
York: Routledge. 
 
Coulthard, M. (1992). Forensic discourse analysis. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in 
Spoken Discourse Analysis. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 242-258. 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
22
 
EAGLES (1995). Evaluation of Natural Language Processing Systems. EAGLES document 
EAG-EWG-PR.2. Version of September, 1995. Available on line: 
http://www.issco.unige.ch/ewg95/ewg95.html 
 
Gibbons, J. (2003). Forensic Linguistics. An Introduction to Language in the Justice System. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
 
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond Culture. USA: Doubleday Anchor Book. 
 
McMenamin, G. R. (2004). Disputed authorship in US Law. Speech, Language and the Law 
, vol.11:1, 73-82. 
 
McMenamin, G. R. (2002). Forensic Linguistics. Advances in Forensic Stylistics. Florida: 
CRC Press. 
Olsson, J. (2004). Forensic Linguistics. An Introduction to Language, Crime and the Law. 
London and New York: Continuum. 
 
Rieber, R. W. & Stewart, W. A. (Eds.) (1990). The Language Scientist as Expert in the 
Legal Setting. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. New Cork: The New 
York Academy of Sciences, vol. 606,1-135. 
 
Rieber, R. W. & Stewart, W. A. (1990). The interaction of the language sciences and the 
Law. In R. W. Rieber & W. A. Stewart (Eds.), The Language Scientist as Expert in 
the Legal Setting. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. New Cork: The New 
York Academy of Sciences, pp. 1-4. 
 
Scott, M. (2003). WordSmith Tools version 4.0. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Shuy, R. W. (2005). La aportación de la lingüística al estudio de la intencionalidad criminal. 
In Mª T. Turell (Ed.), Lingüística forense, lengua y derecho. Conceptos, métodos y 
aplicaciones. Barcelona: IULA, pp. 19-48. 
 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N. & Kokkinakis, G. (1999). Automatic authorship attribution. In 
EACL, 158-164. Available on line: http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu//E/E99-1021.pdf 
 
Svartvik, J. (1968). The Evans Statements: A Case for Forensic Linguistics. Göteborg: 
University of Gothenburg Press.  
 
Tanner, D. C. & Tanner, M. E. (2004): Forensic Aspects of Speech Patterns: Voice Prints, 
Speaker Profiling, Lie and Intoxication Detection. Arizona: Lawyers & Judges. 
 
Turell, Mª T. (2006). Aplicaciones forenses de la lingüística descriptiva y de corpus. In M. 
Juan, M. Amengual, & J. Salazar (Eds.), Lingüística aplicada en la sociedad de la 
información y la comunicación. Universidad de las Islas Baleares: Servicio de 
Publicaciones y de Intercambio Científico, pp. 43-64. 
 
Turell, Mª T. (Ed.) (2005). Lingüística forense, lengua y derecho. Conceptos, métodos y 
aplicaciones. Barcelona: IULA. 
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
23
Woolls, D. (2003). Better tools for the trade and how to use them. The International Journal 
of Speech Language and the Law: Forensic Linguistics, vol.10:1,102-112. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
24
APPENDIX: RESULT TEMPLATE (EVALUATION OF SOFTWARE FOR 
FORENSIC AUTHORSHIP IDENTIFICATION) 
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
25
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
26
 
Exploring State-of-the-Art Software for Forensic Authorship Identification 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
27
 
 Victoria Guillén-Nieto et al. 
 
© Servicio de Publicaciones. Universidad de Murcia. All rights reserved.           IJES, vol. 8 (1), 2008, pp. 1-28 
28
 
