Genre Identification on the Web
Mikael Gunnarsson
mikael.gunnarsson@hb.se
http://www.adm.hb.se/∼mg/
Swedish School of Library and Information Science
Swedish National Graduate School of Language Technology
September 29, 2006
Abstract: One of the problems with the web and its tools for browsing and
searching its contents is that its genre heterogeneity is not sufficently accounted
for. Recent years have demonstrated some successful efforts in algorithmic
genre identification, but the area is still in its infancy. This paper presents the
general conception of genre and how document structure may be used as an
additional discriminative feature in algorithmic genre identification.
1 Introduction
The web is nowadays an almost self-evident source in any information seeking task. It
is sometimes described as a huge digital library, a statement which is refuted by others
who object that it is not a library since it is not carefully organized. The description,
indexing and classification of its contents that characterizes an ordinary library does not
characterizes the web. However, it cannot be denied that the web is a huge repository
of documents and in that respect resembles an ordinary library. Therefore, methods
and techniques that apply to library collections may be (and is) adopted for the web.
One of the main properties of the web that distinguishes it from a physical library
is its heterogeneity with respect to genre. Genre as a reflection of typifications in
documentary and communicative practices is generally not taken care of in all the tools
available for browsing and searching the web. Most efforts in improving information
seeking tools focus on topical retrieval and seem to consider genre adherence as a
secondary matter.
Genre is generally not fully considered in libraries either, but the classification
schemes used in libraries to organize its collections do incorporate aspects on genre,
though genre is often counted among the so called form subdivisions of classification
schemes. (Wilson & Robinson, 1990) But it has been emphasized by Crowston &
Kwasnik (2003) that the understanding of genre within Library and Information Sci-
ence and library practices is shallow, which sometimes is explained by the fact that
genre within library collections is not considered a problem. They also observed that
library collections demonstrate a rather restricted genre repertoire in comparison to the
web. What is more is that library classification schemes have a bias for library collec-
tions and do not transfer well for application to extensive collections of web documents,
at least not to the extent that it can be used to cover its entirety.
1
The economic unfeasibility of having humans to classify the complete contents
of the web is apparent, and if we want to take advantage of the web’s encompassing
coverage we have to rely on algorithmic approaches to the description, indexing and
classification of its contents. With respect to its contents in terms of topic, theme or
subject matter, much work has been and is being done. More scarce are the attempts to
algorithmically organize contents from the perspective of genre.
Recent years have seen an increasing interest in algorithmic genre identification,
mainly within computational linguistics and computer science, and mainly with respect
to textual documents. Such attempts demonstrate that genre is not a straight-forward
concept. Many consider genre as a matter of artefactual style only (e.g. Bogdanov &
Worring, 2001; Dewdney et al., 2001; Folch et al., 2000), while others take a more
sociocultural stance and consider genre as a reflection of communicative purpose (e.g.
Kessler et al., 1997; Wolters & Kirsten, 1999; Rauber & Müller-Kögler, 2001).
1.1 Genre
Though genre may be best known in the context of literary studies, genre is referred to
in many areas. Swales (1990) gives an extensive overview of its occurrence. To this
may be added the recent attention given to the concept as a framework for the study of
organizational communication. (e.g. Orlikowski & Yates, 1994; Honkaranta, 2003)
From the perspective of the so called new genre theory, genre is usually considered
a triple of 1) communicative purpose in particular situations, 2) a discourse community
in which communication and documentation activities take place, and 3) a set of typi-
fied artefacts. (Cf. Swales, 1990; Mayes, 2003; Bazerman, 1994) For Carolyn Miller,
in her seminal article of the 1980s, genre is understood as “typified rhetorical actions
based in recurrent situations” (Miller, 1994) and thus a sociocultural and sociolinguistic
phenomenon.
The new genre theory reflects an inductive approach in which empirical studies is
carried out in order to describe genre artefacts and the conceptions and expectations
of particular genres. Some genres have gained more interest than others. The research
article is one of these, and Chapter 7 of (Swales, 1990) demonstrates this, where the
research article is investigated against the background of the common sequential IMRD
structure — Introduction, Method, Results and Discussion — with an extensive exposé
of earlier studies. At least in some domains it is expected that all articles obey the
IMRD formula in order to be accepted. There are other structural typifications as well.
For instance, it is common to start a research article from a general reasoning and
narrow it down to a more specific problem while at the end of the discussion moving
out from the particular to the general.
Genre theory provides background knowledge for the identification of genre if it it
can be reasonably assumed that their findings reflect the ways that humans recognize
genre. One aspect of particular impact is that genre relates to human practices in a way
that both “shapes the schematic structure of the discourse and influences and constrains
choice of content and style” (Swales, 1990, p. 58). Neither communicative purpose,
communities of practices, nor artefacts can be given evident primacy over any other
aspect on genre.
Linguists in general, in addition to the term genre, operate with terms that have
similar connotations. One of these terms is register, preferred by e.g. Biber & Fine-
gan (1994) that compared with genre theory are more directed towards the details in
how language is used. Swanson (2003, p. 21f), who studies the use of anaphoric and
cataphoric constructs within different genres, argues for a distinction where genre is
2
associated with cultural context and the word register with situational context. The
register, for Swanson, is a mediator of the realization of a genre.
In any case, genre is inherently an abstract construal of documentary practices. This
abstraction is determined by the three very general variables referred to above, but for
the identification of genre we must rely on the third observable variable — the arte-
fact. Here is a tension to be found, between individual variation and genre typification.
Within one and the same communicative situation and discourse community different
people may realize their artefacts in slightly different ways. Genre identification must
identify the non-variable aspects of the artefacts and at the same time bear in mind that
individual variation over time may change the genre. In addition, genres may be identi-
fied on different levels of granularity. (Cf. Santini, 2006) The genre of research articles
is a very broad one. It is obvious that research articles are used within many different
scholarly communities where authorial conventions differ. It may also be supposed that
research articles are not always produced with the same intentions or purposes. The
communicative purpose is a cumbersome variable, as has been admitted by Askehave
& Swales (2001), and it is not always evident that the purpose of a research article
is the intention of reporting on research, which may be a common conception of its
purpose.
Genres need not to have commonly recognized names. (Cf. Santini, 2005; Fer-
guson, 1994, p. 22) Maybe it is reasonable to look at the term research article as a
common denominator for a set of unlabeled genres. The indeterminacy of genre ne-
cessitates that any algorithm for genre identification refrain as far as possible from any
presupposition of a finite and predetermined space of labeled genres.
1.2 Genre as a Reflection of Speech Acts
The idea of genre theory is that genre is a conflation of language use and action, an oth-
erwise common focus for any sociolinguistic theory influenced by certain philosophies
of language. For instance, Austin (1975, p. 5) stated that a linguistic utterance “is, or
is part of, the doing of an action”. In his influential 1955 lectures Austin started out
by observing that many utterances do not conform to the then common philosophical
conception of a statement, they do not constate anything that can be characterized as
being true or false. He termed these non-constating utterances performatives, because
they are used in order to achieve some particular goal, to perform some job, without
which the goal cannot be achieved. Common and distinct examples are to be found in
the context of marriage and baptism ceremonies where the uttering of certain phrases
are the necessary requirements for the fulfilment of the ceremony. Consider a more
subtle example, a research article in which an utterance starts out
We define classification as being the assignment ...
Example 1.1
This is obviously different from
Classification is an assignment of ...
Example 1.2
The theme or topic for both Example 1.1 and 1.2 is classification and they both say
3
something about the theme, which is considered the rheme. According to the systemic-
functional grammar of Halliday & Matthiessen (2004) where words “get their meaning
from activities in which they are embedded” (Halliday & Hasan, 1989, p. 5), this is the
textual meaning of both utterances. The example in 1.1 is different from the one in 1.2
with respect to its degree of apparent performativeness. In 1.1 the author does not state
anything that is to be considered true or false. The author is simply stating in what
sense he or she is going to use the word classification, a commissive act of speech.
According to the systemic-functional grammar there are differences with respect to
ideational and interpersonal meaning. The ideational meaning of 1.1 is conveyed by
the commissive verb “define” as opposed to the existential “is” and the interpersonal
meaning by the choice of the pronominalization “we” of the author(s) in 1.1 as opposed
to the implicitness of the utterer in 1.2.
In the end of his lectures, after trying to identify a lexical catalog of verbs and verb
forms that mark the occurrence of performatives, Austin ends up by observing that the
distinction between performatives and constatives is not so clear as it first appeared to
be. Almost any utterance implies an enactment of a speech act. The difference between
constatives and performatives is only a slight shift in balance between locutionary and
illocutionary forces — between what an utterance is saying and what it is intended to
do. This marks the difference between what is focused in identification of topic versus
genre.
The kind of variation exemplified above is important for language use as action, as
opposed to simple sayings, and with respect to genre the act of saying matters equally
much as what is said. Certain ways of saying something are indicative of the situation
and the sociocultural setting in which the act takes place. The bulk of empirical and
theoretical research on language use, that embarks from views on language use as ex-
emplified with Austin’s speech act theory, provide us with the background knowledge
for modeling genre identification.
1.3 Modeling Genre Identification
Characteristic for algorithmic applications assisting human tasks is that they must rely
on some model of human action (or cognition). If genre is typified action and recog-
nized as such, its embedded artefacts can be assumed to demonstrate this typification
as typified language use. We must ask which clues do people use in deciding upon
genre, just as has been done with respect to topical identification, highly connected to
the identification of theme. This is what has been done by e.g. Crowston & Kwasnik
(2004) with respect to heuristic genre classification.
As for topical identification the task is greatly simplified by the mere existence of
technological conventions, such as titles, tables of contents and back of the book sum-
maries. These conventionalized text units make it unnecessary to read the complete text
and sum up all the themes of clauses and paragraphs into one overarching theme. These
text units have developed over centuries and are part of many kinds of documents.
In automated genre identification clues derived from the linguistic contents is al-
most self-evident, since typification in language use is considered indicative of genre.
The question whether technological and other extra-linguistic properties may be used
in genre identification is to a large extent uninvestigated — both as indicative of genre
and as feature weighting indications. Let us return to this question later on and first
consider some more aspects on how texts are composed into artefacts, by reference to
what has been termed text grammars.
4
In the text grammar of Werlich (1976) a text is a structure “marked by both coher-
ence among the elements and completion” [emphasis in orig.]. It is a structure because
it is constituted by clauses linked together to larger text units that form completed texts
by being linked in their turn. What seems to be the most attended aspects of a text for
Werlich is how the linking between text units is accomplished and how the semantics
of each unit refers to contextual phenomena. On this framework Werlich plots out five
categories of text units based on their “dominant contextual foci” and how their units
are linked according to these foci.
Werlich adapts the fairly traditional term text type to signify these categories. There
are five text types in Werlich’s typology: descriptions, narrations, expositions, argu-
mentations, and instructions. These are categories on an abstract level reflecting autho-
rial strategies and should not be taken as directly reflecting genre. For instance, text
units of the narrative category are characterized by a dominance of temporal linking,
often realized with extensive use of temporal adverbials, whereas a description on the
other hand is realized with extensive use of spatial abverbials.
With respect to genre identification, text type occurrences may very well be in-
dicative. It is for instance not common to find narrations and instructions in scholarly
writings, if not as illustrations. According to Werlich (1976, p. 46) text types are con-
ventionally manifested as text forms — which is just another word for the common
conception of genre. The binary feature of a text being narrative or not has been used
by Kessler et al. (1997) for algorithmic genre identification as a “facet”.
Topical identification (which must be distinguished from the subject analysis of li-
brary practices — a more encompassing activity) is modeled according to assumptions
on word frequency distributions over sets of documents. The algorithms differ mostly
in the ways word frequency distributions and collocations are accounted for in the al-
gorithms. In heuristic topical identification, this task is assisted by the existence of
technological conventions.
The question is what assumptions algorithmic genre identification may rely upon.
Let us consider what is usually relied upon.
The number of features used in genre identification is generally high. The number
of features used by Biber (1988) in his seminal work of the 1980s was 67, but recent ef-
forts tend to regard even more features. For instance, Finn & Kushmerick (2003) used
152 features. (Stamatatos et al., 2000) is probably one of the crudest approaches. They
used word counts and investigated how certain words were discriminative for certain
genres. Words that within a group of documents with the same topic demonstrated a
high frequency within one genre but a very low frequency in other genres were con-
sidered discriminative. Their result was then a set of 30 discriminating words. To this
kind of features they added figures on the occurrence of punctuation characters. Kessler
et al. (1997) in addition to words (lexical features) and punctuation counts used what
they refer to as “derivative” features, which is a combination of lexical features and
character-level features — sometimes similar to traditional text complexity measures,
such as the proportion of long words. A fourth group of features, referred to as struc-
tural cues, is used by some: Karlgren (2000); Dewdney et al. (2001); Argamon et al.
(1998); Wastholm et al. (2005) all used part-of-speech tags in their experiments. An
obvious drawback is that this kind of features requires part-of-speech tagging or pars-
ing which presupposes a computationally expensive preprocessing. A fifth group of
features used by, for instance, Santini (2005), Lim et al. (2005), Elsas & Efron (2004)
and Rauber & Müller-Kögler (2001), are counts of certain HTML tags. Lim et al.
(2005) put particular interest in the URLs of the hyperlinking tags and take account of
5
if they refer to documents within the same domain or not.
Besides these five groups of features, there are some who focus on the appearance
of documents, and nothing else. Bogdanov & Worring (2001) and Ihlström & Åkesson
(2004) do this, but it should be remembered that these two investigations do not pri-
marily aim at classification for information seeking tasks. (Power & Scott, 1999; Hu
et al., 1999) are two other examples.
The results of all research give no significant clues to whether some set of features
are better than others, but most report on the fact that combinations from different
groups of features yield better results in classification tasks.
Algorithmic genre identification does not generally consider technological conven-
tions. For instance, the occurrence of certain text unit types, such as bibliographies,
quotations and the like, is not at all considered. This may be seen as surprising, since
some text unit types are particular for certain groups of genres. A bibliography is for
instance common for many scholarly genres, whereas it is not for non-scholarly works,
at least not with linking to inline citations to the same extent.
The work that is only tentatively presented here, given the restricted space, focuses
on the identification of these text units to improve genre identification. These text units
map to a set of text unit types (which will be referred to as genre modules, from the
point of view of genre) where each member is distinguished by common functions in
documentary practices.1 Genre modules should not be taken as cognitive categories,
the model does not assume anything of authorial intention or readerly perception that
otherwise distinguish many text typologies.
2 Methodology
Space does not allow for a complete description of the method here. It must suffice
to point out some directions with relation to what has been said above on algorithmic
genre identification.
2.1 The document seen from the perspective of genre
Formally we may say that from the point of view of genre, a document di can be defined
as an ordered set of micro-acts realized as distinct text units (Equation 1).
di = 〈t1, t2, ..., tn〉 (1)
Thus, from the point of view of document structure typification, a text unit tj is
of a certain type. Let us term this type a genre module and denote a particular genre
module with the symbol gmk, where k denotes the type (given as an index number in
the following). For a given set of documents D we have a set of genre modules as in
Equation 2.
GmD = {gm1, gm2, ..., gmn} (2)
Having identified the text units Tdi of a certain document di ∈ D, each text unit
tj ∈ Tdi has to be identified as being of type gmk ∈ GmD. A classified text unit is
denoted by tj(gmk). A document can then be described as a set of classified text units
as in Equation 3.
1The term genre module has been introduced by Rehm (2002) with a similar meaning
6
di = Tdi = 〈t1(gmx), t2(gmy), ..., tn(gmz)〉 (3)
Representing a document as a flat sequence of text units is a simplification, because
we ignore the fact that some text units are part of other text units. Lists are easier to
work with than trees, and the position of any text unit in a tree can be encoded as a
feature of the unit.
2.2 The document seen from the perspective of the artefact
Seen from the point of view of genre, text units and genre modules are both abstractions
in the sense that they require human heuristics to be identified. From the appearance
of documents a text unit may be identified from e.g. its surrounding white space. The
type of such a text unit may then be interpretatively identified by a human mind. Algo-
rithmic applications, on the other hand, need to be developed from apparent data on a
technical level from which the identification and interpretation proceeds.
Since the domain which this work focuses on is the web, algorithms must be devel-
oped with respect to the technology of the web, which HTML markup is part of. From
the technological perspective of markup a document di can be defined as a set of nodes
Ndi (Equation 4).
di = Ndi = 〈n1, n2, ..., nn〉 (4)
Figure 1 of the appendix depicts an HTML snippet consisting of the representation
of an endnote. The nodes of an HTML document are of different types. According to
markup terminology they may be of any one of seven different types: element nodes,
text nodes, attribute nodes, comment nodes etc. Some of these types are of less interest
here2, and we shall look upon a document as a set of text nodes. The endnote in Figure
1 is realized as 7 text nodes, 6 element nodes and 3 attribute nodes.
Now, each text node nl in the set of text nodes in Ndi of a document di is assumed
to correspond with a part of a text unit tj ∈ Tdi , or being identical to it. Each text node
of Figure 1, for instance, is part of the text unit of type endnote.3 This assumption can
be stated as in Equation 5
tj(gmk) ≡ {n1(gmk), n2(gmk), ..., nn(gmk)} ∨ nl(gmk) (5)
Because of this equivalence, we may substitute the task of text unit classification
with a text node classification. If the task is considered a function that maps a text unit
onto a space of genre modules, we assume the following equivalence as well.
Fn : nl → gmk ≡ Ft : tj → gmk (6)
2.3 Text Unit Sequences as Document Features
The purpose of this decomposition of documents is to find a way to represent a docu-
ment structure used as a feature in the process of genre identification. Actually, we do
not want to operate on text nodes, we only intend to use sequences of classified text
2For instance, the root node is always html, and comment nodes contain text or code that do not often
relate to the linguistic content of the document.
3It may be observed that the element node with its contained text node at line 10 is a navigational com-
modity and could be treated as a particular type of text unit in itself.
7
units as document features. The equivalence assumed in Equation 5 thus requires a
composition from text nodes to text units. A fairly simple algorithm is enough for this.
Taking the ordered set of classified text nodes, 〈n1(gmx), n2(gmy, ..., nn(gmz)〉,
the algorithm maps each sequence of text nodes with the same class assigned, i.e. x =
y, to one and the same text unit. Where there is a transition from one class to another
in the sequence, there is a shift of text unit.
Two problems may occur with respect to an idealized conception of a text unit.
First, two text units of the same type will be collapsed into one, and genre modules
that are naturally contained in other genre modules will split its container into two text
units. Since the resulting structure will be used as a document feature only and this
approximation is consistently applied, this is not treated as a problem.
3 Closing Words
Research on algorithmic genre identification has not reached the maturity that applies
to information retrieval research. There is a lack of common and large text collec-
tions that allow for benchmarking. In addition, different research initiatives focus on
fairly different genre spaces. As a consequence, results in terms of accuracy give noth-
ing more than vague indications on how research efforts best proceed, and there are
no common understandings of what features are the most valuable features for genre
identification.
The work presented here aims to support the area with an attempt to model docu-
ment structures for use as additional features in genre identification.
References
Argamon, S., M. Koppel, & G. Avneri (1998). Routing document according to style. In
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Innovative Internet Information
Systems.
Askehave, I. & J. M. Swales (2001). Genre identification and communicative purpose:
A problem and a possible solution. Applied Linguistics, 22(2):195–212.
Austin, J. L. (1975). How to do things with words: the William James Lectures deliv-
ered at Harvard University in 1955. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2 edition.
Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of genres and the enactment of social intentions. In
A. Freedman & P. Medway (editors), Genre and the New Rhetoric, Critical Perspec-
tives on Literacy and Education, pp. 79–101. Taylor & Francis, London.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
D. Biber & E. Finegan (editors) (1994). Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register. Ox-
ford Studies in Sociolinguistics. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bogdanov, A. D. & M. Worring (2001). Fine-grained document genre classification us-
ing first order random graphs. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Document Analysis and Recognition.
8
Crowston, K. & B. H. Kwasnik (2003). Can document-genre metadata improve infor-
mation access to large digital collections. Library Trends, 52(2):345–361.
Crowston, K. & B. H. Kwasnik (2004). A framework for creating a facetted classifi-
cation for genres: Addressing issues of multidimensionality. In Proceedings of the
37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. IEEE.
Dewdney, N., C. VanEss-Dykema, & R. McMillan (2001). The form is the substance:
Classification of genres in text. In ACL Workshop on Human Language Technology
and Knowledge Management, pp. 142–149.
Elsas, J. & M. Efron (2004). Html tag based metrics for use in web page type
classification.
Ferguson, C. A. (1994). Dialect, register, and genre: Working assumptions about con-
ventionalization. In D. Biber & E. Finegan (editors), Sociolinguistic Perspectives on
Register, pp. 15–30. Oxford University Press.
Finn, A. & N. Kushmerick (2003). Learning to classify documents according to genre.
In IJCAI-03 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthe-
sis.
Folch, H., S. Heiden, B. Habert, G. Illouz, S. Fleury, P. Lafon, J. Nioche, & S. Prévost
(2000). TyPTex: Inductive typological text classification by multivariate statistical
analysis for nlp systems tuning/evaluation. In LREC 2000.
Halliday, M. A. K. & R. Hasan (1989). Language, Context and Text; Aspects of Lan-
guage in a Social-semiotic Perspective. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2 edition.
Halliday, M. A. K. & C. M. I. M. Matthiessen (2004). An Introduction to Functional
Grammar. Arnold, London, 3 edition.
Honkaranta, A. (2003). From genres to content analysis: experiences from four case
organizations. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science and Information Sys-
tems. University of Jyväskylä. Jyväskylä Studies in Computing ; 31.
Hu, J., R. Kashi, & G. T. Wilfong (1999). Document classification using layout analy-
sis. In DEXA Workshop, pp. 556–560.
citeseer.ist.psu.edu/article/hu99document.html
Ihlström, C. & M. Åkesson (2004). Genre characteristics: a front page analysis of 85
swedish online newspapers. In Proceedings of 37’ Hawaii International Conference
on Systems Science. IEEE Press.
Karlgren, J. (2000). Stylistic experiments for information retrieval. PhD thesis, De-
partment of Linguistics. Stockholm Univ.
Kessler, B., G. Nunberg, & H. Schütze (1997). Automatic detection of text genre. In
Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 8th meeting of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pp. 32–38, San Francisco. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Lim, C. S., K. J. Lee, & G. C. Kim (2005). Multiple sets of features for automatic
genre classi?cation of web documents. Information Processing and Management 41
(2005) 1263–1276, 41:1263–1276.
9
Mayes, P. (2003). Language, social structure and culture. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.
Miller, C. R. (1994). Genre as social action. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (edi-
tors), Genre and the New Rhetoric, Critical Perspectives on Literacy and Education,
pp. 23–42. Taylor & Francis, London.
Orlikowski, W. & J. Yates (1994). Genre repertoire: the structuring of communicative
practices in organizations. Administrative science quarterly, 39:541–574.
Power, R. & D. Scott (1999). Using layout for the generation understanding or retrieval
of documents : Papers from the 1999 AAAI fall symposium. Notes.
Rauber, A. & A. Müller-Kögler (2001). Integrating automatic genre analysis into digi-
tal libraries. In JCDL ’01, Roanoke, Virginia, USA. ACM.
Rehm, G. (2002). Towards automatic web genre identification. In Proceedings of
the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’02)-
Volume 4. IEEE Computer Society.
Santini, M. (2005). Genres in formation? an exploratory study of web pages using
cluster analysis. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Colloquium for the UK Special
Interest Group for Computational Linguistics.
Santini, M. (2006). Common criteria for genre classification: Annotation and granu-
larity. In Workshop on Text-Based Information Retrieval (TIR-06), Riva del Garda,
Italy.
Stamatatos, E., N. Fakotakis, & G. Kokkinakis (2000). Text genre detection using
common word frequencies. In Proceedings of the 18th conference on Computational
linguistics - Volume 2, pp. 808–814, Luxembourg.
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis; English in academic and research settings.
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Swanson, W. (2003). Modes of Co-reference as an Indicator of Genre. Linguistic
Insights: Studies in Language and Communication; Vol. 12. Peter Lang, Bern.
Wastholm, P., A. Kusma, & B. Megyesi (2005). Using linguistic data for genre classifi-
cation. In Advances in Artificial Language in Sweden. The Annual Swedish Artificial
Intelligence and Learning Systems Event, SAIS-SSLS, April 2005, pp. 173–176.
Werlich, E. (1976). A Text Grammar of English. Quelle & Meyer, Heidelberg.
Wilson, P. & N. Robinson (1990). Form subdivisions and genre. Library Resources &
Technical Services, 34(1):36–43.
Wolters, M. & M. Kirsten (1999). Exploring the use of linguistic features in domain
and genre classification. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on European chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 142–149. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
10
Appendix
1 <li>
2 <small>
3 <a name="note55">The</a> book in question is Dekius Lack,
4 <i>Biljard klockan noll i cyber-cyber</i>
5 (Lund: Bakhåll, 1998).
6 Alternative endings at:
7 <a href="http://www.novapress.se/cyber">
8 http://www.novapress.se/cyber
9 </a>&nbsp;
10 <a href="#55">Åter till texten</a>
11 </small>
12 </li>
Figure 1: HTML encoding of an endnote
11
