Retrieving and Ranking Scientific Publications from 
Linked Open Data Repositories
Arben Hajra 
South East European University 
(SEEU)  
Bul. Ilindenska 335 
1200 Tetovo, Macedonia 
a.hajra@seeu.edu.mk 
Atif Latif 
Leibniz Information Centre for 
Economics (ZBW) 
Düsternbrooker Weg 120 
24105 Kiel, Germany 
a.latif@zbw.eu 
 
Klaus Tochtermann 
Leibniz Information Centre for 
Economics (ZBW) 
Düsternbrooker Weg 120 
24105 Kiel, Germany 
k.tochtermann@zbw.eu 
 
ABSTRACT 
Content enrichment of publications stored in different cross 
domain Digital Libraries can facilitate the scholarly 
communication in big way. However, current DL still entails 
limitation of interoperability between cross domain repositories. 
This paper emphasizes on this limitation and proposes an 
innovative approach for finding and recommending scientific 
publications which are stored in disparate repositories. At first 
Linked Open Data is considered by exploring existing alignments 
between Econstor and other datasets within the current LOD 
cloud through the STW Thesaurus. Moreover, incorporation of 
other relevant metadata is proposed by implementing a data 
mining approach which improves the semantic relativeness of the 
publications from the recommended list. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information filtering 
H.3.7 [Digital Libraries]: Miscellaneous 
General Terms 
Knowledge Management, Recommender Systems, Algorithms 
Keywords 
Linked open data, semantic web, digital libraries, data mining 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Digital Libraries (DL) represents an important place for 
publishing, discovering and sharing scientific findings. Their 
usages bring a huge avail for the community and for scholars 
especially. However, not always what is required can be found in 
a single location. Publications stored in a repository in most cases 
belong to a particular domain, described or catalogued according 
to predefined metadata. Furthermore, according to Paepcke et al. 
[15], the interoperability among different repositories continues to 
be a challenge for digital libraries. 
As part of this, our goal is to enrich scientific publications stored 
in a specific repository with other related data, such as 
information about authors, correlations with other authors’ 
information about conferences, events, projects etc. However, one 
of the main aims at this stage has to do with finding and extracting 
other publications, from different repositories that may belong to 
entirely different areas. Such interoperability would facilitate the 
scholarly communication by bringing information from many 
repositories. In order to achieve this, the main direction will be to 
leverage the already available contents on the semantic web, such 
as Linked Open Data (LOD) repositories, as one of the most 
promising data sources [10]. The majority of the evaluations take 
place at Econstor1 repository for targeting publications at 
OpenAgris2. 
This paper begins by highlighting the motivation and problem 
statement about the current digital libraries. We continue by 
exploring the research track and proposals, as the main metadata, 
Linked Open Data and Data mining approaches.  The remaining 
parts will focus on the designed prototype, results and the 
evaluation. 
2. MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM 
STATEMENT 
It is an undisputed fact that libraries represent the most important 
place for scholarly communication. However, in most cases the 
user needs to be very lucky to find the “proper” resource with few 
clicks in a relatively short timeframe. Each search provides a large 
list of resources offered from the digital library. Therefore, very 
useful information can be offering a list of recommended papers 
related to the publication initially sought. Current DL systems 
mainly offer such services, however, the recommendations are 
retrieved from the same repository where all publications are. 
Thus, it would be beneficial for readers to be offered publications 
related to the initial one, from different repositories and domains, 
such as social science, agriculture or medicine, which will enrich 
the given result. 
Considering these facts, it can be said that using current DLs, we 
not always get the most relevant, up to date and cross domain 
literature [3] [14]. The static metadata structure of DLs present 
them as monolithic systems, where metadata describe the data 
rather than usages [2] [4]. Based on this, we raise the need to add 
other information about a publication to provide a richer and more 
detailed description. With this goal in mind, we are considering to 
include “everything” that exists around about the publication; 
other publications from other disciplines, authors’ details, co-
authors relations, information about the institute or organization, 
events, etc. 
                                                                
1 http://www.econstor.eu/ 
2 http://aims.fao.org/openagris 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s) 
i-KNOW '14, Sep 16-19 2014, Graz, Austria 
ACM 978-1-4503-2769-5/14/09. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2637748.2638436 
 
Figure 1. Generating and using the set of concepts from the publication metadata for querying other repositories 
The main focus for enriching scientific publications with other 
information, will be constrained to the content available in a 
Semantic Web representation, i.e., Linked Open Data (LOD). The 
publication of a large number of data, such as linked data, 
provides an excellent opportunity to use them in different 
scenarios. Hence, the primary source for this purpose will be the 
LOD cloud where the repositories and thesauri will be 
highlighted, like STW3, Agrovoc4, OpenAgris, TheSoz, DBLP5, 
etc. [1] [6]. The idea is to design a generic framework that would 
include different repositories (taxonomies, thesauri and 
ontologies) for achieving an interoperability.  
3. RESEARCH TRACK AND PROPOSAL 
Analysis of the existing metadata which is used to describe a 
publication in the Econstor repository will be the first step to 
achieve interoperability goal. Each paper stored in Econstor is 
described by a wide range of metadata. Besides the commonly 
included data for title, abstract, and authors, the application of the 
STW thesaurus provides enrichment with a huge set of descriptors 
and concepts with the respective mappings to other datasets [13]. 
Table 1 show the potential metadata set behind a publication in 
Econstor.   
Table 1. The set of all possible metadata behind a publication 
in Econstor 
Title T ={t1
, t
2
, t
3
, …., t
n
} 
Abstract A ={a1
, a
2
, a
3
,…,a
n
} 
Descriptors D ={d1
, d
2
, d
3
, …, d
n
} 
  
Narrower N1
={(n
1, 
d
1)
), (n
2
, d
1
), (n3, d
1
),  ..(n
n
, d
1
)} 
Broader B1
={(b
1, 
d
1)
), (b
2
, d
1
), (b3, d
1
),  ..(b
b
, d
1
)} 
Related R1
={(r
1, 
d
1)
), (r
2
, d
1
), (r3, d
1
), ..(r
r
, d
1
)} 
Mappings 
(Alignments) 
M ={m
1
, m
2
, m
3
, .., m
n
} 
Keywords K ={k1
, k
2
, k
3
, …, k
n
} 
  Synonyms S1
={(s
1, 
k
1)
), (s
2
, k
1
), (s3, k
1
), ..(s
s
, k
1
)} 
 
To get more cross domain alignment for Econstor publication we 
are experimenting with OpenAgris and Agrovoc thesauri which 
                                                                
3 http://zbw.eu/stw/versions/latest/about 
4 http://aims.fao.org/standards/agrovoc/about 
5 http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/ 
are a comprehensive multilingual agriculture thesaurus used for 
indexing the data in OpenAgris [1]. Between Agrovoc and STW 
there already exists 1136 linked concepts with skos:exaxtMatch 
links. By considering the existing alignments between STW and 
other Thesauri/Repositories, a key question here would be to find 
out “How inclusion of additional metadata element i.e. keywords, 
title, etc., along with existing alignment can improve the quality 
of the retrieved results”. According to this, the implementation of 
algorithms for vector space model and text mining (calculating the 
frequency of used term in different documents, similarity between 
them or relevance ranking) will facilitate the process. 
4. PROTOTYPE AND RESULTS 
The approaches mentioned in previous sections are implemented 
and evaluated through a prototype. The prototype has been 
deployed by using EasyRDF6 PHP library and OWLIM-SE7 
Semantic repository through Sesame8. Let us consider a concrete 
example.  For the publication with title: “The long run impact of 
biofuels on food prices”, the prototype creates a set of metadata 
(see Table 1). Among them, all main descriptors dc:subject, are 
listed followed by the ongoing links, skos:exactMatch alignments, 
to other repositories, as Agrovoc, DBPEDIA, GNDB9, and 
GESIS10. In addition, the prototype also creates all the narrowed 
related and broadened concepts. Figure 2 shows detailed view of 
this for a single descriptor: “Investment”.  
From these voluminous set of metadata, a special focus will be 
given to the alignments between repositories. Thus, for the 
publication mentioned above, specific subsets of mapped links are 
generated for each dataset in particular. Hence, in total 13 links 
(concepts) are found, that are mapped between STW and 
Agrovoc.  
By performing a SPARQL query in the OpenAgris repository, 
with each of these URIs (concepts) in particular, a broad list of 
232.154 papers is recommended. In order to deliver more details, 
only the concept “Investment” (see Figure 2) aligned to Agrovoc 
with the URI http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/ c_3930, is used as a 
descriptor in 19.292 papers, where the majority of them are not 
close with our Econstor paper regarding the similarity. Trying to 
include all of them with an “and” between, bring a completely 
                                                                
6 http://www.easyrdf.org/ 
7 http://www.ontotext.com/owlim 
8 http://www.openrdf.org/ 
9 http://www.dnb.de/ 
10 http://www.gesis.org/ 
opposite result. The differences in the set of concepts that are used 
to describe a publication in different repositories result in a null 
returned publication. Almost impossible to be found a paper 
described with the same set of descriptors and concepts, in 
different repositories. 
 
Figure 2. The list of alignments to other dataset together with 
narrowed, broadened and related concepts, about a single 
descriptor for an Econstor paper 
 
Another tentative would be to use the thesaurus of the target 
repository, such as Agrovoc, in a way to narrow or broaden a 
specific concept there. Afterwards a query could be performed on 
OpenAgris. Using the local thesaurus of the target repository can 
be helpful for extending the set of descriptors and concepts, as the 
hierarchical navigation to them, however the raised challenge as 
how many and which of them to consider, still remain.  
In such situation, we will refer to the set of metadata for a better 
solution. Hence, the title, abstract, the list of keywords, and 
synonyms, are promising for gaining a greater precision.  
By considering the above example, we are using specific 
keywords from the title, T={long, run, impact, biofuels, food, 
prices}, such as “biofuel”, “food” and “price”. This approach will 
result in a shorter list of recommended publications from 
OpenAgris, only 80 titles, with an improved precision.  
Thus, the choice, combination and lexical form (plural, singular, 
synonyms) of the metadata can play crucial role for retrieving 
publications, in particular by taking into account the semantic 
relativeness among them. In order to automate this selection, the 
implementation of vector space model algorithms and text mining 
techniques will be applied. The main intention would be to 
calculate the frequency of used terms in different document, 
similarity between publications, or a way to achieve a ranking 
among papers in a recommended list.  
In line with this, as most promising for this phase, we use Cosine 
Similarity (CS) and Term frequency–inverse document frequency 
(TF–IDF) [12]. Hence, a multidimensional array A is created and 
consisted from various terms from the corpus of the publication’s 
metadata (refer to Table 1).  
A = {T U A U … U K}= 
={ (t
1
, t
2
, t
3
, …., t
n
) U (a
1
, a
2
, a
3
,…,a
n
) U... U (k
1
, k
2
, k
3
,…,k
n
)} 
While on the other side, B is an array consisted by the possible 
metadata from each publication at the target repository. In fact, for 
each paper in the target repository, a particular array is built, B1, 
B2, B3, …, Bn. The content of the array B depends from the set 
of metadata offered in the target repository.  
By considering an example, for a randomly chosen title from 
Econstor, like “The impact of tax reform on new car purchases 
in Ireland”, a preliminarily search will be performed based on the 
existing aligned concepts used to describe this paper. So, from 
more than 4 million bibliographic records, by applying the 
alignments we get a list of 85.331 titles. Now each of these 
publications will be measured according to the similarity with the 
terms at the array A.  
Thus, for each term in the corpus of A we are looking in the 
corpus of each B, from B1 to Bn.  The term with the highest 
frequency becomes more relevant and showed in top. 
A = {Ta U Aa U Ka} looking at  
B1 = {T1b U A1b} to Bn = {Tnb U Anb} 
For example, if A is consisted of the Title (T), Abstract (A) and 
Keyword (K), while B only from Title (Tb) and Abstract (Ab), the 
retrieved results are listed as in Figure 3. The column “Similarity” 
gives the overall similarity between A and Bx = {Txb U Axb} while 
“Title” gives the similarity among the tiles of this paper and titles 
found in the target repository, A and B{Txb}. All publications are 
ranked based on the “Similarity”. Following this line of reasoning, 
we have performed several experiments, by applying different 
combination into the array A and B, by giving different weight to 
several of them, as the title, abstract, keywords, and synonyms. 
5. EVALUATION 
Based on the current stage of these analyses, alignments between 
repositories/thesauri are very important for having a preliminary 
search, especially for reformulating a search query from one 
vocabulary to another. The presence of a local thesaurus at the 
target repository can be useful to extend the corpus of concepts 
for narrowing or broadening the list of retrieved resources. 
However, incorporating other metadata with data mining 
approaches improves the list of retrieved publications and offers 
ranking possibilities according to similarity.   
To evaluate these methods, 112 aligned papers from Econstor to 
OpenAgris are manually experimented with help of prototype. In 
most of the cases the top ranked publications, according to the 
similarity are close to the initial paper from Econstor. To obtain a 
more detailed conclusion, we should consider involving either the 
experts of the field or a long term end-users usage.  
On the other side, the different combinations of arrays A and B, 
result in different list of retrieved publications and different 
similarity percentage. The usage of Keywords in most of the cases 
significantly improves the results. This can be according to the 
fact that at Econstor keywords are assigned to each paper 
manually or semi-automatically by the domain experts.  So, their 
use gives a greater reliability to the array A. Otherwise, including 
the set of Synonyms related to the Keywords, in several cases 
impairs the result, due to the fact that some irrelevant terms 
receive a certain weight. Additionally, any external service such 
as WordNet11 would be considered for extending the list of terms. 
All these analyses rise the question which combination works 
best?  
To give an in-depth assessment of our approach, we are going to 
implement the same methodology in just one repository, i.e. 
                                                                
11 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
Econstor. To validate our approach, we make a comparison 
between the results offered by Econstor services and our 
prototype. Every time a search is performed, the top ten 
publications on both sides are approximately the same. Only some 
minor ranking positions might differ by combining different 
subset of metadata for performing the query. In the same manner, 
as [5] [11] indicate, any crowdsourcing and pooling techniques 
can be applied with a smallest subset of papers from different 
repositories. 
Another approach to obtain much reliable results in terms of 
evaluation, we think to follow some of the practices presented by 
Benno Stein in [7] [8] and [9], about the evaluation of several 
successfully applied plagiarism detection algorithms and different 
strategies for keywords searching. 
6. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
A possible content enrichment for publications stored in a DL 
along with the list of recommendations from different areas and 
disciplines would facilitate the scholarly communication. In such 
way, as most promising source we are considering the available 
semantic web content, especially bibliographic data represented as 
Linked Open Data. The existing alignments between a specific 
repository/thesaurus to other repositories are highlighted as 
crucial for data retrieval and query formulation.  
However, the quality of the retrieved publications from the other 
datasets can be improved by applying different data mining 
techniques. Hence, in addition to the aligned concept we are also 
considering all possible metadata behind a paper such as title, 
abstract, keywords, descriptors, synonyms, etc. Accordingly, the 
algorithms for vector space model and text mining as TF-IDF in 
combination with Cosine Similarity (CS) are applied in several 
scenarios. A ranking among the retrieved publications is achieved 
as a result of this approach.     
The results described in this paper are satisfactory, aside from the 
fact that we are facing a complex task for a detailed and precise 
evaluation, if the retrieved results are really the best 
recommendation. This remains an issue, depending on the right 
combination of the different metadata for query formulation.   
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks go to German National Library of Economics - 
Leibniz Information Centre for Economics (ZBW) for the proved 
support and the offered services, repositories and thesauri. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Anibaldi, S., Jaques, Y., Celli, F., Stellato, A., and Keizer, J. 
2013. Migrating bibliographic datasets to the Semantic Web: 
The AGRIS case. SWJ, IOS Press. 
[2] Borgman, C. L. 1999. What are digital libraries? Competing 
visions. Inf. Process. Manage. Vol. 35, 3, p.227-243. 
[3] Borgman, L. C. 2013. Digital Scholarship and Digital 
Libraries: Past, Present, and Future. In 17th Inter. Conference 
on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries. Valletta, Malta.  
[4] Buchanan, G. and Hinze, A. 2009. Semantic alerting for 
digital libraries. JCDL '09, p. 363. 
[5] Büttcher, S., Clarke, Ch., Yeung, P. and Soboroff, I. 2007. 
Reliable information retrieval evaluation with incomplete 
and biased judgements. SIGIR '07, ACM, p.63-70.  
[6] De Vocht, L., Softic, S., Mannens, E., Ebner, M. and Walle, 
R. V. 2014. Aligning web collaboration tools with research 
data for scholars. WWW Companion '14, Geneva. 
[7] Gollub, T., Hagen, M., Michel, M. and Stein, B. 2013. From 
Keywords to Keyqueries: Content Descriptors for the Web. 
SIGIR '13, p.981-984. 
[8] Gollub, T., Potthast, M., Beyer, A., Busse, M., Rangel, F., 
Rosso, P., Stamatatos, E. and Stein, B. 2013. Recent Trends 
in Digital Text Forensics and its Evaluation. CLEF '13, 
Springer 
[9] Hagen, M. and Stein, B. 2010. Search Strategies for 
Keyword-based Queries. TIR '10, IEEE, p. 37-41. 
[10] Heath, T. and Bizer, C. 2011. Linked Data: Evolving the 
Web into a Global Data Space. Synthesis Lectures on the 
Semantic Web 
[11] Kazai, G., Kamps, J., Koolen, M. and Milic-Frayling, N. 
2011. Crowdsourcing for book search evaluation: impact of 
hit design on comparative system ranking. SIGIR '11. ACM, 
p.205-214. 
[12] Moerland, M., Hogenboom, F., Capelle, M. and Frasincar, F. 
2013. Semantics-based news recommendation with SF-IDF+. 
WIMS '13. ACM, Article 22. 
[13] Neubert, J. 2012 Linked Data Based Library Web Services 
for Economics, Dublin Core and Metadata Applications 
2012, p.12-22. 
[14] Ojha, R. C. and Aryal, S. 2009.  Digital libraries : Challenges 
and Opportunities. In Infolib, Vol.3. Nr.3, p. 3–10. 
[15] Paepcke, A., Cousins, B. S., Garcia-Molina, H., Hassan, W. 
S., Ketchpel, P., S., Röscheisen, M., and Winograd, T. 2014. 
Towards Interoperability in Digital Libraries.Stanford 
University
 
Figure 3. The retrieved list of recommendations from OpenAgris based on a particular Econstor paper 
 
