C.C. Yang et al. (Eds.): PAISI 2007, LNCS 4430, pp. 1 – 20, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 
Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web:  
The Dark Web Project 
Hsinchun Chen 
McClelland Professor of Management Information Systems 
Director, Artificial Intelligence Lab 
Director, NSF COPLINK Center 
Management Information Systems Department 
Eller College of Management, University of Arizona, USA 
Abstract. In this paper we discuss technical issues regarding intelligence and 
security informatics (ISI) research to accomplish the critical missions of 
international security and counter-terrorism. We propose a research framework 
addressing the technical challenges facing counter-terrorism and crime-fighting 
applications with a primary focus on the knowledge discovery from databases 
(KDD) perspective. We also present several Dark Web related case studies for 
open-source terrorism information collection, analysis, and visualization. Using 
a web spidering approach, we have developed a large-scale, longitudinal 
collection of extremist-generated Internet-based multimedia and multilingual 
contents. We have also developed selected computational link analysis, content 
analysis, and authorship analysis techniques to analyze the Dark Web 
collection.  
Keywords: intelligence and security informatics, terrorism informatics, dark web. 
1   Introduction 
The tragic events of September 11 and the following anthrax contamination of letters 
caused drastic effects on many aspects of society. Terrorism has become the most 
significant threat to national security because of its potential to bring massive damage 
to our infrastructure, economy, and people. In response to this challenge federal 
authorities are actively implementing comprehensive strategies and measures in order 
to achieve the three objectives identified in the “National Strategy for Homeland 
Security” report (Office of Homeland Security, 2002): (1) preventing future terrorist 
attacks, (2) reducing the nation’s vulnerability, and (3) minimizing the damage and 
recovering from attacks that occur. State and local law enforcement agencies, 
likewise, become more vigilant about criminal activities, which can harm public 
safety and threaten national security.  
Academics in the field of natural sciences, computational science, information 
science, social sciences, engineering, medicine, and many others have also been 
called upon to help enhance the government’s abilities to fight terrorism and other 
crimes. Science and technology have been identified in the “National Strategy for 
Homeland Security” report as the keys to win the new counter-terrorism war (Office 
2 H. Chen 
of Homeland Security, 2002). Especially, it is believed that information technology 
will play an indispensable role in making our nation safer (National Research 
Council, 2002), by supporting intelligence and knowledge discovery through 
collecting, processing, analyzing, and utilizing terrorism- and crime-related data 
(Chen et al., 2003a; Chen et al., 2004b). Based on the crime and intelligence 
knowledge discovered, the federal, state, and local authorities can make timely 
decisions to select effective strategies and tactics as well as allocate the appropriate 
amount of resources to detect, prevent, and respond to future attacks.  
2   Problems and Challenges 
Currently, intelligence and security agencies are gathering large amounts of data from 
various sources. Processing and analyzing such data, however, have become 
increasingly difficult. By treating terrorism as a form of organized crime we can 
categorize these challenges into three types: 
• Characteristics of criminals and crimes. Some crimes may be geographically 
diffused and temporally dispersed. In organized crimes such as transnational 
narcotics trafficking criminals often live in different countries, states, and cities. 
Drug distribution and sales occur in different places at different times. Similar 
situations exist in other organized crimes (e.g., terrorism, armed robbery, and 
gang-related crime). As a result, the investigation must cover multiple offenders 
who commit criminal activities in different places at different times. This can be 
fairly difficult given the limited resources intelligence and security agencies 
have. Moreover, as computer and Internet technologies advance, criminals are 
utilizing cyberspace to commit various types of cyber-crimes under the disguise 
of ordinary online transactions and communications. 
• Characteristics of crime and intelligence related data. A significant source of 
challenge is information stovepipe and overload resulting from diverse data 
sources, multiple data formats, and large data volumes. Unlike other domains 
such as marketing, finance, and medicine in which data can be collected from 
particular sources (e.g., sales records from companies, patient medical history 
from hospitals), the intelligence and security domain does not have a well-
defined data source. Both authoritative information (e.g., crime incident reports, 
telephone records, financial statements, immigration and custom records) and 
open source information (e.g., news stories, journal articles, books, web pages) 
need to be gathered for investigative purposes. Data collected from these 
different sources often are in different formats ranging from structured database 
records to unstructured text, image, audio, and video files. Important 
information such as criminal associations may be available but contained in 
unstructured, multilingual texts and remains difficult to access and retrieve. 
Moreover, as data volumes continue to grow extracting valuable and credible 
intelligence and knowledge becomes a difficult problem. 
• Characteristics of crime and intelligence analysis techniques. Current research 
on the technologies for counter-terrorism and crime-fighting applications lacks 
a consistent framework addressing the major challenges. Some information 
technologies including data integration, data analysis, text mining, image and 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 3 
video processing, and evidence combination have been identified as being 
particularly helpful (National Research Council, 2002). However, the question 
of how to employ them in the intelligence and security domain and use them to 
effectively address the critical mission areas of national security remains 
unanswered. 
Facing the critical missions of national security and various data and technical 
challenges we believe there is a pressing need to develop the science of “Intelligence 
and Security Informatics” (ISI) (Chen et al., 2003a; Chen et al., 2004b), with its main 
objective being the “development of advanced information technologies, systems, 
algorithms, and databases for national security related applications, through an 
integrated technological, organizational, and policy-based approach” (Chen et al., 
2003a).  
3   An ISI Research Framework: Techniques and Caveats 
We believe that KDD techniques can play a central role in improving counter-
terrorism and crime-fighting capabilities of intelligence, security, and law 
enforcement agencies by reducing the cognitive and information overload. 
Knowledge discovery refers to non-trivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown, 
and potentially useful knowledge from data. Knowledge discovery techniques 
promise easy, convenient, and practical exploration of very large collections of data 
for organizations and users, and have been applied in marketing, finance, 
manufacturing, biology, and many other domains (e.g., predicting consumer 
behaviors, detecting credit card frauds, or clustering genes that have similar biological 
functions) (Fayyad & Uthurusamy, 2002). Traditional knowledge discovery 
techniques include association rules mining, classification and prediction, cluster 
analysis, and outlier analysis (Han & Kamber, 2001). As natural language processing 
(NLP) research advances text mining approaches that automatically extract, 
summarize, categorize, and translate text documents have also been widely used 
(Chen, 2001) (Trybula, 1999).  
Many of these KDD technologies could be applied in ISI studies (Chen et al., 
2003a; Chen et al., 2004b). With the special characteristics of crimes, criminals, and 
crime-related data we categorize existing ISI technologies into six classes: 
information sharing and collaboration, crime association mining, crime classification 
and clustering, intelligence text mining, spatial and temporal crime mining, and 
criminal network mining. These six classes are grounded on traditional knowledge 
discovery technologies, but with a few new approaches added, including spatial and 
temporal crime pattern mining and criminal network analysis, which are more 
relevant to counter-terrorism and crime investigation. Although information sharing 
and collaboration are not data mining per se, they help prepare, normalize, 
warehouse, and integrate data for knowledge discovery and thus are included in the 
framework.  
We present in Figure 1 our proposed research framework with the horizontal axis 
being the crimes types and vertical axis being the six classes of techniques (Chen et 
al., 2004a). The shaded regions on the chart show promising research areas, i.e., a 
certain class of techniques is relevant to solving a certain type of crime. Note that 
4 H. Chen 
more serious crimes may require a more complete set of knowledge discovery 
techniques. For example, the investigation of organized crimes such as terrorism may 
depend on criminal network analysis technology, which requires the use of other 
knowledge discovery techniques such as association mining and clustering. An 
important observation about this framework is that the high-frequency occurrences 
and strong association patterns of severe and organized crimes such as terrorism and 
narcotics present a unique opportunity and potentially high rewards for adopting such 
a knowledge discovery framework. 
Several unique classes of data mining techniques are of great relevance to ISI 
research. Text mining is critical for extracting key entities (people, places, narcotics, 
weapons, time, etc.) and their relationships presented in voluminous police incident 
reports, intelligence reports, open source news clips, etc. Some of these techniques 
need to be multilingual in nature, including the abilities for machine translation and 
cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR). Spatial and temporal mining and 
visualization is often needed for geographic information systems (GIS) and temporal 
analysis of criminal and terrorist events. Most crime analysts are well trained in GIS-
based crime mapping tools; however, automated spatial and temporal pattern mining 
techniques (e.g., hotspot analysis) have not been adopted widely in intelligence and 
security applications. Organized criminals (e.g., gangs and narcotics) and terrorists 
often form inter-connected covert networks for their illegal activities. Often referred 
to as “dark networks,” these organizations exhibit unique structures, communication 
channels, and resilience to attack and disruption. New computational techniques 
including social network analysis, network learning, and network topological analysis 
(e.g., random network, small-world network, and scale-free network) are needed for 
the systematic study of those complex and covert networks. We broadly consider 
these techniques under criminal network analysis in Figure 1. 
 
Fig. 1. A knowledge discovery research framework for ISI 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 5 
Before we review in detail relevant ISI related dada mining techniques, 
applications, and literature in the next section we wish to briefly discuss the legal and 
ethical caveats regarding crime and intelligence research.  
The potential negative effects of intelligence gathering and analysis on the privacy 
and civil liberties of the public have been well publicized (Cook & Cook, 2003). 
There exist many laws, regulations, and agreements governing data collection, 
confidentiality, and reporting, which could directly impact the development and 
application of ISI technologies. We strongly recommend that intelligence and security 
agencies and ISI researchers be aware of these laws and regulations in research. 
Moreover, we also suggest that a hypothesis-guided, evidence-based approach be 
used in crime and intelligence analysis research. That is, there should be probable and 
reasonable causes and evidence for targeting at particular individuals or data sets for 
analysis. Proper investigative and legal procedures need to be strictly followed. It is 
neither ethical nor legal to “fish” for potential criminals from diverse and mixed 
crime, intelligence, and citizen related data sources. The well-publicized Defense 
Advanced Research Program Agency (DARPA) Total Information Awareness (TIA) 
program and the Multi-State Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange (MATRIX) 
system, for example, have recently been shut down by the U.S. Congress due to their 
potential misuse of citizen data; resulting in impairment of civil liberties (American 
Civil Liberties Union, 2004).  
In an important recent review article by Strickland, Baldwin, and Justsen 
(Strickland et al., 2005), the authors provide an excellent historical account of 
government surveillance in the United States. The article presents new surveillance 
initiatives in the age of terrorism (including the passage of the U.S.A. Patriot Act), 
discusses in great depth the impact of technology on surveillance and citizen rights, 
and proposes balancing between needed secrecy and oversight. We believe this is one 
of the most comprehensive articles addressing civil liberties issues in the context of 
national security research. We summarize some of the key points made in the article 
in the context of our proposed ISI research. Readers are strongly encouraged to refer 
to (Strickland et al., 2005) for more details. 
Framed in the context of domestic security surveillance, the paper considers 
surveillance as an important intelligence tool that has the potential to contribute 
significantly to national security but also to infringe civil liberties. As faculty of the 
University of Maryland Information Science department, the authors believe that 
information science and technology has drastically expanded the mechanisms by 
which data can be collected, knowledge extracted, and disseminated through some 
automated means. 
An immediate result of the tragic events of September 11, 2001 was the 
extraordinarily rapid passage of the U.S.A. Patriot Act in late 2001. The legislation 
was passed by the Senate on October 11, 2001 and by the House on October 24, 2001; 
and signed by the President on October 26, 2001.  But the continuing legacy of the 
then-existing consensus and the lack of detailed debate and considerations has created 
a bitter ongoing national argument as to the proper balance between national security 
and civil liberties. The Act contains ten titles in 131 pages. It amends numerous laws, 
including, for example, expansion of electronic surveillance of communications in 
law enforcement cases; authorizing sharing of law enforcement data with intelligence; 
6 H. Chen 
expansion of the acquisition of electronic communications as well as commercial 
records for intelligence use; and creation of new terrorism-related crimes. 
However, as new data mining and/or knowledge discovery techniques became 
mature and potential useful for national security applications, there are great concerns 
of violating civil liberties. Both the DARPA’s TIA Program and the Transportation 
Security Administration’s (TSA) Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening Systems 
(CAPPS II) were cited as failed systems that faced significant media scrutiny and 
public opposition. Both systems were based on extensive data mining of commercial 
and government databases collected for one purpose and to be shared and used for 
another purpose; and both systems were sidetracked by a widely perceived threat to 
personal privacy. Based on much of the debates generated, the authors suggest that 
data mining using public or private sector databases for national security purposes 
must proceed in two stages – first, the search for general information must ensure 
anonymity; second, the acquisition of specific identity, if required, must by court 
authorized under appropriate standards (e.g., in terms of “special needs” or “probable 
causes”).  
In their concluding remarks, the authors cautioned that secrecy in any 
organizations could pose a real risk or abuse and must be constrained through 
effective checks and balances. Moreover, information science and technology 
professionals are ideally situated to provide the tools and techniques by which the 
necessary intelligence is collected, analyzed, and disseminated; and civil liberties are 
protected through established laws and policies. 
4   University of Arizona Artificial Intelligence Lab Research 
In response to the challenges of national security, the Artificial Intelligence Lab and 
its affiliated NSF (National Science Foundation) COPLINK Center for law 
enforcement and intelligence research at the University of Arizona has developed 
many research projects over the past decade to address the six critical mission areas 
identified in “National Strategy for Homeland Security” report (Office of Homeland 
Security, 2002): intelligence and warning, border and transportation security, 
domestic counter-terrorism, protecting critical infrastructure and key assets, 
defending against catastrophic terrorism, and emergency preparedness and 
responses. The main goal of the Arizona lab/center is to develop information and 
knowledge management technologies appropriate for capturing, accessing, analyzing, 
visualizing, and sharing law enforcement and intelligence related information (Chen 
et al., 2003c).  
In this paper we present four case studies of relevance to intelligence and warning 
based on our Dark Web research. In Case Studies 1 and 2, we report the Dark Web 
Portal project, which collects open source terrorism web site information based on 
select spidering and portal techniques. A (limited access) web portal has been 
developed to support retrieval and analysis of these extremist-generated contents. 
Case Study 3 reports how US domestic extremist groups used the web to disseminate 
their ideology, recruit members, and support communications.  Case Study 4 reports a 
novel Arabic language model for authorship identification of Dark Web online 
forums. 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 7 
Case Study 1: The Dark Web Portal 
Because the Internet has become a global platform for anyone to disseminate and 
communicate information terrorists also take advantage of the freedom of cyberspace 
and construct their own web sites to propagate terrorism beliefs, share information, 
and recruit new members. Web sites of terrorist organizations may also connect to 
one another through hyperlinks, forming a “dark web.” We are building an intelligent 
web portal, called Dark Web Portal, to help terrorism researchers collect, access, 
analyze, and understand terrorist groups (Chen et al., 2004c; Reid et al., 2004). This 
project consists of three major components: Dark Web testbed building, Dark Web 
link analysis, and Dark Web Portal building. 
• Dark Web Testbed Building: 
Relying on reliable governmental sources such as the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 
FBI, and United States Committee for a Free Lebanon (USCFL), we identified 224 
U.S.A. domestic terrorist groups and 440 international terrorist groups. For U.S.A. 
domestic groups, group-generated URLs can be found in FBI reports and Google 
Directory. For international groups, we used the group names as queries to search 
major search engines such as Google and manually identified the group-created URLs 
from the result lists. To ensure that our testbed covered major regions in the world, we 
sought the assistance of language and domain experts in English, Arabic, and Spanish 
to help us collect URLs in several major regions. All URLs collected were manually 
checked by experts to make sure that they were created by terrorist groups. After the 
URL of a group was identified, we used the SpidersRUs toolkit, a multilingual digital 
library building tool developed by our lab, to collect all the web pages under that URL 
and store them in our testbed. Table 1 shows a summary of web pages collected from 
three rounds of spidering (performed bi-monthly).  
Table 1. Summary of URLs identified and web pages collected in the Dark Web collection 
Region U.S.A. Domestic Latin-America Middle-East 
Batch # 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd
Total 81 233 108 37 83 68 69 128 135 
From 
literature
& reports 
63 113 58 0 0 0 23 31 37 
From 
search 
engines 
0 0 0 37 48 41 46 66 66 
# of 
seed 
URLs 
From link 
extraction 
18 120 50 0 32 27 0 31 32 
# of terrorist groups 
searched 
74 219 71 7 10 10 34 36 36 
Total 125,61
0
396,10
5
746,29
7
106,45
9
332,13
4
394,31
5
322,52
4
222,68
7
1,004,
785
# of 
Web
pages Multimedia 
files 
0 70,832 223,31
9
0 44,671 83,907 0 35,164 83,90
7  
• Dark Web Link Analysis and Visualization: 
Terrorist groups are not atomized individuals but actors linked to each other through 
complex networks of direct or mediated exchanges. Identifying how relationships 
8 H. Chen 
between groups are formed and dissolved in the terrorist group network would enable 
us to decipher the social milieu and communication channels among terrorist groups 
across different jurisdictions. Previous studies have shown that the link structure of 
the web represents a considerable amount of latent human annotation (Gibson et al., 
1998). Thus, by analyzing and visualizing hyperlink structures between terrorist-
generated web sites and their content, we could discover the structure and 
organization of terrorist group networks, capture network dynamics, and understand 
their emerging activities.  
• Dark Web Portal Building:  
Using the Dark Web Portal, users are able to quickly locate specific dark web 
information in the testbed through keyword search. To address the information 
overload problem, the Dark Web Portal is designed with post-retrieval components. A 
modified version of a text summarizer called TXTRACTOR, which uses sentence-
selection heuristics to rank and select important text segments (McDonald & Chen, 
2002), is added into the Dark Web Portal. The summarizer can flexibly summarize 
web pages using three or five sentence(s) such that users can quickly get the main 
idea of a web page without having to read though it. A categorizer organizes the 
search results into various folders labeled by the key phrases extracted by the Arizona 
Noun Phraser (AZNP) (Tolle & Chen, 2000) from the page summaries or titles, 
thereby facilitating the understanding of different groups of web pages. A visualizer 
clusters web pages into colored regions using the Kohonen self-organizing map 
(SOM) algorithm (Kohonen, 1995), thus reducing the information overload problem 
when a large number of search results are obtained. Post-retrieval analysis could help 
reduce the information overload problem. However, without addressing the language 
barrier problem, researchers are limited to the data in their native languages and 
cannot fully utilize the multilingual information in our testbed. To address this 
problem, we added a cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR) component into the 
portal. Based on our previous research, we have developed a dictionary-based CLIR 
system for use in the Dark Web Portal. It currently accepts English queries and 
retrieves documents in English, Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic. Another component 
that will be added to the Dark Web Portal is a machine translation (MT) component, 
which will translate the multilingual information retrieved by the CLIR component 
back into the users’ native languages. 
We show a sample search session in the figures below. Suppose the user is 
interested in the terrorist group “Ku Klux Klan” and uses it as a search term. Two 
types of search forms are available: simple search and advanced search (see Figure 2). 
Our user chose to use simple search at first. The advanced mode gives users more 
options to refine their search. For example, he can specify that he wants web pages 
with the exact phrase. In addition, he can restrict the results within a few terrorist 
categories, or choose to search a particular file type, such as PDF or Word files.  
By hitting the “Find Results” button, the top 20 results are displayed (see Figure 3). 
On the top of the result page it shows a list of “suggested keywords,” such as “Aryan 
Nations” and “David Duke,” which help the user to expand or refine his query. Along 
with the web page result display, our portal also presents the terrorist group name and 
the corresponding group category. As terrorist group web pages may often disappear,  
 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 9 
a. US Domestic (English) 
Simple Search Interface  
b. US Domestic (English) 
Advanced Search Interface  
 
Fig. 2. Dark Web Portal interfaces: simple search and advanced search 
“Cached Pages” for each web page collected at different time periods are provided 
(e.g., 2004/03). Additionally, the user can view web pages, PDF files, or Word files 
by clicking the corresponding links.  
As terrorist groups continue to use the Internet as their communication, recruiting, 
and propaganda tool, a systematic and system-aided approach to studying their 
presence on the web is critically needed. 
Case Study 2: Jihad on the Web 
With weekly news coverage of excerpts from videos produced and webcasted by 
terrorists, it has become clear that terrorists have further exploited the Internet beyond 
routine communication and propaganda operations to better influence the outside 
world (Arquilla & Rondeldt, 1996).  Some terrorism researchers posited that terrorists 
have used the Internet as a broadcast platform for the “terrorist news network,” which 
is an effective tactic because they can reach a broad audience with relatively little 
chance of detection (Elison, 2000; Tsfati & Weimann, 2002; Weinmann, 2004). 
Although this alternate side of the Internet, referred to as the “Dark Web” has recently 
received extensive government and media attention, systematic understanding of how 
terrorists use the Internet for their campaign of terror is very limited.   
10 H. Chen 
Switch between 
document types  
Returned Results
Group name 
and category 
Summarizer
Cached Page
Suggested keywords
 
Fig. 3. Dark Web Portal interfaces: returned results 
In this study, we explore an integrated computer-based approach to harvesting and 
analyzing web sites produced or maintained by Islamic Jihad extremist groups or their 
sympathizers to deepen our understanding of how Jihad terrorists use the Internet, 
especially the World Wide Web, in their terror campaigns. More specifically, we built 
a high-quality Jihad terrorism web collection using a web harvesting approach and 
conducted hyperlink analysis on this collection to reveal various facets of Jihad 
terrorism web usage. We hope to supplement existing high-quality but manual-driven 
terrorism research with a systematic, automated web spidering and mining 
methodology.  
• Building the Jihad Web Collection:  
To guarantee that our collection is comprehensive and representative, we take a three-
step systematic approach to construct our collection: 
1) Identifying seed URLs and backlink expansion: The first task is to find a small 
set of high-quality Jihad web sites. To identify terrorist groups, we completely relied 
on the U.S. Department of State’s list of foreign terrorist organizations. In particular, 
we only selected Middle-Eastern organizations from that list for this study. After 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 11 
identifying the terrorist groups in the Middle-East region, we manually searched 
major search engines to find web sites of these groups. Our goal here was not to 
construct a comprehensive list of URLs but merely to compile a small list of high-
quality URLs that can serve as the seeds for backlink expansion. The backlinks of 
these URLs were automatically identified through Google and Yahoo backline search 
services and a collection of 88 web sites was automatically retrieved. 
2) Manual collection filtering: Because bogus or unrelated terrorist sites can make 
their way into our collection, we developed a manual filtering process based on 
evidence and clues in the web sites. Aside from sites which explicitly identify 
themselves as the official sites of a terrorist organization or one of its members, a web 
site that contains praise of or adopts ideologies espoused by a terrorist group is 
included in our collection.  
3) Extending search: To ensure the comprehensiveness of our collection we 
augment the collection by means of expanded searches. Based on the 26 web sites 
identified in the previous step, we constructed a small lexicon of commonly-used 
Jihad terms with the help of Arabic language speakers. Examples of highly relevant 
keywords included in the lexicon are: “حرب صليبية” (“Crusader’s War”), “المجاهدين” 
(“Moujahedin”), “الكفار” (“Infidels”), etc. This lexicon is utilized to perform expanded 
searches. The same rules used in the filtering process are used here to discern fake 
and unrelated web sites. As a result, our final Jihad web collection contains 109,477 
Jihad web documents including HTML pages, plain text files, PDF documents, and 
Microsoft Word documents. 
• Hyperlink Analysis on the Jihad Web Collection: 
We believe the exploration of hidden Jihad web communities can give insight into the 
nature of real-world relationships and communication channels between terrorist 
groups themselves (Weimann, 2004). Uncovering hidden web communities involves 
calculating a similarity measure between all pairs of web sites in our collection. We 
define similarity as a function of the number of hyperlinks in web site “A” that point 
to web site “B,” and vice versa. In addition, a hyperlink is weighted proportionally to 
how deep it appears in the web site hierarchy. The similarity matrix is then used as 
input to a Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) algorithm (Torgerson, 1952), which 
generates a two dimensional graph of the web sites.  The proximity of nodes in the 
graph reflects their similarity level.  
As shown in Figure 4, domain experts recognized six clusters representing 
hyperlinked communities in the network. On the left side of the network resides the 
Hizbollah cluster. Hizbollah is a Lebanese militant organization. Established in 1982 
during the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the group routinely attacked Israeli military 
personnel until their pullout from south Lebanon in 2000. A cluster of web sites of 
Palestinian organizations occupies the bottom-left corner of the network, including: 
Hamas, Al-Aqsa Martyr’s Brigades, and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.  An interesting 
observation here is the close link between the Hizbollah community and the 
Palestinian militant groups’ community. Hizbollah has traditionally sympathized with 
the Palestinian cause.  
On the top-left corner sits the Hizb-ut-Tahrir cluster. Hizb-ut-Tahrir is a political 
party with branches in many countries over the Middle-East and in Europe. Although 
the group is believed to be associated with Al-Qaeda, an apparent relation between  
 
12 H. Chen 
                 
Jihad 
sympathizer
Palestinian 
terrorist groups 
Al-Qaeda 
linked sites 
Hizbollah
Tanzeem-e-Islami
Hizb-ut-Tahrir
 
Fig. 4. The Jihad terrorism web site network visualized based on hyperlinks 
the two groups has not been proven. Looking at the bottom-right corner one can see a 
cluster of Al-Qaeda affiliated sites. This cluster has links to two radical Palestinian 
web sites. Al-Qaeda sympathizes with Palestinian groups and some Palestinian 
Islamist groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad share the same Salafi ideology with Al-
Qaeda. In the top-right corner, the Jihad Sympathizers web community includes web 
sites maintained by sympathizers of the Global Salafi movement. For example, 
“kavkazcenter.net” and “clearguidance.com” are two web sites maintained by 
sympathizers of the Chechen rebels. As expected the sympathizers community does 
not have any links to Hezbollah’s community as they follow radically different 
ideologies. 
Visualizing hyperlinked communities can lead to a better understanding of the 
Jihad web presence. Furthermore, it helps foretell likely relationships between 
terrorist groups. 
Case Study 3: US Domestic Extremist Groups on the Web 
Although not as well-known as some of the international terrorist organizations, the 
extremist and hate groups within the United States also pose a significant threat to our 
national security. Recently, these groups have been intensively utilizing the Internet to 
advance their causes. Thus, to understand how the domestic extremist and hate groups 
develop their web presence is very important in addressing the domestic terrorism 
threats. This study proposes the development of systematic methodologies to capture 
domestic extremist and hate groups’ web site data and support subsequent analyses. In 
this study, we aim to answer the following research questions: What are the most 
appropriate techniques for collecting high-quality web pages of domestic extremist 
and hate groups? What are the systematic procedures for analyzing and visualizing 
the content of individual these web sites? 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 13 
We propose a sequence of semi-automated methods to study domestic extremist 
and hate group content on the web. First, we employ a semi-automatic procedure to 
harvest and construct a high quality domestic terrorist web site collection. We then 
perform hyperlink analysis based on a clustering algorithm to reveal the relationships 
between these groups. Lastly, we conduct an attribute-based content analysis to 
determine how these groups use the web for their purposes. Because the procedure 
adopted in this study is similar to that reported in Case Study 3, Jihad on the Web, we 
only summarize selected interesting results below. 
• Collection Building: 
We manually extracted a set of URLs from relevant literature. In particular, the web 
sites of the “Southern Poverty Law Center” (SPLC, www.splcenter.org), and the Anti-
Defamation League (ADL, www.adl.org) are authoritative sources for domestic 
extremists and hate groups. A total of 266 seed URLs were identified in SPLC and the 
ADL web sites as well as in the “Google directory”. A backlink expansion of this initial 
set was performed and the count increased to 386 URLs. The resulting set of URLs is 
validated through an expert filtering process. A total of 97 URLs were deemed relevant. 
We then spidered and downloaded all the web documents within the identified web 
sites. As a result, our final collection contains about 400,000 documents. 
• Hyperlink Analysis: 
Using the MDS algorithm (Torgerson, 1952), we visualize the hidden hyperlinked 
communities among 44 web sites randomly retrieved from our collection. Three 
communities are identified in the network shown in Figure 5. The left side of the 
network shows the “Southern Separatists” cluster, which mainly consists of the web 
sites of new confederate organizations in the Southern states. They espouse a 
separatist ideology, promoting the establishment of an independent state in the south. 
In addition, they share elements of white-supremacy ideas with other non-neo-
confederate racist organizations such as the KKK.  A cluster of web sites of white 
supremacists occupies the top-right corner of the network, including: Stormfront, 
White Aryan Resistance (www.resist.com), etc.  Neo-nazis groups occupy the bottom 
portion of Figure 5. 
• Content Analysis: 
We asked our domain experts to review each web site in our collection and record the 
presence of low-level attributes based on an eight-attribute coding scheme: Sharing 
Ideology, Propaganda (Insiders), Recruitment and Training, Command and Control, 
Virtual Community, Propaganda (Outsiders), Fundraising, and Communications. For 
instance, the web page of “Nation of Islam” contains recordings of the organization’s 
leaders (for their followers). The presence of these recordings contributes to the web 
site’s content richness and is coded under the “Propaganda (Insiders)” attribute. Our 
web coding scheme is similar in nature to the one developed by Demchak et al. 
(2000) for coding government web site characteristics. 
The manual coding of the attributes in a web site takes about 45 minutes. After 
completing coding for the web sites in our collection, we compared the content of 
each of the six domestic extremist and hate groups as shown in Figure 6. “Sharing 
Ideology” is the attribute with the highest frequency of occurrence in these web sites. 
It encapsulates all communication media devoted to portraying the goals of the  
 
14 H. Chen 
 
Fig. 5. Web community visualization of selected domestic extremist and hate groups 
terrorist group, defining its general policies, and presenting the foundational ideology. 
In addition, “Propaganda (Insiders)” and “Recruitment and Training” are widely used 
by all groups on their web sites. 
Another interesting observation is the low presence of “Propaganda (Outsiders),” 
with the exception of Eco-terrorism/Animal Rights groups, which are considered to 
have a much wider audience than the racist groups, who have a more targeted 
audience. Much research is still needed for the systematic understanding of how 
domestic extremist and hate groups use the web to promote their causes. 
Figure 7-4. Content analysis of web sites of domestic extremist and hate groups. 
Figure 7-4. Content analysis of web sites of domestic extremist and hate groups 
Content Across Various Terrorist Organizations 
Web Communities
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Bl
ac
k 
Se
pa
ra
tis
ts
Ch
ris
tia
n 
Id
en
tit
y
M
ilit
ia
Ne
o-
co
nf
ed
er
at
es
Ne
o-
na
zis
Ec
o-
Te
rro
ris
m
Terrorist Organizations Web 
Communities
S
ca
le
d
 C
o
n
te
n
t 
L
ev
el
Communications
Fundraising
Ideology
Propaganda
(insiders)
Propaganda
(outsiders)
Virtual Community
Command and
Control
Recruitment and
Training
 
Fig. 6. Content coding for various terrorist organizations web communities 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 15 
Case Study 4: Developing an Arabic Authorship Model for Dark Web Forums 
The evolution of the Internet as a major international communication medium has 
spawned the advent of a multilingual dimension.  Application of authorship 
identification techniques across multilingual web content is important due to 
increased globalization and the ensuing security issues that are created. 
Arabic is one of the six official languages of the United Nations and the mother 
tongue of over 300 million people.  The language is gaining interest due to its socio-
political importance and differences from Indo-European languages.  The 
morphological challenges pertaining to Arabic pose several critical problems for 
authorship identification techniques. These problems could be partially responsible 
for the lack of previous authorship analysis studies relating to Arabic.   
In this study we apply an existing framework for authorship identification to 
Arabic web forum messages.  Techniques and features are incorporated to address the 
specific characteristics of Arabic, resulting in the creation of an Arabic language 
model. We also present a comparison of English and Arabic language models. 
Most previous authorship studies have only focused on English, with a few studies 
done on Greek and Chinese.  Stamamatos et al. applied authorship identification to a 
corpus of Greek newspaper articles (Stamamtos et al., 2001).  Peng et al. conducted 
experiments on English documents, Chinese novels, and Greek newspapers using an 
n-gram model (Peng et al., 2003). Zheng et al. performed authorship identification on 
English and Chinese web forum messages (Zheng et al., 2003).  In all previous 
studies, English results were better than other languages. Applying authorship 
identification features across different languages is not without its difficulties. Since 
most writing style characteristics were designed for English, they may not always be 
applicable or relevant for other languages. Structural and other linguistic differences 
can create feature extraction nightmares.         
Arabic is a Semitic language, meaning that it belongs to the group of Afro-Asian 
languages which also includes Hebrew.  It is written from right to left with letters in 
the same word being joined together, similar to English cursive writing.  Semitic 
languages have several characteristics that can cause difficulties for authorship 
analysis.  These challenges include properties such as inflection, diacritics, word 
length, and elongation. 
• Inflection: 
Inflection is the derivation of stem words from a root. Although the root has a 
meaning, it is not a word but rather a class that contains stem instances (words). 
Stems are created by adding affixes (prefixes, infixes, and suffixes) to the root using 
specific patterns. Words with common roots are semantically related. Arabic roots are 
3-5 letter consonant combinations with the majority being 3-letters.  Al-Fedaghi and 
Al-Anzi believe that as many as 85% of Arabic words are derived from a tri-lateral 
root, suggesting that Arabic is highly inflectional (Al-Fedaghi & Al-Anzi, 1989).  
Inflection can cause feature extraction problems for lexical features because high 
levels of inflection increase the number of possible words, since a word can take on 
numerous forms.  
• Diacritics: 
Diacritics are markings above or below letters, used to indicate special phonetic 
values.  An example of diacritics in English would be the little markings found on top 
of the letter “e” in the word résumé.  These markings alter the pronunciation and 
16 H. Chen 
meaning of the word.  Arabic uses diacritics in every word to represent short vowels, 
consonant lengths, and relationships between words.   
• Word Length: 
Arabic words tend to be shorter than English words.  The shorter length of Arabic words 
reduces the effectiveness of many lexical features.  The short-word count feature; used 
to track words of length 3-letters or smaller, may have little discriminatory potential 
when applied to Arabic.  Additionally, the word-length distribution may also be less 
effective since Arabic word length distributions have a smaller range.  
• Elongation: 
Arabic words are sometimes stretched out or elongated.  This is done for purely 
stylistic reasons using a special Arabic character that resembles a dash (“-”).  
Elongation is possible because Arabic characters are joined during writing. Table 2 
shows an example of elongation.  The word MZKR (“remind”) is elongated with the 
addition of four dashes between the “M” and the “Z.” Although elongation provides 
an important authorship identification feature, it can also create problems. 
Table 2. An Arabic elongation example 
Elongated English Arabic Word Length 
No MZKR آ  4 
Yes M----ZKR آ ــــ  8 
 
Our test bed consisted of English and Arabic datasets.  The English dataset was 
adapted from Zheng et al.’s study and consists of messages from USENET newsgroups 
(Zheng et al., 2003).  The dataset identifies 20 authors engaged in potentially illegal 
activities relating to computer software and music sale and trading. The data consists of 
20 messages per author for a total of 400 messages. The Arabic dataset was extracted 
from Yahoo groups and is also composed of 20 authors and 20 messages per author.  
These authors discuss a broader range of topics including political ideologies and social 
issues in the Arab world.  Based on previous studies, there are numerous classification 
techniques that can provide adequate performance.  In this research, we adopted two 
popular machine learning classifiers; ID3 decision trees (called C4.5) and Support 
Vector Machine (SVM). The Arabic feature set was modeled after the English feature 
set.  It includes 410 features, with the key differences highlighted in Table 3.    
The results for the comparison of the different feature types and techniques are 
summarized in Table 4 and Figure 7. In both datasets the accuracy kept increasing 
with the addition of more feature types.  The maximum accuracy was achieved with 
the use of SVM and all feature types for English and Arabic. Using all features with 
the SVM classifier, we were able to achieve an accuracy level of 85.43% for the 
Arabic data set; a level lower than the 96.09% achieved for the English data set. 
A comparison of C4.5 and SVM revealed that SVM significantly outperformed the 
decision tree classifier in all cases. This is consistent with previous studies that also 
 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 17 
Table 3. Differences between English and Arabic feature sets 
Feature Type Feature English Arabic
Short Word Count 
Track all words 3 
letters or less 
Track all words 2 
letters or less 
Word Length 
Distribution 
1-20 letter words 1-15 letter words Lexical, F1
Elongation N/A 
Track number of 
elongated words 
Function Words 150 words 250 words 
Syntactic, F2
Word Roots N/A 30 roots 
Structural, F3 No Differences - - 
Content Specific, F4 Number of words 11 25 
 
Table 4. Accuracy for different feature sets across techniques 
Accuracy (%) English Dataset Arabic Dataset 
Features C4.5 SVM C4.5 SVM 
F1 86.98% 92.84% 68.07% 74.20% 
F1+F2 88.16% 94% 73.77% 77.53% 
F1+F2+F3 88.29% 94.11% 76.23% 84.87% 
F1+F2+F3+F4 89.31% 96.09% 81.03% 85.43% 
 
showed SVM to be superior. The difference between the two classifiers was consistent 
across English and Arabic, with English accuracies being about 10% higher. 
In the future we would like to analyze authorship differences at the group-level 
within a specific language. Identification of unique writing style characteristics for 
speakers of the same languages across different geographic locations (e.g., Iraq vs. 
Palestine), cultures (e.g., Sunni vs. Shiite), and interest (e.g., terrorist) groups could 
prove to be an interesting endeavor.    
18 H. Chen 
English Dataset                    Arabic Dataset
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
F1 F1+F2 F1+F2+F3 F1+F2+F3+F4 F1 F1+F2 F1+F2+F3 F1+F2+F3+F4
C4.5
SVM
 
Fig. 7. Authorship identification accuracies for different feature types 
5   Conclusions and Future Directions 
In this paper we discuss technical issues regarding intelligence and security 
informatics (ISI) research to accomplish the critical missions of international security. 
We propose a research framework addressing the technical challenges facing counter-
terrorism and crime-fighting applications with a primary focus on the knowledge 
discovery from databases (KDD) perspective. We also present several Dark Web 
related case studies for open-source terrorism information collection, analysis, and 
visualization. As this new ISI discipline continues to evolve and advance, several 
important directions need to be pursued, including technology development, testbed 
creation, and social, organizational, and policy studies.  We hope active ISI research 
will help improve knowledge discovery and dissemination and enhance information 
sharing and collaboration among academics, local, state, and federal agencies, and 
industry, thereby bringing positive impacts to all aspects of our society.   
Acknowledgement 
The Dark Web research has been partially supported by the National Science 
Foundation Digital Government Program, the Intelligence Technology Innovation 
Center (ITIC)/CIA Knowledge Discovery and Dissemination Program, and the 
Department of Homeland Security BorderSafe Program. 
References 
Adderley, R., & Musgrove, P. B. (2001). Data mining case study: Modeling the behavior of 
offenders who commit serious sexual assaults. In F. Provost & R. Srikant (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining (pp. 215-220).  New York:  Association for Computing Machinery. 
 Exploring Extremism and Terrorism on the Web: The Dark Web Project 19 
Al-Fedaghi Sabah S. and Al-Anzi, F. (1989) A new algorithm to generate Arabic root-pattern 
forms. Proceedings of the 11th National Computer Conference, King Fahd University of 
Petroleum & Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, (pp. 4-7). 
American Civil Liberties Union. (2004). MATRIX: Myths and reality. Retrieved July 27, 2004, 
from the World Wide Web: http://www.aclu.org/Privacy/Privacy.cfm?ID=14894&c=130 
Arquilla, J. & Ronfeldt, D. F. Advent of Netwar. (1996). Rand Report, http://www.rand.org/.  
Chen, H., Miranda, R., Zeng, D. D., Demchak, C., Schroeder, J., & Madhusudan, T. (Eds.). 
(2003a). Intelligence and Security Informatics: Proceedings of the First NSF/NIJ 
Symposium on Intelligence and Security Informatics. Berlin: Springer. 
Chen, H., Moore, R., Zeng, D., & Leavitt, J. (Eds.). (2004b). Intelligence and Security 
Informatics: Proceedings of the Second Symposium on Intelligence and Security 
Informatics. Berlin: Springer. 
Chen, H., Qin, J., Reid, E., Chung, W., Zhou, Y., Xi, W., et al. (2004c). The Dark Web Portal: 
Collecting and analyzing the presence of domestic and international terrorist groups on the 
Web. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITSC 2004). 
Chen, H. & Xu, J. (2005) Intelligence and security informatics for national security: a 
knowledge discovery perspective, In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science 
and Technology (ARIST), Volume 40. Information Today, Inc., Medford, New Jersey. 
Cook, J. S., & Cook, L. L. (2003). Social, ethical and legal issues of data mining. In J. Wang 
(Ed.), Data mining: Opportunities and challenges (pp. 395-420). Hershey, PA: Idea Group 
Publishing. 
Elison, W. (2000) Netwar: Studying Rebels on the Internet. The Social Studies 91, 127-131. 
Fayyad, U. M., Djorgovshi, S. G., & Weir, N. (1996). Automating the analysis and cataloging 
of sky surveys. In U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth & R. Uthurusamy (Eds.), 
Advances in knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 471-493). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI 
Press. 
Fayyad, U. M., & Uthurusamy, R. (2002). Evolving data mining into solutions for insights. 
Communications of the ACM, 45(8), 28-31. 
Gibson, D., Kleinberg, J., & Raghavan, P. (1998). Inferring Web communities from link 
topology.  In R. Akscyn, D. McCracken, & E. Yoder (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th ACM 
Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia (pp. 225-234).  New York:  Association for 
Computing Machinery. 
Han, J., & Kamber, M. (2001). Data mining: Concepts and techniques. San Francisco, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
Office of Homeland Security. (2002). National Strategy for Homeland Security. Washington 
D.C.: Office of Homeland Security. 
O'Hara, C. E., & O'Hara, G. L. (1980). Fundamentals of Criminal Investigation (5th ed.). 
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Reid, E. O. F., Qin, J., Chung, W., Xu, J., Zhou, Y., Schumaker, R., et al. (2004). Terrorism 
Knowledge Discovery Project: A knowledge discovery approach to address the threats of 
terrorism. In H. Chen, R. Moore, D. Zeng & J. Leavitt (Eds.), Proceedings of the Second 
Symposium on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI’04) (pp. 125-145).  Berlin:  
Springer. 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., & Kokkinakis, G. (2001). Computer-based authorship attribution 
without lexical measures. Computers and the Humanities, 35(2), (pp. 193-214). 
Strickland, L. S., Baldwin, D. A., & Justsen, M. (2005) Domestic security surveillance and civil 
liberties, In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 
(ARIST), Volume 39. Information Today, Inc., Medford, New Jersey. 
20 H. Chen 
Tolle, K. M., & Chen, H. (2000). Comparing noun phrasing techniques for use with medical 
digital library tools. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(4), 352-370. 
Torgerson, W. S. (1952). Multidimensional scaling: Theory and method. Psychometrika, 17, 
401-419. 
Trybula, W. J. (1999). Text mining. In M. E. Williams (Ed.), Annual Review of Information 
Science and Technology (ARIST) (vol. 34, pp. 385-419). Medford, NJ: Information Today, Inc. 
Tsfati, Y. & Weimann, G. www.terrorism.com: Terror on the Internet. Studies in Conflict & 
Terrorism, 25, 317-332 (2002). 
Weimann, G. (2004). www.terrorism.net: How Modern Terrorism Uses the Internet. Special 
Report 116, U.S. Institute of Peace.  
Zheng, R., Qin, Y., Huang, Z., & Chen, H. (2003). Authorship analysis in cybercrime 
investigation. In H. Chen, R. Miranda, D. Zeng, C. Demchak, et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of 
the First NSF/NIJ Symposium on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI’03) (pp.59-73). 
Berlin:  Springer. 
