Translation and Scientific Terminology   
A Corpus-Based Multilingual Study  
 
Meng Ji  
University of Tokyo, Japan  
 
Abstract 
 
It is well known that the establishment of modern scientific language in the late nineteenth century was instrumental 
in the making of China’s and Japan’s early modern scientific identity. The current study aims to offer an original 
empirical investigation of early modern Chinese scientific terminology from a cognitive and functional perspective, 
which has been rarely explored before. Through a detailed corpus-based linguistic investigation, the present study 
probes the complex historical process of cross-cultural and cross-linguistic scientific exchange between the West and 
China and Japan in the late nineteenth century. The new insights brought about by the novel use of statistical methods 
point to potentially prolific directions for future research in contrastive historical linguistics and science history.  
Keywords: corpus linguistics, translation studies, multilingual studies (Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, 
Japanese), scientific terminology, corpus statistics.  
 
1. Introduction  
The main purpose of this paper is to explore the complex historical process of cross-cultural and cross-linguistic 
interaction between China, Japan and the West in the late nineteenth century. Instead of following a prescriptive 
approach to the subject matter which characterizes many past studies, the present paper attempts to formulate and test 
theoretical hypotheses through the generation and exploration of quantitative textual data retrieved from newly 
created large-scale online multilingual databases of historical texts. It represents an important effort in the 
development and innovation of research methodologies and analytical techniques in historical linguistics and related 
fields such as science history and cross-cultural studies.  
 
The establishment of a working model for the translation of scientific terminology played a central role in the 
introduction and assimilation of imported Western scientific concepts into the traditional cultural and philological 
systems of China and Japan in the late nineteenth century. It was a daunting task which entailed a thorough 
understanding on the part of cross-cultural mediators (or translators) of the source and target languages, as well as an 
in-depth understanding of Western sciences practised at the time. It is our hypothesis that the huge difficulties implied 
in devising a working system for cross-cultural scientific exchange between China, Japan and the West were not only 
ideological and conceptual, but also linguistic and highly technical in terms of the borrowing and adaptation of 
subject-specific Western scientific expressions into traditional Chinese and Japanese (Ji, 2010a).  
 
It should be noted that by the late nineteenth century, the network of cross-cultural scientific exchange developed in 
East Asia was already entrenched and largely dynamic that studies purely focused on the etymology of individual 
words would hardly be able to capture the whole picture and thus render less prolific (Shen, 2001). This paper 
therefore attempts to approach the topic from a novel cognitive and functional perspective that will bring us valuable 
insights into the formation of a modern scientific terminology in the character-based writing system of Chinese and 
Japanese. That is to say, instead of exhausting historical material on the etymological origin of scientific terms coined 
at the time, we concentrate on the micro-structural features and cognitive functions of relevant linguistic events 
 1
highlighted in the database, which in turn will prepare solid empirical ground for further discussions on the evolution 
of the Chinese and Japanese lexis in the late nineteenth century.  
 
2. Database for textual analysis   
The raw linguistic data used here were extracted from a large-scale database of early Chinese and Japanese 
translations of imported Western scientific works. It was originally developed and maintained by the University of 
Heidelberg, Germany (Lacker, et al, 2001). The textual material examined in this paper comprises five important 
pieces of bilingual lexicographical works produced and widely circulated in the late nineteenth century, which 
represented the frontier of contrastive scientific terminology between Chinese, Japanese and main European 
languages at the time. Concretely speaking, they are the English Chinese Dictionary with Punti and Mandarin 
Pronunciation (1866-9) by the German missionary Wilhelm Lobscheid; A Vocabulary and Handbook of the Chinese 
Language (1872-3) by the American Board missionary Justus Doolittle; Tetsugaku Jii (A Dictionary of Philosophical 
Terms, second edition) (1884) by Inoue Tetsujiro and Ariga Hisao; Dictionnaire Français-Chinois (contenant les 
expressions les plus usitées de la langue mandarine) (1884) by the French missionary Seraphim Couvreur; and 
Nederlandsch-Chineesch Woordenboek met de Transcriptie der Chineesche Karakters in het Tsiang-Tsiu Dialekt 
(1886) by the Dutch sinologist Gustave Schlegel.   
 
Table 1 Five bilingual dictionaries of translated scientific terminology  
NO. AUTHOR DATE  TRANSLATION DIRECTION CORPUS SIZE 
(IN CHARACTER WORDS) 
1. Wilhelm Lobscheid 1866-9 (German) English  Chinese 5, 121 
2. Justus Doolittle 1872-3 (American) English  Chinese 2, 136 
3. Inoue Tetsujiro 1884 English  Japanese 3, 912 
4. Seraphim Couvreur 1884 French  Chinese 500 
5. Gustave Schlegel 1886 Dutch  Chinese 3, 782  
 
Table 1 shows some basic information of the five bilingual lexicographic works selected for the current study. The 
reason for highlighting these five works from the rich referential material collected by the Heidelberg database was 
threefold. First of all, they were chosen under the consideration that they represent six languages heavily involved in 
the cross-cultural scientific exchange in East Asia at the time, namely, American English, (German) English, Chinese, 
Dutch, French and Japanese. In contrastive linguistics, especially translation studies, the source language may well 
serve as a controlling factor in the exploration of textual patterns underlying the Chinese and Japanese translations of 
Western scientific works. Furthermore, the representativeness of the language pairs studied might also be of help in 
verifying the existence of translation universals from a historical perspective (Baker, 2004; Laviosa, 1998).   
 
Secondly, given the gap in the publication dates, the five contrastive lexicographic works may be roughly classified 
into two groups: (1) the mid-nineteenth century group containing Lobscheid’s and Doolittle’s translations and (2) the 
late-nineteenth century group including Inoue’s, Couvreur’s and Schlegel’s translations. Such time intervals may be 
explored to examine the continuity or even possible legacy of earlier works on later translations, and the 
independence among works produced around the same time such as the former two or the latter three. This would 
also help elucidate the different linguistic modes and patterns developed by the five translators when working on 
early Chinese and Japanese scientific terminology or nomenclature in the late nineteenth century.  
   
Lastly, as the last column of Table 1 shows, despite the different sizes of the five texts, they are all large enough to 
 2
make a likely statistical comparison among them. A distinctive feature of the current study consists in its use of 
quantitative linguistic data in the study of historical scientific translation. Textual features gathered in sufficient 
quantity make up a prerequisite for any corpus-based language study (Ji, 2010b). In processing the numerous textual 
traits extracted from the database, the use of statistical methods will help bring to light revealing patterns in the 
textual material which would appear inconspicuous to the naked eye. The analytical technique reported here 
represents a major methodological innovation in terms of the introduction of statistics from the social sciences to 
humanistic research such as science history and historical contrastive lexicography.  
 
3. Textual phenomena under study  
Due to the pilot nature of this paper, we single out two specific textual features of translated scientific terminology, 
with a view to testing the productivity of the methods developed for corpus-based historical contrastive lexicography. 
The two textual features highlighted are token length and functional particle. Token length refers to the number of 
characters making up a proper character word in historical Chinese and Japanese. It is an important linguistic feature 
in the study of textual genres. For instance, within the context of scientometrics, token length provides an effective 
measurement of the succinctness and referability of modern scientific language. In modern corpus linguistics, token 
length has been explored extensively for the purpose of natural language processing and automatic text genre 
disambiguation (Van Gijsel et al, 2006; Stamatatos, 2001). Its validity and usefulness for historical contrastive 
lexicography, however, remains to be tested.  
 
Past studies show that modern Chinese lexis is predominately disyllabic (i.e. composed by two characters), whereas 
in ancient or classical Chinese, it was mono-syllabic words which prevailed (Needham and Robinson, 2004; Ji, 
2010c). It is hoped that through a corpus-based statistical comparison of the five Chinese and Japanese translations of 
Western scientific works, the present study would help illustrate the various attempts made by influential 
cross-cultural mediators at the time, including foreign missionaries, sinologists and native Chinese and Japanese 
scholars, at forging a viable modern scientific lexis for the character-based writing system of Chinese and Japanese. 
In this paper, we shall first attempt to map out the distributional patterns of the running tokens in each text in terms of 
their varying lengths, in an effort to gauge the similarities and dissimilarities among the five translations.  
 
Another origin observation made in this paper regards the creative use of functional particles in the five historical 
translations. Within the context of the current study, a functional particle is defined as a basic semantic or 
grammatical unit of translated terminology or nomenclature. It is often attached to the main part of a character word 
to indicate the abstract concept or metaphorical reference conveyed by the linguistic expression. The type of 
functional particles described here resembles to suffixes or prefixes of inflectional languages. It represented a creative 
use of classical Chinese and Japanese, given the fact that these two historical languages were essentially 
non-inflectional, in contrast with most European languages. A whole set of functional particles, as the current study 
will elucidate, were already coined and put into practice by the five translators in the late nineteenth century, which 
eventually became an integral part of modern Chinese and Japanese scientific terminology.   
 
The experimentation with these functional particles proved instrumental in the establishment of a working modern 
scientific lexicon in Chinese and Japanese. That is because, at the conceptual level, due to the huge social and cultural 
differences between the West and the traditional Chinese and Japanese societies, many scientific terms or expressions 
imported from the West were totally unknown to the target audience at the time, severely hindering the introduction 
and further penetration of Western scientific ideas and concepts among the target readership. One possible way of 
solving the problem, as the five translated texts seem to suggest, was to contrive a linguistic technique or device that 
 3
might allow some conceptual commensurability between the two major language systems in question. Since by the 
late nineteenth century, modern scientific register in main European languages had already achieved a level that was 
far more sophisticated and elaborated than the traditional scholarly writing style of Chinese and Japanese, the 
borrowing of functional expressions from the West had turned out to be most cost-effective.  
 
The development of linguistic devices in Chinese and Japanese comparable to functional expressions in modern 
scientific register in Western European languages was not that straightforward as it might have been for cognate 
languages. It first and foremost involved a thorough and painstaking re-examination of the target knowledge body, 
searching for expressions of metaphorical references parallel to their Western counterparts. In cases where lexical 
borrowing of readily-available words was deemed unfeasible, a number of functional particles had been coined to 
facilitate the transmission of concepts and ideas between the two knowledge systems. We shall endeavor to identify 
various recurrent types of functional particles found in the five translations. The findings uncovered in this paper will 
throw new light on the complex process in which the existing knowledge structure of the traditional Chinese and 
Japanese societies was gradually transformed through an influx of scientific translation in the late nineteenth century.     
 
4. HCA (Hierarchical Cluster Analysis) of token lengths distribution in the five translations   
Table 2 Comparative statistics of token lengths  
Token Lengths  Lobscheid Doolittle Inoue Couvreur Schlegel 
1  262 194 48 48 487 
2 2, 158 1, 033 2, 680 334 1842 
3 1, 111 501 569 75 579 
4 1, 100 269 410 25 561 
5 264 91 100 4 161 
6  125 27 19 1 105 
7  57 9 7 1 32 
8 23 8 1 2 10 
9 or above 21 4 3 1 5 
 
Table 2 exhibits the comparative statistics of token lengths in the five translations of scientific terminology. In the left 
column of the table, the token length of a word is measured by its constituent character (s) ranging from one to nine 
or above. For example, in the Chinese translation of aerometry 度-氣-體-之-理 (measure-air-form of 
existence-of-theory) (du-qi-ti-zhi-li) (Lobscheid, 1866-9), the length of the newly coined Chinese scientific term is 
five-character long; or in the Chinese translation of nominative即-變-詞-格-之-第-一-法-也 
(thus-change-lexis-rules-of-the-first-law-affirmative particle in classical Chinese) (ji-bian-ci-ge-zhi-di-yi-fa-ye) 
(Schlegel, 1886), the novel Chinese linguistic expression is distinctively formed by nine individual characters, 
implying the experimental attempts made by the translator at introducing a new concept or an unknown linguistic 
phenomenon to the target readership. A first glance at the table finds that in all five translations, the vast majority of 
word tokens are disyllabic, followed by tri-syllabic and quadric-syllabic words. Monosyllabic and penta-syllabic 
words display a sharp decrease in number when compared to the top three, forming the third layer of the database in 
terms of word token lengths. Poly-syllabic words composed by six characters or more make up the fourth tier of the 
word token hierarchy, totalling no more than three per cent of the entire database. To visualize the patterns indicated 
in the cross-tabulation, a linear histogram representing the distribution of varying word tokens in the five translated 
texts was plotted and given below.  
 4
 
Diagram 1 Distribution of token lengths in the five historical translations of scientific terminology  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 or
above
Lobscheid Doolittle Inoue Couvreur Schlegel
 
Diagram 1 gives us more direct access to the information hidden behind the abstract figures. In the first three 
categories, namely word tokens composed by one to three characters, the shape of the bell curve in coloured lines 
resembles each other. Corresponding to what was found in Table 1, disyllabic words form the sharp crest of the bell 
curve in all colours. The number of tokens picks up at the fourth category of quadric-syllabic words, after which the 
bell-shaped curve proceeds further and further into a long tail along the X axis. Despite the striking similarities in the 
general shape of the bell curve representing each of the five translations, subtle yet important variations seem to 
emerge to the surface. This regards the proportions between different token length categories within each translation. 
For instance, although the frequency of occurrence of disyllabic words in Inoue Tetsujiro’s work (1884) features the 
highest on the graph, the number of quadric-syllabic words found in his work is far less conspicuous compared to 
other translations. It is worthwhile asking whether such variation within each translation should be taken into 
consideration when measuring the similarities among the five translated texts.  
 
Table 3 Agglomeration schedule of HCA of intra-textual dissimilarities (based on token length)  
Cluster Combined Stage Cluster First Appears Stage  
Cluster 1 Cluster 2 
Distance 
Coefficients Cluster 1 Cluster 2 
Next Stage 
1 3 4 .987 0 0 3 
2 2 5 .978 0 0 3 
3 2 3 .958 2 1 4 
4 1 2 .889 0 3 0 
 
To reveal the latent structure of the database regarding the distribution of token lengths, we introduce the statistical 
procedure of Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) in this part of our study. HCA is an important exploratory 
technique in statistics, which has been used widely in the social sciences. To the best of my knowledge, its usefulness 
and validity for historical contrastive linguistics has been rarely tested before. Within the context of the current study, 
HCA is used to group translated texts based their computed similarities and dissimilarities. Due to the exploratory 
nature of the procedure, the preliminary result obtained at this stage remains to be tested in future research with 
textual material collected at a larger scale. The new insights brought about at this stage, however, will help deepen 
 5
our understanding of the underlying structure of the pilot database, giving rise to the formulation of new theoretical 
hypotheses regarding the correlation and independence among the five translations under investigation.   
 
Table 3 shows the agglomeration schedule of the HCA based on the computed dissimilarities among the five 
translations. It is a numerical summary of the cluster solution. As may be seen from Table 3, at the first stage of the 
HCA, case 3 (Inoue) and case 4 (Couvreur) are combined, for they have the smallest distance. The cluster created by 
their joining next appears in Stage 3. At Stage 3, the clusters created at Stage 1 and 2 are joined. The resulting cluster 
next appears in Stage 4. In assessing the statistical result, a good cluster solution sees a sudden gap in the distance 
coefficient, and the solution before the gap indicates the good solution. From the distance coefficients column, it is 
easy to find that the largest gap in distance coefficient occurs between Stage 3 and 4, indicating a two-cluster solution 
to the classification of the five translations in comparison.    
 
Diagram 2 HCA dendrogram of intra-textual dissimilarities (based on token length)  
 
 
The decisiveness of this classification scheme is reflected in the dendrogram, which is a graphic demonstration of the 
clustering process conducted by the HCA. From right to left, the initial splitting of the tree forms two clusters. The 
upper cluster contains four later translations including Inoue, Couvreur, Doolittle and Schlegel, whereas the lower 
cluster refers to Lobscheid’s work only. The top-level cluster suggests that despite the apparent similarities among the 
five translations, Lobscheid’s translating style distinguishes itself from the rest in a most decisive manner with 
regards to the use of length-specific expressions throughout his work. One possible explanation for this statistically 
detected difference is his idiosyncratic use of Chinese four-character expressions as suggested in Diagram 1.  
 
The rationale behind Lobscheid’s particular approach to scientific terminology in his Chinese translation may well 
been due to his background as a native speaker of German, though he chose English as his working language, 
presumably to increase the influence of the dictionary that he was working on. It is noted that the extensive use of 
multiword expressions forms a distinctive feature of German scientific vocabulary (Keppler, 1955). Lobscheid’s 
intuitive use of compound phrases in his Chinese translation of English scientific nomenclature thus lets his work 
stand out from the other four translations under investigation. Lobscheid’s preference of Chinese multiword 
expressions may also be due to his own understanding of the Chinese language, its traditional scholarly writing style, 
as well as the ideological principle underpinning his cross-cultural enterprise. Four-character expression is a unique 
type of phraseology in Chinese which tends to be associated with the stylistic elegancy and formality of classical 
 6
Chinese. Moreover, it is a highly conventionalized morpho-syntactic structure charged with idiomaticity. For instance, 
it is estimated that more than ninety per cent of Chinese idioms are composed by four characters, causing the 
common mis-understanding that any four-character expression is idiomatic in Chinese. Lobscheid’s heavy use of 
four-character phrases in his dictionary may well be an indication of his target-oriented approach to the translation 
and introduction of Western scientific ideas and concepts into the existing knowledge base of China.  
  
The upper cluster is then further split into two smaller clusters containing case 3 (Inoue) and case 4 (Couvreur), and 
case 2 (Doolittle) and case 5 (Schlegel). As mentioned at the outset of the study, the deliberately built diachronic 
framework of the five translations may be explored to examine the continuity or possible legacy of earlier translations 
on later works. The statistical result computed by the HCA seems to suggest that there is a higher level of similarity 
between Inoue’s (1884) and Couvreur’s work (1884), and between Doolittle’s (1872-3) and Schlegel’s work (1886). 
To examine the possible legacy of Doolittle’s translation on Schlegel’s work, we proceed to compute the Linear 
Regression (LR) test, which is widely used in quantitative linguistics to analyze the relationship between the 
controlling factor and the dependent variable. Within the context of the current study, LR is used to explore the 
influence of earlier Chinese or Japanese translations of Western scientific works on latter translations. To illustrate 
the computer-assisted textual analysis, we choose to study the detected correlation between Doolittle’s and Schlegel’s 
translations as an example.  
 
Diagram 3 Histogram of linear relationship between Doolittle’s and Schlegel’s work  
 
 
As with most parametric statistical tests, in sight of the limited range of textual data collected in the current study, we 
first proceed to check the normality of the linear relationship between the two variables under study. A commonly 
used technique for such purpose is the graphic demonstration of intra-textual relationship. The simple scatter-plot 
given above depicts the mode and pattern in which the two factors correlate with each other in terms of the 
distribution of the various token length categories. It becomes clear from the scatter-plot that in most cases, 
Schlegel’s use of length-specific tokens varies in proportion to Doolittle’s use of corresponding lexical categories. 
This is shown in the graph as most scatters cluster round the best fitting line with a regression coefficient as high as 0. 
957. This linearity check suggests that despite the limited amount of data collected in this case study, the two 
 7
variables under investigation, i.e. Doolittle’s and Schlegel’s translations, exhibit a sound linear relationship that is 
suitable for linear regression analysis.  
 
Table 4 ANOVA test of Doolittle’s and Schlegel’s work   
ANOVAb
Model Sum of Squares Df Mean Square F Sig. 
Regression 2610967.821 1 2610967.821 154.964 .000a
Residual 117941.735 7 16848.819   
1 
Total 2728909.556 8    
a. Predictor: Doolittle; b. Dependent Variable: Schlegel 
 
Table 4 reports the result of the ANOVA test as an integral part of the linear regression analysis. It tests the 
acceptability of the model from a statistical perspective. The regression row displays information about the variation 
accounted for by the linear regression model thus built. Accordingly, the Residual row shows information regarding 
the variation that is not covered by the statistical model. As one may see from the table, the amount of the Sum of 
Squares explained by the Regression model is much higher than that left out in the Residual half. This suggests that 
the linear regression model has captured much of the variation in the dependent variable, i.e. Schlegel’s use of 
length-specific words, in relation to Doolittle’s use of corresponding phrasal categories in his translation. The value 
of F statistics is significantly lower than the threshold value of five per cent, suggesting that the variation explained 
by the model is not due to chance. The ANOVA summary validates the efficiency of the model. It however does not 
directly address the strength of correlation between the model and the dependent variable.                    
 
Table 5 Summary of linear regression model  
Model Summary b
Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 
1 .978a .957 .951 129.803 
a. Predictors: (Constant), Doolittle; b. Dependent Variable: Schlegel 
 
Table 5 shows the model summary which reports the strength of the relationship between the model and the 
dependent variable. R stands for the correlation coefficient which measures the linear relationship between the 
observed and model-predicted values of the dependent variable. Within the context of the present study, R value 
indicates the level at which the linear regression has rightly predicted the frequency of occurrence of length-specific 
tokens in Schlegel’s work based on the features of Doolittle’s translation. R value ranges from zero to one: the higher 
the predicting power of the regression model, the higher the R value. In an idealized setting, the R value would reach 
one signifying the identification of the observed and predicted values of the dependent variable. From Table 5, it 
becomes clear that the original R value is as high as 0.978, pointing to a strong relationship between the model and 
the dependent variable. R Square refers to the coefficient of determination. It is the squared value of the correlation 
coefficient. It shows that more than ninety per cent of the variation in Schlegel’s use of length-specific scientific 
terms has been rightly predicted by the regression model, i.e. the computed similarities between Doolittle’s and 
Schlegel’s works. The validated strong relationship between Doolittle’s and Schlegel’s works requires further 
detailed textual analysis of the two translations. Nevertheless, the preliminary findings presented here would seem to 
point to a shared approach to Chinese scientific terminology between the two translations, despite the different source 
 8
languages involved, i.e. American English in the case of Doolittle and Dutch in Schlegel’s case, as well as the 
distinctive social and cultural circumstances surrounding the publication of each translation in different time periods.    
 
5. HCA of the distribution of functional particles in the five translations   
 
Table 4 Comparative statistics of functional particles (e.g. suffixes and prefixes)  
No. Functional particles categories Lobscheid Doolittle Inoue Couvreur Schlegel 
1.        GMF 56 0 41 4 0 
2.       SCF_AC 30 10 103 82 96 
3.        SCF_CC 19 53 19 34 15 
4.        SCF_CP 5 22 127 8 7 
5.        SCF_DE 54 158 10 90 118 
6.        SCF_DF 21 12 103 10 39 
7.   SCF_ML 53 23 133 96 49 
8. SCF_PA 96 51 59 160 211 
9. SCF_PE 102 251 3 82 60 
10. SCF_PQ 11 5 14 24 14 
11. SCF_QA 5 14 112 14 18 
12. SCF_SCP 32 1 58 32 43 
13. SCF_SQ 190 22 9 40 79 
14. SCF_TSR 35 31 6 38 32 
15. SCF_SS 37 321 45 36 52 
16. SCG_TG  40 5 68 36 78 
17. SCF_TS 47 16 90 32 89 
18. NA 167 5 0 182 0 
19. Total 1, 000 1, 000 1, 000 1, 000 1, 000 
 
Table 4 offers a tentative classificatory framework of several recurrent functional particles identified in the five 
translations. The annotation system developed in the current study includes seventeen marking-up labels. They may 
be divided into two main categories of GMF and SCF, in accord with the grammatical and semantic-cognitive 
functions they assume in early Chinese and Japanese scientific nomenclature. GMFs refer to prefixes or suffixes 
indicating the grammatical function of a translated term. For example, a typical GMF instance in the five translations 
is the use of the Chinese character 的 (of) (de) as the ending component of the translated scientific term. It serves to 
indicate the grammatical function of the expression as an adjective. Empirical evidence collected from non-translated 
historical Chinese corpora shows that the use of 的 is predominant in modern Chinese (1368-1911), especially in the 
penultimate dynasty Ming (1368-1644), with a higher frequency of occurrence in general literary fiction.1 The newly 
invested use of this functional particle in early Chinese scientific translation as an emerging textual genre in the late 
nineteenth century points to an important linguistic strategy adopted by early language workers at the time, i.e. an 
inventive transformation of the Chinese language attained within its existing linguistic and philological system.          
                                                        
1 The non-translated Chinese historical Chinese corpus used is the Sheffield Corpus of Chinese, which is accessible 
online at http://www.hrionline.ac.uk/scc. Last access was on 23 November 2010.  
 9
 
Within the context of the current study, SCFs may be construed as prefixes or suffixes indicating the semantic or 
conceptual function of a translated scientific term. They play a central role in the introduction and institutionalization 
of Western scientific expressions in China. For example, in Lobscheid’s English Chinese Dictionary (1866-9), a 
number of English scientific terms covering biology, physics, chemistry, law and international relations, religion, etc. 
were translated into compact penta-syllabic words into Chinese, which were invariably marked by the use of 者 
(meaning: unspecific reference to things, agents or abstract concepts) (zhe) as the ending morpheme. In 
non-translated Chinese historical corpora, distribution statistics shows that the use of the SCF者 is most significant 
in archaic Chinese (12th AC – 220AD), with a percentage as high as 60.4%, compared to 25.1% in medieval Chinese 
(220-1368) and 14.5% in modern Chinese (1368-1911). In terms of textual genre distribution, the most common use 
of the SCF者 occurs in philosophical texts (24.9%), followed by historical texts (15.2%) and biographical essays 
(13.7%).  
 
A comparison of the Chinese scientific terms coined by Lobscheid and the original expressions in English shows that 
the use of the SCF 者 symbolizes an initial attempt made by the German translator at transferring highly 
conventionalized nominalised expressions in Chinese philosophical texts to its early modern scientific register. 
Nominalisation is an important linguistic device in modern scientific discourse, which has been studied extensively. 
Nominalised terms provide a wealth of easily referable linguistic resources which may help describe complex 
physical process, chemical change, human behaviour and socio-cultural phenomena. The five translators, especially 
Lobscheid, were obviously aware of the conventionalized use of the SCF 者 and thus took full advantage of this 
particular linguistic feature of the target language when rendering Western scientific texts into their Chinese 
counterparts.  
 
It is, however, interesting to notice that the use of functional primitive like 者 seems to point to a gradual 
transformation of historical Chinese at a cross-genre level within the traditional Chinese language system, rather than 
at a cross-linguistic and cross-cultural level as previously thought. This may be inferred from the statistics given 
above as the functional term 者 is now heavily exploited in early modern scientific translations, despite its 
predominate occurrence in Chinese philosophical texts of ancient times. Based on our original observation, it may be 
said that the exploration of such linguistic devices represents a tactical manipulation of the traditional Chinese 
linguistic system, with the intention of extending the boundaries of its existing knowledge body into unknown 
conceptual territories.  
 
In an effort to attain a deeper understanding of the significance and nature of such linguistic strategies in scientific 
translations produced at the time, we proceed to identify several recurrent SCF categories in the pilot parallel corpus. 
It should be noted that due to the experimental nature of the current study, the list of SCFs given below is far from 
exhaustive; it however helps indicate the scale and the patterns of various highly productive functional particle types 
in the five scientific translations, which in turn were representative of the cross-cultural scientific exchange practiced 
at a much larger scale in China and Japan in the late nineteenth century. Through the online corpus mining tool, a 
range of functional particles falling under the SCF category were identified and summarized below:  
 
[1] SCF_AC: abstract concepts (e.g. patterns of change or ideologies);  
[2] SCF_CC: units of classification or types of measurement;   
[3] SCF_CP: chemical process, physical change or ways of human behaviour (e.g. behavioural verbs);  
[4] SCF_DE: devices or apparatus (including those of the human body) (concrete or abstract devices);  
 10
[5] SCF_DF: disciplinary fields;  
[6] SCF_ML: research methodologies (specific or abstract) or logic;  
[7] SCF_PA: practitioners, institutions of social and cultural activities and the forms of their organization (e.g. 
schools of thoughts, associations, learned societies, etc.);  
[8] SCF_PE: physical entities, chemical substance, natural phenomena;   
[9] SCF_PQ: physical qualities of things including shape, weight, size, quantity, etc.;  
[10] SCF_QA: qualities of animate or inanimate things in response to external changes (natural, social, physical, etc)    
[11] SCF_SCP: social, cultural and religious practice;  
[12] SCF_SQ: nominalization: persons, objects, concepts or socio-cultural phenomena of special qualities;  
[13] SCF_TSR: temporal or spatial reference;  
[14] SCF_SS: systems of scientific symbols and basic disciplinary concepts (including medical, clinical terms, etc.)  
[15] SCF_TG: textual genres: oral or written discourse; particular linguistic events or phenomena;   
[16] SCF_TS: theoretical systems (论, 理, 法, 说): to describe more established Western sciences with existing 
Chinese terms; these theoretical systems largely form the foundation of discrete modern scientific disciplines in 
China; the distribution of SCF_TS depicts the modes and patterns underlying the introduction and assimilation 
of different scientific fields in China through translated scientific terminology.  
 
Diagram 3 Distribution of functional particles in the multilingual database of translated scientific terminology  
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
GM
F
SC
F_
AC
SC
F_
CC
SC
F_
CP
SC
F_
DE
SC
F_
DF
SC
F_
ML
SC
F_
PA
SC
F_
PE
SC
F_
PQ
SC
F_
QA
SC
F_
SC
P
SC
F_
SQ
SC
F_
TS
R
SC
F_
SS
SC
G_
TG
SC
F_
TS N
A
Lobscheid Doolittle Inoue Couvreur Schlegel
 
 
Diagram 3 shows the distribution of the various types of functional particles in the five translations. The graph 
depicted here turns out more complex than Diagram 1, in which the distribution of tokens of varying lengths shows 
striking similarities among the five texts under study. As mentioned above, Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) is 
especially useful when dealing with the classification of a small number of variables. It explores the underlying 
structure of the entire database through extracting a limited number of clusters based on their computed (dis-) 
similarities. At the initial stage of our corpus-based study, a variety of functional particles have been identified based 
on the researcher’s own observation of the database. Those categories are then used to mark up the quantitative 
linguistic events retrieved from the five translations. It is likely that there is certain overlapping or even redundancy 
among the originally proposed tagging categories. To streamline the later textual analysis based on the initial 
hypothesis, it is essential to explore the latent structure of the experimental framework of classification. The refined 
 11
model of categorization may be then used to improve the initial theoretical hypothesis with new evidence collected 
from the database. In the current study, after extracting a large amount of translated scientific terms from the five 
translations, we proceed to tag the raw data in accord with the categorizing framework explained above. The 
marked-up linguistic data are then sorted out and put into a cross-tabulation shown in Table 5. Due to the internal 
complexity of the framework and the relatively large amount of data, it is hard to discern any underlying patterns by 
looking at the figures only. At this point, we again resort to the HCA to refine the initial hypothetical model.  
 
Table 5 Agglomeration schedule of HCA of functional particles  
Cluster Combined Stage Cluster First Appears Stage 
Cluster 1 Cluster 2 
Distance  
Coefficients Cluster 1 Cluster 2 
Next Stage 
1 3 10 .089 0 0 5 
2 15 16 .247 0 0 6 
3 2 9 .423 0 0 4 
4 2 13 .689 3 0 12 
5 3 5 1.032 1 0 11 
6 11 15 1.634 0 2 10 
7 1 6 2.452 0 0 10 
8 4 8 4.119 0 0 9 
9 4 14 7.429 8 0 13 
10 1 11 10.873 7 6 11 
11 1 3 16.193 10 5 12 
12 1 2 24.727 11 4 15 
13 4 12 34.539 9 0 14 
14 4 7 46.957 13 0 15 
15 1 4 75.000 12 14 0 
 
Table 5 shows the agglomeration schedule of HCA of the tagged functional particles. As can be seen from the table, 
the decisiveness of the HCA is reflected in the increasing gaps in distance coefficients after stage 10 (italics are mine). 
Since the largest difference in distance coefficients occurs between stages 14 and 15, the cluster solution may be 
safely put at two. This has greatly simplified the initial model by conflating the originally proposed sixteen particles 
with semantic and cognitive functions into two major categories. The lesser differences detected within each of the 
two main categories may be then used to identify new subcategories of functional particles. In this way, the initial 
framework of classification is effectively streamlined and improved to benefit further quantitative data analysis. To 
have a more visualized access to the statistical information summarized in the agglomeration schedule, we proceed to 
plot the dendrogram of HCA, which illustrates the arrangement of clusters in a tree graph.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12
Diagram 4 Dendrogram of HCA of functional particles   
 
 
Diagram 4 displays the dendrogram of HCA of functional particles in the five translations. Along the vertical axis, 
each type of functional particles is marked with a numerical label, which is its case number used in the statistical 
processing. It is easy to find in the graph that from right to left, at the top level, the original sixteen SCF categories 
have been conclusively split into two clusters. The upper cluster includes eleven functional particles from SCF_CP to 
SCF_TSR, whereas the lower cluster is substantiated by five functional particles from SCF_DE to SCF_PA. Within 
each of the two main clusters, subcategories of functional particles are identified based on their computed degrees of 
dissimilarities. For example, in the upper cluster, at the root level in the left, four basic clusters are first extracted 
which are (UC1) SCF_CP/ SCF_QA/ SCF_DF, (UC2) SCF_TG/ SCF_TS/ SCF_SCP, (UC3) SCF_AC/ SCF_ML, 
(UC4) SCF_CC/ SCF_PQ/ SCF_TSR. Clusters UC2 and UC3 are then converged to join UC1. Their joint cluster 
meets UC4 to form the upper cluster. In a somehow contrastive manner, the lower cluster is formed through the 
expansion of the basic cluster containing SCF_DE and SCF_PE to annex SCF_SS, SCF_SQ and SCF_PA, 
successively.  
 
The quantitative analysis thus conducted requires further qualitative interpretation of the refined model to have a 
better understanding of the underlying structure of the database. Within the upper cluster, we attempt to identify the 
common features of the variables forming the constituent clusters, i.e. UC1 to UC4. For example, the three functional 
particles forming UC1 invariably refer to the nature of things from modes of physical changes to general qualities. 
Similarly, the three variables substantiating UC2 may be termed as naming systems from theoretical through 
socio-cultural to scientific spheres. UC3 comprises SCF_AC and SCF_ML which jointly point to metaphorical 
concepts. Lastly, the tripartite UC4 provides useful resources for measurements and directional locations. In a similar 
fashion, the lower cluster as a whole may be defined as referential specificity, for the five constituent functional 
particles consistently refer to specific and concrete objects or agents.  
 
The qualitative analysis provided above offers possible explanations of the rationale behind the corpus-based 
statistical analysis. It reveals the dichotomy of abstractness vis-à-vis specificity dividing the original sixteen SCF 
categories at a general level. Within each of the two main categories, a number of SCF subgroups were identified 
based on their shared functions in interpreting the variations detected in the dependent variables, i.e. the five early 
 13
Chinese and Japanese scientific translations. It helps elucidate the complex process in which early cross-cultural 
mediators attempted to develop a new scientific language through an innovative use of linguistic devices as part of 
historical Chinese. It forms part of the transformation of traditional Chinese writing style of scientific texts, which 
makes important preparations for the systematic introduction and assimilation of Western scientific concepts and 
ideas into the Chinese existing knowledge body at later times.  
 
6. Conclusion  
 
This paper offered an original investigation of translated scientific terminology in China and Japan in the late 
nineteenth century from a solid empirical perspective. In an effort to delve into the complex historical process of the 
early introduction of Western scientific ideas and concepts in China and Japan, we concentrated on the generation and 
statistical processing of quantitative linguistic events extracted from a large-scale database of translated terminology. 
The two linguistic features highlighted are token length and functional particles in newly coined scientific terms. In 
the study of token lengths, the HCA singled out the idiosyncratic use of idiomatic expressions by the German 
missionary Wilhelm Lobscheid; and in the case of functional particles, the HCA has greatly streamlined the initial 
framework of analysis, suggesting a refined dichotomous model of abstractness vis-à-vis concreteness which 
underlies the original sixteen SCF categories of functional particles. In this paper, we attempted to test the validity 
and usefulness of statistical procedures for historical contrastive linguistics. Last but least, due to the limited size of 
the database used in the current study, the findings reported here remain largely exploratory and experimental. At a 
later stage of our study, as the database enlarges, the newly refined model will be subjected to further experimentation 
to test its robustness and wider applicability. The very interesting and revealing patterns emerged in our investigation, 
however, would help point to potentially prolific directions for future research.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14
Reference  
 
[1] Baker, M. (2004) 'The Treatment of Variation in Corpus-based Translation Studies', in Karin Aijmer and Hilde 
Hasselgård (eds) Translation and Corpora (Göteborg Studies in English), Göteborg University, Sweden, 7-17  
[2] Couvreur, S. (1884) Dictionnaire Français-Chinois (contenant les expressions les plus usitées de la langue 
mandarine)   
[3] Doolittle, J. (1872-3) A Vocabulary and Handbook of the Chinese Language   
[4] Inoue, T. and Ariga, H. (1884) Tetsugaku Jii (Dictionary of Phisophical Terms, second edition), Tokyo  
[5] Ji, M. (2010a) “A Corpus-Based Study of Linguistic Variation in Modern Chinese Scientific Writing”, in 
Journal of Gender Equality and Multicultural Conviviality, no.2, Tohoku University, pp. 106-15   
[6] Ji, M. (2010b) Phraseology in Corpus-Based Translation Studies, Oxford and Bern: Peter Lang 
[7] Ji, M. (2010c) “A corpus-based study of lexical periodization in Chinese historical corpora”, in Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, Oxford University Press, vol. 25, no.2, pp. 199-213  
[8] Keppler, K. (1955) “Characteristics and difficulties of the German scientific vocabulary”, in The German 
Quarterly, vol. 28, no.3, pp. 152-8  
[9] Lackner, M. et al (eds.) (2001) New Terms for New Ideas: Western Knowledge and Lexical Change in Late 
Imperial China, Leiden: Brill  
[10] Laviosa, S. (1998) “The corpus-based approach: a new paradigm in translation studies”, in Meta, 43, pp. 474-9  
[11] Lobscheid, W. (1866-9), English Chinese Dictionary with Punti and Mandarin Pronounciation (1866-9)  
[12] Needham, J. and Robinson, K. (2004) Science and Civilization in China, vol.7, no.2, Cambridge University 
Press  
[13] Schlegel. G. (1886) Nederlandsch-Chineesch Woordenboek met de Transcriptie der Chineesche Karakters in het 
Tsiang-Tsiu Dialekt (Dutch Chinese Dictionary with Transcript of Chinese Characters in the Jiang Su Dialect)  
[14] Shen, G. W. (2001) “The creation of technical terms in English Chinese dictionaries from the nineteenth 
century”, in M. Lackner, et al (eds.) New Terms for New Ideas: Western Knowledge and Lexical Change in Late 
Imperial China, Leiden: Brill, pp. 287-304 
[15] Stamatatos, E. et al (2010) “Automatic text categorization in terms of genre and author”, in Computational 
Linguistics, vol.26, no.4, pp. 471-96  
[16] Taylor, G. and Chen, T. (1991) “Linguistic, cultural and sub-cultural issues in contrastive discourse analysis: 
Anglo-American and Chinese scientific texts”, in Applied Linguistics, vol.12, no.3, pp. 319-36  
[17] Tsien, T. (1954) “Western impact on China through translation”, in The Far Eastern Quarterly, vol. 13, no.3, pp. 
305-27  
[18] Van Gijsel, S. et al. (2006) “Locating lexical richness: a corpus linguistic, sociovariational analysis”, in the 
Proceedings of JADT 2006: 8es Journées internationales d’Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles, pp. 
953-64 
[19] Wright, D. (1998) “The translation of modern western science in nineteenth century China”, in ISIS, vol. 89, pp. 
653-73  
 
 15
