. RESEARCH PAPER .
SCIENCE CHINA
Information Sciences
doi: 10.1007/s11432-013-4860-3
c© Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 info.scichina.com www.springerlink.com
Analyzing market performance via social media:
a case study of a banking industry crisis
JIANG CuiQing1, LIANG Kun1∗, CHEN Hsinchun2 & DING Yong1
1School of Management, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China;
2Department of Management Information Systems, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
Received August 7, 2012; accepted November 5, 2012
Abstract Analyzing market performance via social media has attracted a great deal of attention in the finance
and machine- learning disciplines. However, the vast majority of research does not consider the enormous
influence a crisis has on social media that further affects the relationship between social media and the stock
market. This article aims to address these challenges by proposing a multistage dynamic analysis framework. In
this framework, we use an authorship analysis technique and topic model method to identify stakeholder groups
and topics related to a special firm. We analyze the activities of stakeholder groups and topics in different
periods of a crisis to evaluate the crisis’s influence on various social media parameters. Then, we construct
a stock regression model in each stage of crisis to analyze the relationships of changes among stakeholder
groups/topics and stock behavior during a crisis. Finally, we discuss some interesting and significant results,
which show that a crisis affects social media discussion topics and that different stakeholder groups/topics have
distinct effects on stock market predictions during each stage of a crisis.
Keywords social media, market performance, stakeholder theory, authorship analysis technique, topic model
Citation Jiang C Q, Liang K, Chen H, et al. Analyzing market performance via social media: a case study of a
banking industry crisis. Sci China Inf Sci, 2013, 56, doi: 10.1007/s11432-013-4860-3
1 Introduction
Analyzing market performance via social media has long been of interest to researchers in the finance
and machine- learning disciplines. Traditionally, a firm’s financial measures and information about its
historical stock behavior were used to predict market performance. More recently, researchers have
examined the inclusion of professional news articles about firms to improve market performance [1–3].
Online social media such as firm-related web forums have also been shown to be valuable sources in
explaining subsequent stock behavior [4].
Previous research has already shown that social media has an important influence on the performance
of a firm’s stock. For example, an increased number of message postings in social media led to high stock
volatility and low returns [5]. A significant relationship between the sentiments expressed in social media
∗Corresponding author (email: liangkun fd@163.com)
2 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
and stock values has also been found [4]. In addition, further analysis of social media participants and their
discussion topics enhanced the explanatory power of stock prediction. A firm holds relationships with
various stakeholders in addition to investors such as customers, employees, political groups, and activists,
all of whom are indispensable for the long-term success of the firm [6]. The openness of social media
attracts various types of participants including not only shareholders but other types of stakeholders as
well. Many social media sites also hold diversified discussion topics [7]. Even in a finance firm-related
web forum, discussion content is not limited to investment decisions, but includes all kinds of firm-
related news and gossip. Researchers have segmented social media by stakeholder groups, and further
by topics, resulting in a strengthened relationship between discussions within specific groups and stock
behavior [8].
However, most of these studies do not consider the enormous influence a crisis has on social media, this
influence consequently affects the relationship between social media and the stock market. A crisis might
affect participants in social media. The hot topics closely watched by participants might also be different
during each phase of a crisis. Nowadays, various social crises occur frequently. An information explosion
can be spurred by a crisis in a short amount of time, leading to important social influences. For example,
starting from 2008 the economic downturn and debt crisis pushed the American banking industry toward
bankruptcy. This crisis seriously affected banking industry firm-related web forums and stock behavior.
At the beginning of a crisis, people focus on the macroeconomy and stock transactions. People might
consequently worry about bank failures. However, as an economic crisis’ develops, governments take a
series of corresponding measures. The performance of policies might be closely watched. Prior research
where crisis stages were not distinguished certainly did not take stakeholder groups and topic changes
into account. Additionally, because of different stakeholder groups and topics in each period of a crisis,
the relationships between stakeholder groups/topics and a firm’s stock behavior will also be different.
In this article, the aforementioned problems are addressed by proposing a multistage dynamic analysis
framework for analyzing stock behavior via firm-related web forums during a crisis. We choose the recent
American banking industry crisis as an event model. According to the process of incident development
and public policy measures, the crisis is divided into three stages and US bank shares are predicted
via firm-related web forums during each stage of the crisis. We use an authorship analysis technique
to identify stakeholder groups through similarity in writing styles. Then we use the Mallet tool for
topic clustering [9]. Stakeholder groups and topics are identified on firm-related web forums during each
stage of the crisis. Furthermore, we construct a stock regression model to examine relationships between
stakeholder groups/topics and the behavior of a firm’s stock during each stage of the crisis. This research
aims at better understanding how social media can be used for stock prediction during crisis and whether
adopting a stakeholder perspective of a firm-related web forum can reveal which stakeholder groups hold
particularly strong relationships with the behavior of firm’s stocks during each stage of a crisis. From
a broader perspective, this research contributes to improving investment decisions. It elucidates which
stakeholder group’s opinions will be valuable during each stage of a crisis.
Based on the discussion above, this paper addresses the following questions:
Q1: How does a crisis affect stakeholder groups and topics in firm-related web forums?
Q2: How does the relationship between stakeholder groups/topics and a firm’s stock behavior change
in each stage of a crisis?
Q3: Which stakeholder group or topic in firm-related web forums holds particularly strong sentiments,
or provides advanced indications, regarding a firm’s stock behavior in each stage of a crisis?
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the relationship
between the stock market and social media, participants and discussion topics in social media, social media
analysis techniques and stock prediction models. Section 3 develops a framework for stock prediction with
firm-related web forums that includes firm-related web forum analysis, event analysis and stock regression
modeling. Section 4 conducts a series of experiments to assess the effectiveness of our proposed framework.
Section 5 concludes with a summary of our research contributions.
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 3
2 Related studies
2.1 Social media analysis for stock prediction
There are three main sources of information for stock prediction: analysts’ forecasts, accounting variables
in financial statements, and information appearing in news and social media [10]. Admittedly, analysts’
forecasts suffer from significant bias and accounting variables do not always correspond to stock prices
in an empirical sense [11,12]. Therefore, information contained in news and social media has become an
important source providing additional explanatory power for stock prediction. Furthermore, compared
with traditional news media, social media such as firm-related web forums enable various investors to
express their views freely [4], greatly enhancing the richness of information. Also, discussions in social
media can have a greater influence on participants than do traditional media [13]. Social media contain
vast amounts of information. However, it is impossible to read all of it. To improve the prediction
performance of stocks, we analyze social media to extract useful information from participants and their
discussion topics.
Previous research analyzing social media for stock prediction deemed all the participants as sharehold-
ers. In fact, the openness of social media attracts various types of participants not limited to shareholders
but including other types of stakeholders related to a firm. In many cases, these stakeholders’ views are
as important as shareholders’ views to the price of a firm’s stock. Thus many studies focus on stake-
holder analysis for stock prediction. Wingyan Chung [14] have developed a prototype called the Business
Stakeholder Analyzer (BSA) that helps managers and analysts identify and classify their stakeholders on
the Internet. As with participant analysis, early studies deemed all the discussion topics on social media
as investment decisions, despite this not always being the case. Many social media sites hold diversified
discussion topics such as firm related news and gossip.
In addition, previous research did not consider the dynamic nature of social media. In fact, participants
in social media have evolved over time [15,16]. The discussion content in social media is also very
frequently updated in real time [15,17,18]. Hence, the relationships among stakeholders/topics and stock
market performance change over time, especially in different periods of a crisis.
In summary, the nature of social media includes participant/discussion diversity and dynamics. There-
fore, in the following sections, we review the literature on techniques which adapt to these aspects of
social media.
2.2 Techniques for social media analysis
2.2.1 Authorship analysis
Effective extraction of the views of all the types of a company’s stakeholders in social media improves
the prediction of the performance of a firm’s stock. In general, participants belonging to the same type
of stakeholder should exhibit similar characteristics in discussions and activities. For example, investors
are more likely to use technical terms and talk succinctly compared with other stakeholders. Therefore,
stakeholders can be partitioned into groups based on similarities in these characteristics. Authorship
analysis is a process of examining the characteristics of a piece of writing to draw conclusions as to its
authorship [19]. Authorship analysis techniques use writing-style features including lexical, syntactic,
structural, and content—specific components extracted from linguistic data. In essence, authorship
analysis is a writing-style feature extraction and classification problem. Hence, feature-set selection
might significantly affect the performance of authorship analysis.
In early studies, researchers analyzed authors’ usages of words to identify authors. Burrows [20]
developed a set of more than 50 high-frequency words, which were tested on The Federalist Papers.
Holmes (1998) analyzed the use of “shorter” words and “vowel words”. However, such lexical words
cannot reflect the syntactical features of an author’s writing style. Rooted from linguistics, syntactical
features have been applied to authorship research. Fakotakis et al. [21] introduced a fully automatic
method to extract part-of-speech (POS) features, resulting in better performance compared with pure
lexical-feature-based approaches . As a later developed type of writing-style feature, structural features
4 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
attracted more attention. People have different habits when organizing an article. These habits, including
paragraph length, use of signatures, and use of indentation, can be strong authorial evidence of a personal
writing style. De Vel et al. [22] proposed to use structural features and other writing-style features for
e-mail author identification. This method performed well with high identification accuracy. Compared
with conventional authorship analysis objects such as published articles or literary works, one of the
challenges of authorship analysis of social media messages is the multiple topics of online messages. The
effectiveness of the above methods is limited because word usage is highly dependent on discussion topic.
Therefore, we need “content-specific” features. In Zheng et al. [23], approximately 10 content-specific
features were introduced in a cybercrime context and improved identification performance.
By comparing different stakeholder’s writing-style features, social media participants can be divided
into several stakeholder groups according to similarities in their characteristics. In addition to partici-
pants, social media topics might also significantly affect stock market performance.
2.2.2 Topic analysis
Social media hot topics have an important influence on stock market performance. Topic analysis tech-
niques can be roughly classified into two types: a topic model approach [9,24,25] and a clustering-based
approach [26]. Topic models are based on the assumption that each document is a mixture of a small
number of topics, where each topic defines a probability distribution over words. The mixing proportions
across topics are document-specific, but the probability distribution over words, defined by each topic,
is the same across all documents. Identifying topics is essential to estimating the parameters related to
the topic mixture and word distribution based on an existing corpus of topics using statistical methods.
Well-known topic models include pLSI [24,27] and LDA [9,25]. These topic models require manual spec-
ification of the number of topics in advance. LDA has been widely employed in topic identification tasks
in various contexts such as journal abstracts [9,25], newspapers [28], and Q&A [29].
A clustering-based approach distinguishes topics by the similarity of the words used in documents.
Clustering techniques can be logically divided into three categories: iterative distance-based clustering,
incremental hierarchical clustering, and probability-based clustering [30,31]. Iterative distance-based
methods include the classical k-means algorithm, and generally follow the procedure of selecting cluster
centroids, and iterating over a data set by assigning instances to clusters based upon distance measuring,
such as Euclidean distance. Incremental hierarchical methods typically develop a hierarchical-tree struc-
ture for cluster identification, and incrementally absorb each instance into the tree, measuring the overall
quality of the partitioning of instances based upon a category utility function to determine potential im-
provements to the tree structure. Methods in this category include the Cobweb clustering algorithm [32].
An added benefit of using an incremental hierarchical approach is that it produces a hierarchical tree of
attribute divisions for interpretation, providing valuable visualizations useful for drawing inferences about
the identified clusters and their attributes. Probability-based approaches model instances with certain
probabilities of belonging to each cluster,rather than making exclusive cluster divisions. They work by
tuning a finite-mixture model of probability distributions associated with each cluster. Probability-based
methods include the Auto-Class algorithm [33].
2.2.3 Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining, deals with the computational treatment of opinion,
sentiment, and subjectivity in text [34–36]. Sentiment analysis technologies for extracting opinions from
unstructured human-authored documents would be excellent tools for handling many business-intelligence
tasks. Common sentiment analysis approaches can be categorized into rule-based and learning-based
approaches [37]. Rule-based approaches involve the application of a lexicon of opinion-related positive
or negative terms to evaluate text in an unsupervised fashion. For example, analysis using a lexicon of
adjective features has been shown to be effective for predicting subjectivity and evaluating the semantic
gradability of text [38]. Unlike rule-based approaches that require predefining rules, machine-learning
approaches use a textual feature representation in combination with machine learning algorithms to derive
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 5
in a supercised fashion the relationship between text attributes and the opinion expressed by the writing.
Models based upon machine learning techniques require a training set of instances complete with class
labels, to calibrate the models and tune the relevant parameters. Labels can be assigned to training-set
instances manually through human evaluation and coding of the text, or resources with explicitly defined
ratings (such as the number of stars assigned in movie and product reviews) can be leveraged. For
example, in a comparative analysis of several machine-learning techniques for sentiment classification of
movie reviews, respectable and relatively equivalent performances were demonstrated by the näıve Bayes,
maximum entropy, and support vector machine classifiers [39].
Sentiment analysis in social media can effectively ascertain stakeholders’ opinions and attitudes. The
sentiment score is regarded as one of the major indexes reflecting subsequent stock performance. It is an
important explanatory variable in stock regression models.
2.3 Stock prediction model construction
According to previous financial literature, the most common stock behavior variables include stock re-
turn, volatility, and trade volume [40]. Researchers have examined firms’ stock behaviors and identified
relationships with discussions in firm-related web forums [4,5]. Early research focused on forum activity
measures, such as the number of messages, as indicators of stock behavior. Message volume in the forum
was found to significantly predict stock return, volatility, and trade volume [5]. However, such quantity
indicators cannot reflect the opinions of message content. Empirical analysis revealed a statistically signif-
icant relationship between the sentiments expressed in firm-related web forum messages and subsequent
stock values [4]. The above studies constructed stock prediction models using firm-related web forums on
a whole-forum level. According to stakeholder theory, segmenting firm-related web forums by stakeholder
groups, and further by topics, allows finer-grained stock prediction models to be constructed on specific
stakeholder groups and topics. Similarly, these studies also do not take into account the influence of a
crisis on social media.
3 A framework for stock prediction with a firm-related web forum
Because participants and discussion topics in firm-related web forums are usually closely related to a
particular company, firm-related web forums, as a type of social media, become an important source for
stock prediction. In this section, we propose a framework for stock prediction with a firm-related web
forum (Figure 1).
Traditionally, researchers analyzed firm-related web forums to predict stock behavior at the whole-
forum level. Based on related studies, further analysis of stakeholder groups and topics in firm-related
web forums enhance the explanatory power for stock prediction. In this framework, we focus on the
time periods during which social events occur, and periodically analyze what kinds of stakeholders are
participating, and what are their discussion topics and relationships with the stock market.
3.1 Firm-related web forum analysis for stock prediction
3.1.1 Stakeholder and topic identification
Users in a firm-related web forum often show concern about the company, indicating that each participant
may belong to one or more stakeholder group of the company. Typically, a user posts a thread -head
to initiate a discussion and the thread-head attracts many replies. The thread-head and replies form a
complete thread associated with some topic. Identifying and categorizing these stakeholder groups and
topics in each event period help to make comparisons among discussion group characteristics at different
time periods. It also helps when analyzing each stakeholder/topic group’s relationship with stock market
performance individually. This enables finding the most useful group in each period to stock behavior.
The most important step of stakeholder group/topic identification is characterizing each participant and
thread in the firm-related web forum by their writing style or content. The authorship analysis literature
6 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
Firm-related 
 web forum
Research contents                                                                    Research methods
Event model                        Web forum activities                                      Sentiment analysis
Pre event                        
During event   
 Message length 
Message volume
     Sentiment
  Disagreement
Opinion finder
SentiWordNet
Post event   
Fine-grained stock market behavior
Stakeholder groups                            Topics
Stock market behavior
Stock return          Stock volatility       Trading volume
Stock regression modeling
Stakeholder model                           Topic model                                  Stakeholder-topic model
Stakeholder/topic clustering
Social network extraction
   Principal components
             analysis
EM clustering/topic model
Figure 1 A framework for firm-related web forum analysis.
provides guidance for selecting appropriate writing style and content features. Forum-level activity based,
lexical, syntactical, and content specific features have often been used to characterize each user [19,41–43].
Forum-level features include the number of thread-heads and messages posted by a participant. This
represents the level of user activity. Lexical features can be further divided into character-based and word-
based features [44] and reflect the vocabulary richness of a participant. Syntactical features, including
function words and punctuation, can capture an author’s writing style at the sentence level. Content-
specific features depend on specific topics. These features include the frequencies for all word n-grams
(uni, bi, tri) and character n-grams (uni, bi, tri) used by participants. Based on the above analysis, we
integrate three types of features into the feature set: lexical, syntactical, and content-specific features
(Table 1).
Table 1 shows frequency rather than total number to represent some important features. Otherwise,
the total number of messages tends to dominate the stakeholder/topic clustering result. The stakeholder
and topic identification process can be divided into four steps.
Step 1: Message Collection. Based on previous investigations on the Internet, we collect a set of online
messages written by participants and profile the writing styles of each author.
Step 2: Feature Extraction. Messages on firm-related web forums are in unstructured text format.
Based on predefined writing-style features, the feature extractor can analyze the messages and extract
features in textual web forum messages. After feature extraction, each unstructured piece of text is
represented as a vector of writing-style features.
Step 3: Principal Component Analysis and Clustering. Features extracted from each participant or
thread is quantified as feature vectors for the inputs of clustering. However, these feature vectors are
of high-dimension, strongly correlated, and redundant among individual attributes, and cannot conform
to the assumption required for clustering [31]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is used before
clustering to reduce the dimensionality of feature space and increase independency between features,
which is the assumption required for subsequent clustering [45,46].
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 7
Table 1 Features used for stakeholder and topic identification
Representation Category Sub-category Features
Stakeholder
Forum level
Number of messages
Number of threads
Lexical
Character-level
Total number of character
Frequency of alphabetic characters
Frequency of upper case characters
Frequency of digit characters
Frequency of white space characters
Frequency of tab characters
Frequency of letters A–Z (26)
Frequency of special characters (21)
Word-level
Number of words
Frequency of short words (length< 4)
Frequency of characters in words
Average word length
Average sentence length in terms of characters
Average sentence length in terms of words
Total number of different words
Word length frequency (20)
Vocabulary richness
Hapax Legomena
Hapax Disegomena
Sichel’s S
Brunet’s W
Honore’s R
Syntactic
Frequency of punctuations
Frequency of stop-words
Content-specific
Word-level Frequency of word n-grams (uni bi tri):
Character-level Frequency of character n-grams (uni bi tri):
Topic
Forum level
Number of messages
Number of threads
Content-specific Word-level Frequency of word n-grams (uni bi tri):
Because we have clues on neither the number of stakeholder groups nor their specific characteristics in
advance, an unsupervised clustering approach is suitable for stakeholder group identification. We choose
an expectation maximization (EM) clustering algorithm to identify different stakeholders participating
in firm-related web forums. We use an LDA topic model to cluster the topics related to a company in
firm-related web forums by similarity of threads’ content features.
Step 4: Key Phrase Extraction. We extract key phrases from each stakeholder/topic group to repre-
sent them in a human-understandable way. We modify the classical term-frequency inverse document
frequency (tf-idf) formula, widely used in the information retrieval field, to suit the purposes of differen-
tiating the clusters and ranking their key phrases with respect to the other clusters. Traditionally, tf-idf
is applied to rank documents in a collection according to query terms, and considers the word frequen-
cies observed in a single document compared with the frequencies in other documents in the collection.
However, the objective in this study is to differentiate and understand the identified clusters through the
extraction and ranking of key representative phrases. The average word or phrase usage intensity in a
cluster is compared with the average usage intensity in other clusters. Therefore, we rank key phrases
8 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
within each cluster according to the following modified tf-idf measure:
fij
instancesj
log
(
clusters
GEclusters
)
,
where fij represents the frequency of the ith word in cluster j, instancesj indicates the number of instances
in the cluster clusters represents the total number of clusters and GEclusters denotes the total number of
clusters with average usage intensity. Generally (fij/instancesj) is greater than or equal to the average
usage intensity of the cluster being evaluated.
3.1.2 Sentiment analysis
Guided by previous literature, sentiments mirroring stakeholders’ expectations on a firm’s stock prices
should theoretically be related to the behavior of the stock. To accomplish the sentiment analysis task
in our framework, many techniques could be adopted. We choose two main analysis tools: the Opinion
Finder (OF) system and the SentiWordNet (SWN) lexicon.
The OF system performs general text processing tasks prior to subjectivity analysis, including tok-
enization, sentence splitting, part-of-speech tagging, and stemming. These tasks also include matching
extraction patterns that correspond to subjective language [47] and finding out word and phrase clues
using a large subjective language lexicon. The OF system precisely classifies sentences as subjective or
objective; furthermore, for subjective sentences that express sentiments, the specific words conveying
opinions are identified and classified as either positive or negative.
OF is a powerful system for subjectivity analysis, but it must be supplemented if it is to be used for
sentiment analysis. Although OF is capable of identifying opinions, and classifying words in subjective
sentences as positive or negative, it provides no knowledge on the intensity of the expressed sentiment.
Therefore, to accommodate for this deficiency, the intensity of the expressed sentiments identified by
OF is graded using information from the SWN lexicon [48]. The lexicon provides positive and negative
intensity scores for the expansive set of terms in the SWN lexicon. However, the application of the SWN
lexicon without contextual knowledge of expressed sentiments can be problematic. For example, there
are multiple usages for each word; a specific word can be used in various parts of speech, each having an
entry in the lexicon and an assigned positive and negative sentiment score. Knowing which entry in the
lexicon to reference a given specific word, and whether to apply the positive or negative sentiment score,
requires contextual knowledge. Unguided applications of other sentiment lexicons such as the General
Inquirer also suffer from similar contextual limitations. Using the OF system prior to application of the
SWN lexicon enables the targeted application of the lexicon, guided by a knowledge of a term’s usage,
context, and sentiment polarity, thereby leveraging the strengths of both methods.
3.2 Event analysis
In the event model, we choose the recent American banking crisis as a sample event to be analyzed. The
American banking industry has suffered from the economic downturn and debt crisis since 2008. Global
credit markets came to a near stand still in September 2008, as several major financial institutions, such
as Lehman Brothers, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and American International Group, went bankrupt. In
a few surprising moves, heavyweights Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley even changed their charter
to commercial banks, in an attempt to stabilize their capital situation. During this period, the US
government launched many effective actions. In October 2008, the US government launched the Troubled
Assets Relief Program (TARP) to establish and manage the Treasury fund. The bailout was attempting
to increase the liquidity of the secondary mortgage markets by purchasing the illiquid mortgage backed
securities (MBS), and through that, reducing the potential losses of owner institutions. Finally, the
program achieved the purpose of stabilizing the country’s financial system and boosting the economy.
The TARP gives the US Treasury purchasing power of $700 billion to buy up MBS from institutions
across the country in an attempt to create liquidity and un-seize the money markets. The fund was
created by a bill that was made law on October 3, 2008 with the passage of H.R. 1424 enacting the
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. The Treasury was immediately given $250 billion to buy
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 9
equity stakes in nine major US banks, and the president must certify additional funds on demand. The
additional funds were distributed as $100 billion, and then as the final $350 billion was given, Congress
had the right to not approve the additional amounts1).
As we analyze market performance via social media during a crisis, we divide the banking industry
crisis into three time periods based on two important time points. The first time point is October 2008—
the time the US government launched TARP. The second time point is December 2009—the time the
Ministry of Finance completed the last batch of investment in core banking institutions under TARP.
According to these two important time points, the three phases are: before TARP from January 1, 2008
to September 30, 2008; during TARP from October 1, 2008 to December 31, 2009; after TARP from
January 1, 2010 to September 30, 2010.
3.3 Stock regression model construction
Using firm-related web forums for prediction of stock behavior, we select the appropriate forum activity
variables which are related to stock behavior. Early studies focused on quantitative variables such as
message volumes [49, 50] or time-related variables of replies [51] to model forum activity. In addition to
forum activity measures, we evaluate linguistic data in to obtain richer and more nuanced information
from messages. Past research considered not only message volume but also the opinions expressed by
the messages. Empirical analysis revealed a statistically significant relationship between the investor
sentiments expressed in web forum discussions and stock values. In the present study, the independent
variables of a stock regression model are forum activity variables and sentiment variables as described
earlier. Message volume as the most objective measure of forum activity may reflect firm fundamentals [49]
and thus should relate to stock behavior. Message length reflects stakeholders’ attention to a company;
we also extract this as an independent variable of the model. Sentiment variables include a message
level sentiment score and disagreement. Message level sentiment is calculated as the average sentence
sentiment scores based upon the SWN lexicon. Disagreement is defined as the variance of message level
sentiment during a trading day.
Previous financial literature has been mainly interested in three common stock behavior variables:
stock return, volatility, and trade volume [52]. According to previous studies, simplified intraday volatility
(VLTt) (the difference between the high and low price for the day divided by the average of the opening
and closing price) is often used following Das and Chen (2007). Trade volume (VOLt) of the stock is log
scaled. In this study, we focus on stock return. Return (RETt) is defined as the log difference of the
close-to-close stock price [10,53]. We focus on the stock return prediction model. It can be described as
follows:
RETt = β0 + β1MSGVOLt−1,i,j + β2MSGLENt−1,i,j + β3SENTYt−1,i,j + β4DISAGt−1,i,j + εt.
For the model described above, independent variables are message volume (MSGVOL), average message
length (MSGLEN), average message level sentiment (SENTY) and disagreement (DISAG). The subscript
t denotes the time period. The variables i and j denote the number of stakeholder groups and topics,
respectively. For example, MSGLENt−1,i,j denotes the average message length when stakeholder group i
discussed topic j in the t− 1 period.
4 Experimental evaluation
In the previous section, we proposed a framework for firm-related web forum analysis. Accordingly, in
the experimental evaluation phase, we conduct a series of experiments to assess the effectiveness of our
proposed framework.
1) Here we list 22 US major banks receiving TARP money: American Express, KeyCorp, Citigroup, State Street, Bank
of America, Marshall & Ilsley, Comerica, SunTrust, BB & T, Morgan Stanley, Fifth Third, U.S. Bancorp, Bank of New
York Mellon, Northern Trust, Goldman Sachs, Wells Fargo, Capital One, PNC, JPMorgan Chase, Hartford, CIT, Regions.
10 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
4.1 Experimental design
Guided by the research framework and previous literature, we propose a specific research design to
adequately address the research questions. We use the Yahoo! Finance Forum as the test bed mainly
because discussions on it center on company-specific stocks and events relating to them, and are relatively
informed and contain relatively less noises than other Internet forums. We analyzed Bank of America
because of its market prominence, societal presence, and the nature of stakeholder groups who hold
relationships with it.
As described above, we decompose the entire forum discussion into small sub-parts by event periods
and stakeholder/topic groups using EM clustering. The result is that during each event period we can
analyze whether there is a predictive relationship between discussions from a specific group and the firm’s
stock behavior individually.
Based upon the above analysis, the following research hypotheses are developed:
H1: Stakeholder groups and topics will change greatly over the three crisis stages.
H1.1: Stakeholder groups will change greatly over the three crisis stages.
H1.2: Topics will change greatly over the three crisis stages.
H1.3: The relationships among stakeholder groups and topics will be different over the three crisis
stages.
H2: The relationships among stakeholder groups/topics and the firm’s stock behavior will be different
over the three crisis stages.
H2.1: The relationships among stakeholder groups and the firm’s stock behavior will be different over
the three crisis stages.
H2.2: The relationships among topics and the firm’s stock behavior will be different over the three
crisis stages.
H2.3: The relationships among special stakeholder groups’ topics and the firm’s stock behavior will be
different over the three crisis stages.
H3: At each stage of crisis, adopting a stakeholder perspective of the firm-related web forum will
enhance the understanding that stakeholder groups hold a particularly strong relationship with the firm’s
stock behavior.
H3.1: Partitioning the discussions in the web forum by stakeholder group will reveal unique or strength-
ened relationships with stock behavior.
H3.2: Further segmentation of the stakeholder group communications by discussion topic will also
reveal unique or strengthened relationships with stock behavior.
Messages from the Yahoo! Finance Forum from January 1, 1998 to January 1, 2011 are collected for
the study using customized web spidering and parsing programs over a 1 week period. We reference the
Center for Research in Security Prices for stock information to calculate the stock behavior variables for
more than 3000 trading days covered in the analysis. The results of applying the analysis framework to
the Yahoo! Finance Forum is presented and discussed, including the stakeholder and topic analyses, web
forum activities analyses, sentiment analyses, and stock behavior modeling.
4.2 Stakeholder and topic analyses
Various stakeholder groups and topics are identified for Bank of America. Table 2 shows the key phrases
extracted from each group in Bank of America’s message board before the TARP period. The names of
the stakeholder groups and topics are determined according to these key phrases.
Before the TARP period, three distinct stakeholder groups are identified in the web forum. Through
interpretation of the key phrases extracted from each cluster, the following identities are assigned to
the stakeholder groups: technical investors, macroeconomy examiners, and information exchangers. Fur-
thermore, six distinct topics discussed by the stakeholder groups in the web forum are identified by
the clustering procedure. Through interpretation of the key phrases extracted from each cluster, the
following topical labels are assigned: macroeconomy, stock transaction, mortgage and loan, investors
market, people’s life, and political environment. The majority of messages are attributed to the stock
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 11
Table 2 Stock return models for all stakeholders and topics on Bank of America’s message board before TARP
Stakeholder and topic Key word %
Stakeholder groups
Technical Investor dividend-cut capital-gains long-time long-term-investment 36%
MacroEconomy Examiner hedge-funds message-board interest-rate good-luck-longs 53%
Information Exchanger housing-market short-selling chief-executive-officer 11%
Topics
Macroeconomic bank company economy fund people job loan government 18%
Stock Transaction mortgage billion credit work investor money card country 35%
Mortgage and Loan bank stock economy loan price mortgage credit investment 7%
Investors market day money trade people big happy finance long 19%
People’s Life people company happy life work buy feel lost year 14%
Political environment government million work money trade report claim secure 7%
Technical investor                                      Macro-economy examiner
Information exchanger
12
10
  8
  6
  4
  2
  0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
  5
  0
Before TARP                         During TARP                           After TARP
Macro economic                                          Stock transaction
Mortgage and loan                                       Investors market
People’s life                                                 Political enviroment
Fiscal and monetary policy                          Democrats and republicans
TARP, financial crisis                                  Company stock
Government economic work                        Oil prices
Before TARP                                   During TARP                              After TARP
×103
×103
Figure 2 Stakeholder groups and topics for Bank of America.
transaction and investors market discussion topics (35% and 19%, respectively). In this way, we perform
stakeholder groups and topics identification for Bank of America in each event period. Figure 2 illustrates
the quantitative changes of these groups over the time periods.
During the TARP period, the stakeholder clustering result is the same as for the previous stage.
However, the topics identified by the clustering procedure in the web forum are different. This reflects
that, along with development of the economic crisis, stakeholders closely watch different focused topics.
From the statistical results, participants in the web forum belonging to the macroeconomy examiner
stakeholder group (over 54%) are little more than those of the previous stage. However, the proportions
of technical investor and information exchanger stakeholder groups both change. The proportion of
technical investors decreases from 36% to 10%. The proportion of information exchangers grows from
11% to 35%. Furthermore, six distinct discussion topics are identified by the clustering procedure.
According to the key phrases extracted from each cluster, the following topic labels are assigned: fiscal
12 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
Table 3 Forum analysis for Bank of America before TARP ((number of message), [number of author], {number of thread})
Stakeholders
Topic1
macro
economic
Topic2
stock
transaction
Topic3
mortgage
and loan
Topic4
investors
market
Topic5
people’s
life
Topic6
political
environ-ment
All topics
Stakeholder1
technical
investor
(4818)
[1101]
{2265}
(8741)
[1489]
{4578}
(1097)
[478]
{729}
(5713)
[1295]
{2682}
(3354)
[984]
{1795}
(1906)
[569]
{807}
(25629)
[2828]
{12856}
Stakeholder2
macroeconomy
examiner
(2854)
[1329]
{1668}
(5502)
[2052]
{3482}
(733)
[505]
{571}
(3682)
[1637]
{2101}
(2207)
[1146]
{1401}
(1158)
[595]
{614}
(16136)
[4180]
{9837}
Stakeholder3
information
exchanger
(4809)
[362]
{2043}
(7506)
[491]
{3717}
(1584)
[194]
{774}
(6123)
[401]
{2346}
(3165)
[299]
{1531}
(1929)
[187]
{757}
(25116)
[883]
{11168}
All
stakeholder
(12481)
[2792]
{4163}
(21749)
[4032]
{8270}
(3414)
[1177]
{1577}
(15518)
[3333]
{4524}
(8726)
[2429]
{3311}
(4993)
[1351]
{1398}
(66881)
[7891]
{23243}
and monetary policy, stock transaction, Democrats and Republicans, people’s life, TARP financial crisis
and company stock. From the statistical results, the hottest topic is also stock transaction, with the
proportion of message volume being over 37%. In addition, the message volume on the Democrats and
Republicans topic is also very high (over 16%). During the TARP period, stakeholders also pay close
attention to some topics which have not emerged in the previous stage, such as TARP, financial crisis,
company stock, fiscal and monetary policy. In contrast, some hot topics in the previous stage are no
longer the main concern, such as investors market. This conclusion verifies Hypothesis 1.2.
Similar to the past two stages, after the TARP period, the stakeholder clustering result is also the
same. It states that the stakeholder groups associated with the firm are constant. They do not change
along with a particular event. On the other hand, we also found that the topics discussed are different
from each other over the three crisis stages. However, the hot topics which are being closely watched
by stakeholder groups in the web forum are also change. This reflects that the topics are different over
the three crisis stages. Over 50% of participants in the web forum belong to the information exchanger
stakeholder group. However, the message volume of the macroeconomy examiner stakeholder group
is the most of the three stakeholder groups. Also, six distinct discussion topics are identified by the
clustering procedure. They are government economic work, oil prices, mortgage and loan, people’s life,
stock transaction, Democrats and Republicans. According to the statistical results, the hottest topic is
also stock transaction, with the proportion of message volume over 32%. This might show that people
are concerned about the company’s stock all the time. In addition, the proportion of authors belonging
to the government economic work and people’s life topics are also very high (35% and 33%, respectively).
After the TARP period, stakeholders also pay close attention to some topics which had not emerged in
the previous stage, such as government economic work and oil prices. In contrast, some hot topics in the
previous stage are no longer the main concern, such as TARP and the financial crisis.
Stakeholder groups engage in conversation on a variety of discussion topics. However, we observe
some topic tendencies among the stakeholder groups. According to further statistical results, technical
investors engage in relatively high levels of discussion such as on stock transactions and investors market
topics compared with other topics. Table 3 shows detailed statistics.
According to Table 3, the relationships among stakeholder groups and topics are different over the
three crisis stages. This conclusion verifies Hypothesis 1.3.
4.3 Stock regression model for Bank of America
According to the analysis of stakeholder groups and topics in three crisis periods, we test the diversity
of stakeholders and topics on the web forum. Next, we construct the stock regression model to analyze
the relationship between special stakeholder groups/topics and the firm’s stock behavior individually.
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 13
Table 4 Stock return regression model for all stakeholders and topics for Bank of America before TARP
Stakeholder
and topic
Technical
investor
Macro-
economy
examiner
Information
exchanger
Macro
eco-
nomic
Stock
transac-
tion
Mortgage
and
loan
Investors
market
People’s
life
Political
environ-
ment
Sentiment
t−1
0.000
(0.01)
0.003
(0.11)
0.025
(1.16)
−0.003
(−0.23)
0.008
(0.35)
0.008
(0.88)
0.002
(0.14)
0.010
(0.47)
*−0.008
(−1.04)
Disagreement
t−1
0.003
(0.66)
0.005
(0.53)
0.006
(1.18)
−0.002
(−0.19)
−0.007
(−1.00)
−0.001
(−0.25)
*0.008
(1.23)
−0.008
(−0.55)
**0.001
(1.79)
Message
length t−1
4.0E−5
(0.09)
−0.001
(−0.92)
−3.2E−5
(−0.11)
1.8E−5
(0.04)
0.002
(1.72)
0.000
(0.61)
1.3E−5
(0.03)
0.001
(0.70)
***0.001
(2.14)
Message
volume t−1
1.15E−7
(0.12)
−1.3E−6
(−0.81)
1.2E−6
(1.03)
−8.5E−7
(−0.28)
**1.2E−7
(0.16)
3.5E−6
(0.31)
8.5E−8
(0.09)
−1.4E−7
(−0.05)
**−3E−6
(−1.99)
R2 0.225 0.206 0.321 0.150 0.445 0.221 0.564 0.147 0.872
*: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.
Because the Bank of America data are fairly complete, we conduct a detailed analysis on the Yahoo!
Finance Bank of America board. We develop the stock models to test the hypotheses regarding the rela-
tionship between Bank of America Company’s web forum and its stock behavior. We examine correlation
and develop predictive regression models using the variables presented in the research design. Because
there is a relative lag of stock behavior behind forum activities, we use average monthly data to conduct
the regression analysis. In the predictive regressions, forum discussions are used to predict stock behavior
in the following trading month.
4.3.1 Stock return regression model for the stakeholder and topic-level analyses
Before the TARP period, topics related to the political environment hold a significant relationship with
stock returns. Positive sentiments expressed in the political environment topic indicate reduced stock
returns in the following trading month. Interestingly, disagreement in sentiments among stakeholders
in discussions on the political environment holds a significant predictive relationship with stock returns,
where higher disagreement indicates increased stock returns in the following trading month. Message
length remains significant in stakeholder discussions on the political environment, where shorter messages
indicate lower stock returns compared with longer messages. Message volume holds a significant predictive
relationship with stock returns, where increased posting of messages indicates impending negative returns
in the following trading month. This result confirms prior studies [5]. Other stakeholder groups and topics
all are correlated with stock returns. Table 4 presents detailed statistics.
During the TARP period, the sentiments expressed in technical investor and information exchanger
stakeholder groups reveal significant predictive relationships with stock return. However, the directional-
ities of the observed effects differ among the two groups. Positive sentiments expressed by the technical
investors indicate reduced stock returns in the following trading month, while similar expressions by
information exchangers indicate a subsequent increment in stock returns. Additionally, the results of
sentiments expressed in stock transactions and TARP financial crisis topics are also different. The sen-
timents expressed in discussions of the stock transaction topic reveal a significant positive predictive
relationship with stock returns. However, the directionalities of the observed effects are negative for the
TARP financial crisis topic.
After the TARP period, the technical investor stakeholder group holds a particularly strong predictive
relationship with stock returns. Positive sentiments expressed by the technical investors indicate lower
stock returns. Longer messages and a large number of post volume expressed by the technical investors
indicate higher stock returns. The information exchanger stakeholder group also holds a significant
relationship with stock returns. Message length expressed by the information exchanger group holds a
significant positive relationship with stock returns. According to the topic analysis, government economic
work, oil prices, mortgage and loan, and people’s life discussion topics hold significant relationships with
stock returns. Longer messages on the government economic work and people’s life discussion topics
14 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
Table 5 Stock return regression model for special topics for all stakeholders for Bank of America before TARP
Stakeholder
topic
Technical
investor
Macro
economic
Technical
investor
Stock
transaction
Macro-economy
examiner
macro
economic
Macro-economy
examiner
stock
transaction
Information
exchanger
macro
economic
Information
exchanger
stock
transaction
Sentiment
t−1
0.007
(0.295)
−0.010
(−0.391)
*−0.009
(−1.295)
0.008
(0.334)
0.000
(0.021)
−0.002
(−0.111)
Disagreement
t−1
*−0.006
(−1.233)
0.002
(0.361)
**−0.007
(−3.207)
−0.032
(−0.928)
−0.001
(−0.419)
−0.007
(−1.188)
Message
length t−1
0.000
(0.473)
−0.001
(−0.515)
***−0.001
(−6.357)
0.002
(1.230)
4.6E−5
(0.229)
0.000
(1.069)
Message
volume t−1
−4.2E−7
(−0.064)
2.2E−7
(0.107)
***−2.6E−5
(−6.200)
−2E−7
(−0.066)
−2.4E−6
(−0.397)
1.3E−6
(0.588)
R2 0.339 0.113 0.928 0.349 0.080 0.281
*: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.
indicate increased stock returns.
Based on the above analyses, we find that the relationship between stakeholder groups/topics and
firm’s stock behavior is different over the three crisis stages. This conclusion verifies Hypothesis 2.1 and
Hypothesis 2.2. Additionally, we find that under each crisis stage, the stakeholder groups/topics holding
significant relationships with stock returns are different, verifying Hypothesis 3.1.
4.3.2 Stock return regression model for the stakeholder-topic level analyses
In this part of the experiment, we test whether two topics within all the stakeholder discussions hold
additional significance in predicting stock returns in each crisis period.
Table 5 presents selected stakeholder and discussion topic models before the TARP period. Macroe-
conomy examiners on the macroeconomic topic are significant in predicting stock returns. In addition,
the sentiments expressed in messages, disagreement on sentiments, length of messages and message vol-
umes expressed by macroeconomy examiners on the macroeconomy topic all hold significant negative
relationships with stock returns. Interestingly, disagreement in sentiments among technical investors in
discussions on the macroeconomy hold a significant predictive relationship with stock returns, where lower
disagreement indicates increased stock returns in the following trading month. Table 5 shows detailed
statistics.
During the TARP period, the message length expressed by technical investors on the Democrats
and Republicans topic holds a significant negative relationship with stock returns. In contrast, longer
messages expressed by the information exchangers on the fiscal and monetary policy topic indicate highest
stock returns. Disagreement in sentiments among macroeconomy examiners in discussions on the fiscal
and monetary policy topic holds a significant predictive relationship with stock returns, where lower
disagreement indicates increased stock returns.
After the TARP period, technical investors and macroeconomy examiners in discussions on oil prices
hold significant relationships with stock returns. Longer messages expressed by technical investors on
oil prices indicate increased stock returns in the following trading month. However, longer messages
expressed by macroeconomy examiners on oil prices indicate decreased stock returns in the following
trading month. Information exchangers in discussions on government economic work hold a significant
relationship with stock returns. Longer messages expressed by information exchangers on government
economic work indicate increased stock returns in the following trading month. The positive sentiments
expressed by technical investors on the government economic work topic also hold a significant negative
relationship with stock returns.
The relationships among special stakeholder groups’ topics and the firm’s stock behavior are different
over the three crisis stages. This supports Hypothesis 2.3. Following the partitioning of the forum by
stakeholder group, further segmentation of communications by discussion topic reveals strengthened or
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 15
Table 6 Stock return regression model for Bank of America (all variables)
Significant groups
Event period
Before tarp During tarp After tarp
Level
Stakeholder
groups
Technical investor (SENTY:
−0.0552**)
Technical investor
(SENTY: −0.037***;
MEGVOL: 5.1E−07**)
Information exchanger (DISAG:
−0.0093*; MEGLEN: 0.00126**)
Topics
Political environment
(SENTY: −0.008*;
MEGLEN: 0.001**)
Investors market
(DISAG: 0.0076*)
Stock transaction (SENTY:
0.06585*) TARP and financial
crisis (SENTY: −0.01252*;
MEGLEN: −0.00067*)
Government economic work
(MEGLEN: 0.000478*) People’s
life (MEGLEN: 0.00091**)
Stakeholder-
Topic
Macroeconomy
examiner-
macroeconomy
(DISAG: −0.00747**;
MEGLEN:
−0.00141***)
Technical investor-democrats and
republicans (MEGLEN:
−0.00053*) Macro economy
examiner-fiscal, Monetary policy
(DISAG: −0.00697*) Information
exchanger-fiscal, Monetary policy
(MEGLEN: 0.000226*)
Technical investor-oil prices
(MEGLEN: 0.000169*) Macro
economy examiner-oil prices
(MEGLEN: −0.00017**)
Information exchanger-
government economic work
(MEGLEN: 0.000496*)
*: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.
previously unidentified relationships with stock behavior in each crisis stage. This supports Hypothe-
sis 3.2.
Table 6 summarizes observations of significant variables in different groups in each event period for the
stock analysis results for Bank of America. The variables, coefficients, and significance level are shown
in parentheses.
The overall results we obtained, as shown in Table 6 have important implications for guiding various
aspects of real stock trading. For example, the influence of a crisis could be analyzed to predict stock
market behavior via a number of social media parameters.
As seen in Table 6, before the TARP period, discussion topics such as the political environment and
investors market play an important role in predicting stock return. Disagreement among macroeconomy
examiners in discussions on the macroeconomy holds a significant negative relationship with stock re-
turns. With the development of the economic crisis, during the TARP period we find negative predictive
relationships between technical investors’ sentiments and stock returns. TARP and the financial crisis
become hot topics during this period. Disagreement among macroeconomy examiners in discussions on
the fiscal and monetary policy topic holds a significant predictive relationship with stock returns. After
the TARP period, message length of the information exchanger stakeholder group holds a significant
positive relationship with stock returns.
In a real stock market, that stakeholder groups or topics hold significant relationships with the stock
behavior of a firm is something that evolves over time. Under times of crisis we need to adjust the predic-
tion. A crisis might be an important piece of news or policy change. The previous significant relationships
between stakeholder groups (or topics) and the behavior of a firm’s stock should be reanalyzed under the
conditions of the new event while it is occurring. For example, we can rebuild a stock regression model
to predict stock prices 20 minutes after an important news release.
According to the results obtained in this study, we identified a number of types of stakeholders and
topics that play a key role in the stock market in real time. We only analyzed the key stakeholders or
information on a topic, not all the information in a real stock investment process.
5 Conclusions and future directions
In this study we focused on predicting stock market performance with social media in different stakeholder
groups, discussion topics and during each period of a crisis. The main contribution of this study is that we
16 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
proposed a multistage dynamic firm-related web forum analysis framework, which considers how a crisis
has enormous influence on social media, and that these impacts further affect the relationship between
social media and the stock market. The multistage analysis framework showed good performance. As a
result, we draw three conclusions:
First, stakeholder group members are consistent in each stage of a crisis. However, the hot topics being
closely watched by stakeholders are different during each crisis phase.
Second, the relationships among stakeholder groups/topics and a firm’s stock behavior change dy-
namically over different crisis stages. Differing sharply from prior research, crisis have an enormous
influence on web forums and stock market performance. Because the hot topics being closely watched by
stakeholders are different during each crisis stage, the stock regression models also change.
Third, during a crisis, segmenting forum discussions by stakeholder groups, and further by topics,
enhances understanding which stakeholder groups or topics hold particularly strong relationships with a
firm’s stock behavior during each stage of a crisis.
Additionally, this research has given us some important implications for future work. The research
implications include two major aspects. First, when developing real-time stock return models, a specific
firm, period, stakeholders, and topics should be viewed. Second, this research provides a potential
explanation for the inconsistent findings of prior studies about the relationship between comprehensive
information of forum activities and stock behavior. Furthermore, the managerial implications of this
research might contribute to improving investment decisions. Once we construct a stock prediction
model in view of a specific firm, by using the research framework for the analysis of firm-related web
forums, we can find which stakeholder group’s opinions will be valuable during each stage of a crisis. This
can help determine the economic value of using information from a forum.
Acknowledgements
This project was funded primarily by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 70871034,
70771037), Key Project of Natural Science Research of Universities in Anhui Province (Grant No. KJ2010A259),
PhD Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grant No. 2012JYBS0848), and Humanities and
Social Sciences Fund Projects of Ministry of the Education (Grant No. 09YJC630055).
References
1 Agrawal R, Rajagopalan S, Srikant R, et al. Mining newsgroups using networks arising from social behavior. In:
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on World Wide Web. New York: ACM, 2003. 529–535
2 Antweiler W, Frank M Z. Do US stock markets typically overreact to corporate news stories? http://ssrn.com/ab-
stract=878091
3 Schumaker R P, Chen H. Textual analysis of stock market prediction using breaking financial news: the AZFin text
system. ACM Trans Inf Syst, 2009, 27: 12
4 Das S R, Chen M Y. Yahoo! for Amazon: sentiment extraction from small talk on the web. Manag Sci, 2007, 53:
1375–1388
5 Antweiler W, Frank M Z. Is all that talk just noise? The information content of internet stock message boards. J
Finan, 2004, 59: 1259–1294
6 Donaldson T, Preston L E. The stakeholder theory of the corporation: concepts, evidence, and implications. Acad
Manage Rev, 1995, 20: 65–91
7 Kim W, Jeong O R, Lee S W. On social Web sites. Inf Syst, 2010, 35: 215–236
8 Chen H. Smart market and money. IEEE Intell Syst, 2011, 26: 82–96
9 Blei D M, Ng A Y, Jordan M I. Latent dirichlet allocation. J Mach Learn Res, 2003, 3: 993–1022
10 Tetlock P, Teschansky M, Macskassy S. More than words: quantifying language to measure firms’ fundamentals. J
Finan, 2008, 63: 1437–1467
11 Shiller R. Do stock price move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in dividends? Amer Psychol Rev, 1981,
5: 296–320
12 Roll R. R-squared. J Finan, 1988, 43: 541–566
13 Watts D J, Dodds P S. Influentials, networks, and public opinion formation. J Consum Res, 2007, 34: 441–458
14 Chung W, Chen H, Reid E. Business stakeholder analyzer: an experiment of classifying stakeholders on the Web. J
Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci 17
AM Soc Inf Sci Technol, 2009, 60: 59–74
15 Mei Q, Zhai C X. Discovering evolutionary theme patterns from text: an exploration of temporal text mining. In:
Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data Mining. New York:
ACM, 2005. 198–207
16 Zhou Y, Guan X, Zhang Z, et al. Predicting the tendency of topic discussion on the online social networks using
a dynamic probability model. In: Proceedings of the Hypertext 2008 Workshop on Collaboration and Collective
Intelligence. New York: ACM, 2008. 7–11
17 Dubinko M, Kumar R, Magnani J, et al. Visualizing tags over time. ACM Trans Web, 2007, 1: 7
18 Kaplan A M, Haenlein M. Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media. Bus Horiz,
2010, 53: 59–68
19 Zheng R, Li J, Chen H, et al. A framework for authorship identification of online messages: Writing style features and
classification techniques. J AM Soc Inf Sci Technol, 2006, 57: 378–393
20 Burrows J F. Word-patterns and story-shapes: the statistical analysis of narrative style. Lit Linguist Comput, 1987,
2: 61–70
21 Stamatatos E, Fakotakis N, Kokkinakis G. Computer-based authorship attribution without lexical measures. Comput
Hum, 2001, 35: 193–214
22 De Vel O, Anderson A, Corney M, et al. Mining e-mail content for author identification forensics. ACM Sigmod Rec,
2001, 30: 55–64
23 Zheng R, Qin Y, Huang Z, et al. Authorship analysis in cybercrime investigation. In: Proceedings of the 1st NSF/NIJ
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics. Berlin/heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2003. 59–73
24 Hofmann T. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. New York: ACM, 1999. 50–57
25 Griffiths T L, Steyvers M. Finding scientific topics. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA, 2004, 101 (Suppl. 1): 5228–5235
26 Carlson B A. Unsupervised topic clustering of switchboard speech messages. In: Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Atlanta, 1996. 315–318
27 Hofmann T. Unsupervised learning by probabilistic latent semantic analysis. Mach learn, 2001, 42: 177–196
28 Wei X, Croft W B. LDA-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 29th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. New York: ACM, 2006. 178–185
29 Bao H, Chang E Y. Adheat: an influence-based diffusion model for propagating hints to match ads. In: Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web. New York: ACM, 2010. 71–80
30 Jain A K, Murty M N, Flynn P J. Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput Surv, 1999, 31: 264–323
31 Witten I H, Frank E. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learing Tools and Techniques. 2nd ed. Morgan Kaufmann,
2005
32 Fisher D H. Knowledge acquisition via incremental conceptual clustering. Mach Learn, 1987, 2: 139–172
33 Cheeseman P, Stutz J. Bayesian classification (AutoClass): theory and results. In: Fayyad U M, Piatetsky-Shapiro G,
Smyth P, et al., eds. Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Menlo Park: AAAI Press, 1995
34 Abbasi A, Chen H, Salem A. Sentiment analysis in multiple languages: feature selection for opinion classification in
Web forums. ACM Trans Inf Syst, 2008, 26: 12
35 Chen H, Zimbra D. AI and opinion mining. IEEE Intell Syst, 2010, 25: 74–80
36 Pang B, Lee L. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found Trends Inf Retr, 2008, 2: 1–135
37 Gamon M. Sentiment classification on customer feedback data: noisy data, large feature vectors, and the role of
linguistic analysis. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics. Stroudsburg:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004. 841
38 Hatzivassiloglou V, Wiebe J M. Effects of adjective orientation and gradability on sentence subjectivity. In: Proceedings
of the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics. Stroudsburg: Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2000. 299–305
39 Pang B, Lee L, Vaithyanathan S. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using machine learning techniques. In: Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-02 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Stroudsburg: Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2002. 79–86
40 Engle R, Patton A. What good is a volatility model? Quant Financ, 2001, 1: 237–245
41 Abbasi A, Chen H. Writeprints: a stylometric approach to identity-level identification and similarity detection in
cyberspace. ACM Trans Inf Syst, 2008, 26: 7
42 Abbasi A, Chen H, Nunamaker J F. Stylometric identification in electronic markets: scalability and robustness. J
Manage Inf Syst, 2008, 25: 49–78
43 Abbasi A, Chen H. CyberGate: a design framework and system for text analysis of computer-mediated communication.
MIS Quart, 2008, 32: 811
44 Zhang Y L, Dang C. Gender classification for Web forums. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern A-Syst Hum, 2011, 41:
668–677
18 Jiang C Q, et al. Sci China Inf Sci
45 Abbasi A, Chen H. Visualizing authorship for identification. In: Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference
on Intelligence and Security Informatics. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006. 60–71
46 Huang S, Ward M O, Rundensteiner E A. Exploration of dimensionality reduction for text visualization. In: Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization. Washington
DC: IEEE, 2005. 63–74
47 Riloff E, Wiebe J. Learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions. In: Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Stroudsburg: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2003.
105–112
48 Esuli A, Sebastiani F. Sentiwordnet: a publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining. In: Proceedings of the
5th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Genoa, 2006. 417–422
49 Wysocki P. Cheap talk on the web: the determinants of postings on stock message boards. University of Michigan
Business School Working Paper No. 98025. http://ssrn.com/abstract=160170
50 Antweiler W, Frank M Z. Internet stock message boards and stock returns. University of British Columbia Working
Paper, 2002
51 De Choudhury M, Sundaram H, John A, et al. Can blog communication dynamics be correlated with stock market
activity? In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia. New York: ACM, 2008. 55–60
52 Hansen P R, Lunde A. A forecast comparison of volatility models: does anything beat a GARCH (1,1)? J Appl
Econom, 2005, 20: 873–889
53 Bossaerts P, Hillion P. Implementing statistical criteria to select return forecasting models: what do we learn? Rev
Financ Stud, 1999, 12: 405–428
