76 April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
FROM FINGERPRINT
TO WRITEPRINT
Fingerprint-based identification has been the oldest biometric technique suc-
cessfully used in conventional crime investigation. The unique, immutable
patterns of a fingerprint—the pattern of ridges and furrows as well as the
minutiae points—can help a crime investigator infer the identities of suspects.
ILLUSTRATION
BY PAUL WILEY
By JIEXUN LI, 
RONG ZHENG, and 
HSINCHUN CHEN
Identifying the key features to help identify and 
trace online authorship.
However, circumstances have changed
since the emergence and rapid proliferation
of cybercrime. Generally, cybercrime
includes Internet fraud, computer hack-
ing/network intrusion, cyber piracy,
spreading of malicious code, and so on.
Cyber criminals post online messages over
various Web-based channels to distribute
illegal materials, including pirated software,
child pornography, and stolen property.
Moreover, international criminals and ter-
rorist organizations such as Osama bin
Laden and Al Qaeda use online messages as
one of their major communication media.
Since people are not usually required to
provide their real identity in cyberspace, the
anonymity makes identity tracing a critical
problem in cybercrime investigation. This
problem is further complicated by the sheer
amount of cyber users and activities.
Unlike conventional crimes, there are no
fingerprints to be found in cybercrime. For-
tunately, there is another type of print,
which we call “writeprint,” hidden in peo-
ple’s writings. Similar to a fingerprint, a
writeprint is composed of multiple features,
such as vocabulary richness, length of sen-
tence, use of function words, layout of
paragraphs, and keywords. These
writeprint features can represent an author’s
writing style, which is usually consistent
across his or her writings, and further
 

78 April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
become the basis of authorship analysis. In this arti-
cle, we introduce a method of identifying the key
writeprint features for authors of online messages to
facilitate identity tracing in cybercrime investigation.
AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS AND WRITEPRINT FEATURES
Authorship analysis is a process of categorizing arti-
cles by authors’ writing style and is often viewed in
the context of stylometric research [7]. It has its
most extensive applications to historical literature
[4, 8]. Some recent studies introduced this
approach to online messages and showed promising
results [3]. This research field can be categorized
into authorship identification, authorship charac-
terization, and similarity detection. Authorship
characterization is aimed at inferring an author’s
background characteristics rather than identity.
Similarity detection compares multiple pieces of
writing without identifying the author. Authorship
identification determines the likelihood of a partic-
ular author having written a piece of work by exam-
ining other works produced by that author. In this
study, we are particularly interested in authorship
identification because it is the most relevant to
cybercrime investigation.
The essence of authorship identification is to iden-
tify a set of features that remain relatively constant
among a number of writings by a particular author.
Given n predefined features, each piece of writing can
be represented by an n-D feature vector. Supervised
learning techniques such as ID3, Neural Network
(NN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) can train
and generate a classifier so as to determine the cate-
gory of a new vector, that is, the authorship of an
anonymous writing. In such a process, the classifica-
tion technique is very important to the performance
of authorship identification. Support Vector Machine
has been frequently used in previous authorship iden-
tification studies [3, 12]. We have shown in our pre-
vious work [12] that SVM outperforms other
classification methods such as decision tree and neural
network for authorship identification of online mes-
sages. In addition, the predefined feature set is
another crucial factor. The writeprint features pro-
posed in previous literature can be divided into four
types, as described here.
Lexical features, the earliest features used in
authorship analysis, represent an author’s lexicon-
related writing styles. Most of them are character-
based and word-based features. For example, Elliot
and Valenza conducted modal testing based on word
usage to compare the poems of Shakespeare with
those of Edward de Vere, the leading candidate as
the true author of the works credited to Shakespeare
[4]. In Yule’s early work some more generic features
were employed, such as sentence length and vocab-
ulary richness [11]. Later, Burrows developed a set
of more than 50 high-frequency words, which were
tested on the Federalist Papers [2]. Holmes analyzed
the use of “shorter” words (two- or three-letter
words) and “vowel words” (words beginning with a
vowel) [5]. 
Syntactic features, including punctuation and func-
tion words, can capture an author’s writing style at the
sentence level. They are often “content-free” features
derived from people’s personal habits of organizing
sentences. In the seminal work conducted by
Mosteller and Wallace [8], they first used the fre-
quency of occurrence of 30 function words (such as
“while” and “upon”) to clarify the disputed work, the
Federalist Papers. Subsequently different function
words were examined and showed good discriminat-
ing capability [5]. Baayen et al. concluded that incor-
porating punctuation frequency as a feature can
improve the performance of authorship identification
[1]. Stamatatos et al. introduced more complex syn-
tactic features such as passive count and part-of-
speech tags [10]. These studies demonstrated that
syntactic features might be more reliable than lexical
features in authorship identification. 
Structural features, in general, represent the author’s
habits when organizing a piece of writing. Habits
The essence of authorship identification is to IDENTIFY A
SET OF FEATURES that remain relatively constant among
a number of writings by a particular author. 
such as paragraph length, use of indentation, and use
of signature can be strong authorial evidence of per-
sonal writing style. Structural layout traits and other
features have been introduced by de Vel et al. for email
author identification and achieved high identification
performance [3].
Content-specific features refer to keywords in a spe-
cific topic. Although seldom used in previous studies,
these features could complement “content-free” fea-
tures to improve the performance of authorship iden-
tification for particular applications. In the
cybercrime context, a cyber criminal often posts ille-
gal messages involving a relatively small range of top-
ics, such as pirated software or child pornography.
Hence, special words or
phrases closely related to
specific topics may pro-
vide some clues about the
author. For example, a
criminal selling pirated
software may use such
words as “obo” or “for
sale;” one distributing
child pornography mate-
rials is likely to use words
such as “sexy.” 
From a multilingual
perspective, different lan-
guages may share similar
writeprint features, such
as structural features.
However, due to the
uniqueness of language,
some features are not generic. For example, while
most Western languages have boundaries between
words, most Oriental languages do not. In addition,
different languages can have different function words
and word-based features. Rudman summarized
almost 1,000 writeprint features for English used in
authorship analysis applications [9]. Based on previ-
ous literature, Zheng et al. created a taxonomy of
writeprint features for online messages, including 270
features for English (87 lexical features, 158 syntactic
features, 14 structural features, and 11 content-
specific features) and 114 for Chinese (16 lexical fea-
tures, 77 syntactic features, 11 structural features, and
10 content-specific features) [12].
A number of studies have shown the discriminating
power of different types of features. Furthermore,
researchers attempt to identify an optimal set of fea-
tures for authorship identification. Most previous
studies of feature choice compare different types of
features. Even if a type of feature is effective for
authorship identification, some features in this type
may be irrelevant or redundant, hence reducing the
prediction accuracy. For instance, de Vel et al.
observed a reduction in performance when the num-
ber of function word features was increased from 122
to 320 [3]. Feature selection should be undertaken to
remove features that do not contribute to prediction
[3, 5]. To our best knowledge, however, few studies
have been conducted to select key features for author-
ship identification at the individual feature level. In
addition, extracting a large number of features from
online messages is time consuming and may induce
errors. Therefore, it is important to identify the key
writeprint features for authorship identification of
online messages. Due to the multilingual characteris-
tic of online messages, in
this article we study
writeprint features of two
different languages: Eng-
lish and Chinese.
FEATURE SELECTION
Since features are regarded
as an abstract representa-
tion of writeprint, the
quality of the feature
selection directly influ-
ences this representation.
Feature selection tech-
niques aim to select a sub-
set of features relevant to
the target concept: writeprint in this study. There
are a variety of well-developed methods in the pat-
tern recognition and data mining domains to iden-
tify important features. Liu and Motoda
summarized past studies of feature selection into a
general framework [6]. The process of feature selec-
tion can be viewed as a search problem in feature
space. Exhaustive search and heuristic search are
two major search strategies. Exhaustive search tries
every feature combination to achieve the optima
but is computationally infeasible for large feature
sets. Heuristic search uses certain rules to guide the
direction of the search. This search strategy reduces
the size of the search space and therefore speeds up
the process significantly. The major heuristic search
algorithms include hill climbing, best-first search,
and generic algorithm (GA). GA behaves like a
metaphor of the processes of evolution in nature.
The optimal solution, that is the chromosome with
the highest fitness value, can be achieved via a num-
ber of generations by applying genetic operators
such as selection, crossover, and mutation. GA can
avoid local optima and provide multi-criteria opti-
mization functions. 
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 79
Li fig 1 (4/06)
Figure 1. The Process of GA-based Feature Selection.
Population of Candidate
Feature Subset
Selected Parents
Authorship Classifier
Best Individual
New Generation of
Chromosomes
Step 1:
Initiation
Step 2:
Evolution
Step 3:
Evaluation
Step 4:
Convergence
Selection for offspring production
Inductive learning algorithms
Convergence
Applying genetic operators
(Crossover and Mutation)
Probability distribution
of selection
Classifier Testing
Classification
Accuracy as
Fitness Value
Figure 1. The process of 
GA-based feature selection.
A GA-BASED FEATURE SELECTION
MODEL
Here, we propose a GA-based fea-
ture selection model to identify
writeprint features. In such a model
each chromosome represents a fea-
ture subset, where its length is the
total number of candidate features
and each bit indicates whether a
feature is selected or not. Specifi-
cally, 1 represents a selected feature
while 0 represents a discarded one.
For example, a chromosome repre-
senting five candidate features,
“10011,” means that the first,
fourth, and fifth features are
selected, while the other two are
discarded. In the first generation
each bit of chromosomes is
assigned to 0, meaning that none
of the features is selected. Each
chromosome, that is, a feature sub-
set, can be employed to train a clas-
sifier. Thus, the fitness value of
each chromosome is defined as the
accuracy of the corresponding classifier. By applying
genetic operators in the successive generations, the
GA model can generate different combinations of
features to achieve the highest fitness value. There-
fore, the feature subset corresponding to the highest
accuracy of classification
along all the generations
is regarded as the opti-
mum. The selected fea-
tures in this subset are
the key writeprint fea-
tures to discriminate the
writing styles of differ-
ent authors. The process of this GA-based feature
selection is shown in Figure 1.
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
Data Collection. To test the feasibility of the author-
ship identification and to identify the key writeprint
features for online messages, two testbeds of online
messages (English and Chinese) were created. Since
illegal online messages are of particular interest in this
study, we collected messages that were involved in
selling pirated software/CDs from misc.forsale.com-
puters.* (including 27 sub-groups) in Google news-
groups to create the English testbed. The Chinese
testbed is composed of online messages from the two
most popular Chinese Bulletin Board Systems
(smth.org and mitbbs.net), involving seven different
topics (such as movies, music, and novels). For each
of the testbeds, we identified 10 of the most active
authors with 30–40 messages collected for each of
them. The average length of the messages written by
each author is 169 words for the English testbed and
807 characters for the Chinese testbed. Based on our
previous study [12], in total, 270 and 114 features are
predefined and extracted from the English and Chi-
nese messages, respectively. For online messages with
such short length, when the full set of features are
used, a sample size 
of approximately 30 
messages per author is
necessary to predict
authorship with an accu-
racy of 80%–90% [12].
Experimental Results.
We applied the GA-
based feature selection
model on both the Eng-
lish and Chinese testbeds.
Due to its good performance, the Support Vector
Machine algorithm was selected to generate the clas-
sification model. The feature selection process started
with an empty feature set: no feature was used. In the
successive generations, the GA model conducted a
global search for the optimal feature subset by apply-
ing the crossover and mutation operators. We
observed a significant increase of fitness value (classi-
fication accuracy) in a number of early generations
and a relatively constant accuracy afterward. Mean-
while, the number of selected features in the best
chromosome of each generation increased from 0 to
about half of the full feature set. Figure 2 shows the
80 April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
Li table 1 (4/06)
Table 1. Comparison between Full Feature Set
and Optimal Feature Subset.
Dataset
English
Chinese
Feature set
Full set
Optimal subset
Full set
Optimal subset
No. of 
Features
270
134
114
56
Mean 
Accuracy
97.85%
99.01%
92.42%
93.56%
Variance
0.002
0.001
0.023
0.026
P-Value
0.0417
0.1270
Table 1. Comparison between 
full feature set and optimal 
feature subset.
Figure 2. Experiment Results of Feature Selection
on English and Chinese Testbeds.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 50 100 150 200 250
Generations
A
cc
ur
ac
y 
(%
)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
A
cc
ur
ac
y 
(%
)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
N
um
be
r 
of
 F
ea
tu
re
s
300 350 400 450 0 50 100 150 200 250
Generations
300 350 400 450
0 50 100 150 200 250
Generations
300 350 400 450
(b) Chinese
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
N
um
be
r 
of
 F
ea
tu
re
s
0 50 100 150 200 250
Generations
(a) English
300 350 400 450
Figure 2. 
Experiment results
of feature selection
on English and 
Chinese testbeds.
change of accuracy and the num-
ber of selected features along 500
generations for the two testbeds.
The evolutionary process of GA
converged after approximately 50
generations for the English
dataset and 120 generations for
the Chinese dataset. Among all
the chromosomes in the 500 gen-
erations, the one with the highest
accuracy corresponded to the
optimal feature subset.
To compare the discriminating
power of the full feature set and
the optimal set, 30-fold pair-wise t-tests were con-
ducted respectively for the English and Chinese
datasets. As shown in Table 1, the GA-based model
identified a feature subset with approximately only
half of the full set as the key features: 134 out of 270
for English; 56 out of 114 for Chinese. For the Eng-
lish dataset, the optimal feature set achieved a classifi-
cation accuracy of 99.01%, which is significantly
higher than 97.85% achieved by the full set (p-value
= 0.0417). For the Chinese
dataset, the optimal feature set
achieved a classification accuracy
of 93.56%, which is higher than
92.42% achieved by the full set
but not significantly (p-value =
0.1270). In general, using the
optimal feature subset, we can
achieve a comparable (if not
higher) accuracy of authorship
identification.
The effect of feature selection is
significant and promising. Fur-
thermore, we discovered that the
selected key feature subset
included all four types of features.
This is consistent with our previous study in [12],
which showed that each type of feature contributes to
the predictive power of the classification model. In
particular, the relatively high proportion of selected
structural and content-specific features suggests their
useful discriminating power for online messages.
Table 2 illustrates several key features identified from
the full feature set.
The results from Table 2 have some interesting
implications. Since some features in the full feature set
may be irrelevant for online messages, the frequency
of characters related to online messages (such as “@,”
“$”) instead of other common ones (such as “A,” “E”)
were selected. In addition, since some features may
only provide redundant information, the total num-
ber of uppercase letters/total number of characters was
identified as a key feature, while the frequency of 
lowercase letters was discarded. Similarly, only one
vocabulary richness measure, for example, Yule’s K or
Honore’s R, was selected and others were ignored.
Since online messages are often short in length and
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 81
Li fig 3 (4/06)
Figure 3. Comparison of Writeprints between Three Authors.
Feature
1
2
3
4
5
Description
Yule's K
Frequency of “$”
Frequency of “!”
No. of sentences/paragraph
Frequency of “sale”
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1 2 3
Key Features
Mike Joe Roy
4 5
Li table 2 (4/06)
Table 2. Illustration of Key Writeprint Features.
Feature 
Type
Lexical
Syntactic
Structural
Content-specific
English
Total number of upper-case letters /total 
number of characters;
Frequency of character “@” and “$”;
Yule's K measure (vocabulary richness);
two-letter word frequency.
Frequency of punctuation “!” and “:”
Frequency of function word “if” and “can”
Number of sentences per paragraph; 
Has separators
Frequency of word “check” and “sale”
Chinese
Total number of English characters /total 
number of characters;
Total number of digits /total number of 
characters;
Honore's R measure (vocabulary richness).
Frequency of function word “        (then)” 
and “        (I think)”
Number of sentences per paragraph;
Has separators
Frequency of “        (music)” and “
(novel)”
Table 2. Illustration of
key writeprint features. 
Figure 3. Comparison
of writeprints between
three authors. 
The relatively high proportion of selected structural and 
content-specific features suggests their USEFUL 
DISCRIMINATING POWER for online messages. 
flexible in style, structural layout traits such as the
average length of paragraphs became more useful. In
addition, content-specific features are highly related
to their context. Therefore, features such as “sale” and
“check” were identified as the key content-specific
features for the English dataset based on sales of
pirated software/CDs. In other contexts, different
content-specific features should be identified and
used accordingly.
These selected key features of writeprint can effec-
tively represent the distinct writing style of each
author and further assist us in identifying the author-
ship of new messages. Figure 3 exemplifies a compar-
ison of writeprints between three authors in the
English dataset using five of the key features, where
feature values were normalized to [0, 1]. Clearly,
Mike’s distinct writeprint from the other two indi-
cates his unique identity. The high degree of similar-
ity between the writeprints of Joe and Roy suggests
these two IDs might be the same person. 
CONCLUSION
The absence of fingerprints in cyberspace leads law
enforcement and intelligence community to seek
new approaches to trace criminal identity in cyber-
crime investigation. To address this problem, we
propose to develop writeprint to help identify an
author in cyberspace. We developed a GA-based fea-
ture selection model to identify the key features of
writeprint specifically for online messages. Experi-
mental studies on English and Chinese testbeds of
online messages demonstrated the power and poten-
tial of the GA-based feature selection model. The
identified key features could achieve comparable or
even higher classification accuracy and effectively
differentiate the writeprint of different online
authors. 
Currently, several interesting issues in this research
domain are still open. Given the key features selected,
we will continue to rank and cluster them based on
their functional traits, and further provide a visual
representation of an author’s writeprint. Due to the
multinational nature of cybercrime, we intend to
employ this feature selection model to identify the
key writeprint features in other languages such as Ara-
bic and Spanish. In addition, we are also interested in
applying the writeprint identification approach to
other related problems such as plagiarism detection
and intellectual property checking.
References
1. Baayen, H., Halteren, H., Neijt, A., and Tweedie, F. An experiment in
authorship attribution. In Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on the Statistical Analysis of Textual Data (JADT 2002).
2. Burrows, J.F. Word patterns and story shapes: The statistical analysis
of narrative style. Literary and Linguistic Computing 2, (1992), 61–67.
3. de Vel, O., Anderson, A., Corney, M., and Mohay, G. Mining E-mail
content for author identification forensics. SIGMOD Record 30, 4
(2001), 55–64.
4. Elliot, W. and Valenza, R. Was the Earl of Oxford the true Shake-
speare? Notes and Queries 38, (1991), 501–506.
5. Holmes, D.I. The evolution of stylometry in humanities. Literary and
Linguistic Computing 13, 3 (1998), 111–117.
6. Liu, H. and Motoda, H. Feature Selection for Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, 1998.
7. McEnery A. and Oakes, M. Authorship Studies/Textual Statistics. Mar-
cel Dekker, 2000.
8. Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D.L. Inference and Disputed Authorship: The
Federalist. Addison-Wesley, 1964.
9. Rudman, J. The state of authorship attribution studies: some problems
and solutions. Computers and the Humanities 31, (1998), 351–365.
10. Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., and Kokkinakis, G. Automatic text cat-
egorization in terms of genre and author. Computational Linguistics 26,
4 (2001), 471–495.
11. Yule, G.U. The Statistical Study of Literary Vocabulary. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1944.
12. Zheng, R., Li, J., Huang, Z., and Chen, H. A framework of authorship
identification for online messages: writing style features and classifica-
tion techniques. The Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology (JASIST) 57, 3 (2006), 378–393. 
Jiexun Li (jiexun@eller.arizona.edu) is a doctoral student in the
Department of Management Information Systems and research 
associate in the Artificial Intelligence Lab at the University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ.
Rong Zheng (rzheng@stern.nyu.edu) is a doctoral student in the
Department of Information, Operations and Management Sciences at
Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, NY.
Hsinchun Chen (hchen@eller.arizona.edu) is McClelland
Endowed Professor in the Department of Management Information
Systems and head of the Artificial Intelligence Lab at the University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or class-
room use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
© 2006 ACM 0001-0782/06/0400 $5.00
c
82 April  2006/Vol. 49, No. 4 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
These selected key features of writeprint CAN 
EFFECTIVELY REPRESENT THE DISTINCT
WRITING STYLE of each author and further assist us in
identifying the authorship of new messages.
