 
299 
A SYSTEMIC FUNCTIONAL APPROACH TO 
AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 
Shlomo Argamon* and Moshe Koppel** 
INTRODUCTION 
Attribution of anonymous texts, if not based on factors 
external to the text (such as paper and ink type or document 
provenance, as used in forensic document examination), is 
largely, if not entirely, based on considerations of language 
style. We will consider here the question of how to best 
deconstruct a text into quantitative features for purposes of 
stylistic discrimination. Two key considerations inform our 
analysis. First, such features should support accurate 
classification by automated methods. Second, and no less 
importantly, such features should enable a clear explanation of 
the stylistic difference between stylistic categories (read: 
authors) and why a disputed text appears more likely to fall into 
one or another category. The latter consideration is particularly 
important when a nonexpert, such as a judge or jury, must 
evaluate the results and reliability of the analysis. 
We start from the intuitive notion that style is indicated in a 
text by those features of the text that indicate the author’s choice 
of one mode of expression from among a set of equivalent 
modes for a given content. There are many ways in which such 
choices manifest themselves in a text. Specific words and 
phrases may be chosen more frequently by certain authors than 
others, such as the phrase “cool-headed logician” favored by the 
Unabomber. Some authors may habitually use certain syntactic 
                                                          
* Linguistic Cognition Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, Illinois 
Institute of Technology, argamon@iit.edu. 
** Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 
moishk@gmail.com. 
300 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
constructions more frequently, as in Hemingway’s preference 
for short, simple clauses. Differences between authors will also 
arise at the level of the organization of the text as a whole, as 
some people may prefer to make reasoned arguments from 
evidence to conclusions, and others may prefer emotional 
appeals organized differently.  
However, all of these “surface” linguistic phenomena have 
multiple potential underlying causes, not only authorship. They 
include the genre, register, and purpose of the text as well as the 
educational background, social status, and personality of the 
author and audience.1 What all these dimensions of variation 
have in common, though, is independence, to a greater or lesser 
extent, of the “topic” of the text. Hence the traditional focus in 
computational authorship attribution on features such as function 
word usage; vocabulary richness and complexity measures; and 
frequencies of different syntactic structures; which are 
essentially nonreferential. 
Early statistical attribution techniques relied on relatively 
small numbers of such features, while developments in machine 
learning and computational linguistics over the last fifteen to 
twenty years have enabled larger numbers of features to be 
generated for stylistic analysis. However, in almost no case is 
there strong theoretical motivation behind the input feature sets, 
such that the features have clear interpretations in stylistic terms.  
We argue, however, that without a firm basis in a linguistic 
theory of meaning (not just of syntax), we are unlikely to gain 
any true insight into the nature of any stylistic distinction being 
studied. Such understanding is key to both establishing and 
explaining evidence for a proposed attribution. Otherwise, an 
attribution method is merely a black box that may appear to 
work for extrinsic or accidental reasons but not actually give 
reliable results in a given case. Furthermore, an attribution 
method that produces insight into the relevant language variation 
is more likely to be useful and accepted in a forensic context, all 
else being equal, as the judge and jury will be better able to 
understand the results. 
                                                          
1 DOUGLAS BIBER & SUSAN CONRAD, REGISTER, GENRE, AND STYLE (P. 
Austin et al. eds., 2009). 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 301 
We therefore sketch here a computationally tractable 
formulation of linguistically and stylistically well-motivated 
features we have developed that permits text classification based 
on specific variation in choice of nonreferential meanings. The 
system produces meaningful information about the stylistic 
distinctions being analyzed, which can be used for interpretative 
and forensic purposes. We will explain our methodology and 
then use it as a case study for what any such methodology 
should provide. 
Before we begin, it is worth briefly surveying the variety of 
problems that fall under the umbrella of “authorship analysis.” 
The simplest form of the problem is where an anonymous 
document is potentially attributable to one of a relatively small 
number (two to fifty, or so) of suspects. The question is then 
simply which of the suspects has a writing style most like that of 
the anonymous document. More difficult (and much more likely 
in the real world) is the case where the document might not be 
authored by any of the suspects at all—in this case we must be 
able to determine that the document is not enough like any of 
the suspects to attribute authorship. The hardest version of this 
scenario is authorship verification, where the question is whether 
a single suspect did or did not author the anonymous document. 
All such authorship attribution scenarios assume a known set of 
suspects who are being evaluated for authorship of the 
questioned document. We require some quantity of texts written 
by each of the suspects to determine authorship. On the other 
hand, if, as is often the case in police investigations, specific 
suspects are not known, we must consider the task of authorship 
profiling, determining as much about the author as possible, 
based upon clues in the document. As we will discuss below, a 
number of personal characteristics of an author can be reliably 
estimated from stylistic cues in a document. But first we will 
consider generally how we can quantitatively characterize the 
style of a text for computational analysis. 
302 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
I. FUNCTIONAL LEXICAL FEATURES 
Our methodology is based on Halliday’s Systemic Functional 
Grammar2 (“SFG”), which we find to be particularly well-suited 
to the sort of computational analysis we seek. SFG explicitly 
recognizes and represents various aspects of nonreferential 
meaning as part of the general grammar, which makes it directly 
adaptable to stylistic classification.3 We do not claim, of course, 
that SFG is the only, or even necessarily the best, approach but 
rather one that we have found convenient. 
We start from the SFG idea that grammar is a set of 
constraints on how one may express meaning.4 Grammar is thus 
a network of possible choices, with more general or abstract 
choices constraining which more specific choices are allowed. 
This network of choices is called a system network.5 As a simple 
example, consider the (partial) system network for pronouns in 
English, seen below in Figure 1. This network forms a neat 
hierarchical taxonomy, though not all do. As an approximation 
we can extract a set of taxonomies (trees) from the full network. 
 
Figure 1. System diagram for Personal Pronouns, shown as a taxonomic tree. 
 
                                                          
2 See M.A.K. HALLIDAY & CHRISTIAN M.I.M. MATTHIESSEN, AN 
INTRODUCTION TO FUNCTIONAL GRAMMAR 37–63 (3d ed. 2004). 
3 Id. at 50–53. 
4 Id. at 1. 
5 Id. at 23. 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 303 
Given this taxonomy, we may define numeric features 
describing the statistical “stylistics” of a text via the collection 
of conditional frequencies of each node in the tree given its 
parent. Thus, for example, we measure the frequency of 
“Speaker” pronouns out of all occurrences of “Interactant” 
pronouns, and so on. This has a straightforward interpretation of 
measuring the biases of how texts of a given style (e.g., by a 
given author) prefer certain choices of how to express more 
general meanings. By using such biases to analyze authorship, 
we seek to capture relevant codal variation, as contrasted with 
register6 (variation in these probabilities due to a text’s 
functional context), or dialect (variation in how specific 
meanings are realized (e.g., use of “y’all” for plural “you”)). 
To give a flavor of these features, here are brief descriptions 
of several system networks that we have found useful for 
stylistic classification.7  
A. Conjunctions 
How an author conjoins phrases and clauses is an indication 
of how the author organizes concepts and relates them to each 
other. Words and phrases that conjoin clauses (such as “and,” 
“while,” and “in other words”) are organized in SFG in the 
CONJUNCTION system network.8 Types of conjunctions serve 
to link a clause with its textual context, by denoting how the 
given clause expands on some aspect of its preceding context. 
The three top-level options of CONJUNCTION are Elaboration, 
Extension, and Enhancement, defined as: 
 Elaboration: Deepening the content in its context by 
exemplification or refocusing (“for example,” “in other 
words,” “i.e.”);  
                                                          
6 Ruqaiya Hasan, Code, Register, and Social Dialect, in 2 CLASS, 
CODES AND CONTROL: APPLIED STUDIES TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF 
LANGUAGE 224, 253–92 (Basil B. Bernstein ed., 1973). 
7 For a more detailed discussion of these features, and the mathematical 
models involved, see Shlomo Argamon et al., Stylistic Text Classification 
Using Functional Lexical Features, 58 J. AM. SOC’Y INFO. SCI. & TECH. 802, 
802–22 (2007). 
8 See HALLIDAY & MATTHIESSEN, supra note 2, at 538–39. 
304 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
 Extension: Adding new related information, perhaps 
contrasting with the current information (“and,” “or,” 
“furthermore,” “on the other hand”);  
 Enhancement: Qualifying the context by circumstance or 
logical connection (“and then,” “because,” “similarly”).9 
Each option also has several subcategories that further 
subdivide the ways in which information units in a text can be 
linked together. 
 
B. Prepositions 
Similarly, prepositions serve to expand the meaning of a 
phrase or clause by connecting to it a phrase (usually a noun 
phrase). The high-level structure of the PREPOSITION system is 
thus similar to that of CONJUNCTION, with four top-level 
options: 
 Elaboration: Exemplification (“as,” “in the role of”); 
                                                          
9 Id. at 540–48. 
Figure 2. System diagram for Conjunction. 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 305 
 Enhancement: Qualifying context temporally, spatially, or 
causally (“around,” “thanks to,” “during”); 
 Extension: Adding related information about an object or 
event (“of,” “without,” “besides”); 
 Projection: Using an object to construe the meaning or 
significance of another (“against,” “regarding,” “according 
to”).10 
 
Figure 3. System Diagram for Prepositions. 
 
C. Modality 
The MODALITY system comprises four taxonomies 
describing choices in how to describe the level of typicality or 
necessity of facts and events. Syntactically, modality can be 
realized through modal verbs (e.g., “can,” “might,” “should,” 
“must”); adverbial adjuncts (e.g., “probably,” “preferably”); or 
projective clauses (e.g., “I think that,” “It is necessary that”). 
The four attributes of any modal expression are:  
 Type: What kind of modality is being expressed? 
o Modalization: How “typical” is it? (“probably,” 
“seldom”)  
                                                          
10 See CHRISTIAN M.I.M. MATTHIESSEN, LEXICO-GRAMMATICAL 
CARTOGRAPHY: ENGLISH SYSTEMS (1995). 
306 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
o Modulation: How “necessary” is it? (“ought to,” 
“allowable”) 
 Value: What degree of the relevant modality scale is being 
averred?  
o Median: The “normal” amount (“likely,” “usually”)  
o Outer: An extreme (either high or low) amount 
(“never,” “maybe,” “must”)  
 Orientation: What is the relation to the speaker/writer of the 
modality expressed? 
o Objective: Modality expressed irrespective of the 
speaker/writer (“maybe,” “always”) 
o Subjective: Modality expressed relative to the 
speaker/writer (“We think,” “I need”) 
 Manifestation: How is the modal assessment related to the 
event being assessed? 
o Implicit: Modality realized “in-line” by an adjunct or 
modal auxiliary (“preferably,” “maybe”)  
o Explicit: Modality realized by a projective verb, with 
the nested clause being assessed (“It is better to,” “It is 
possible to”)11  
                                                          
11 See HALLIDAY & MATTHIESSEN, supra note 2, at 612–25.  
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 307 
Figure 4. System diagram for Modality. Note the four parallel taxonomies. 
 
 
II. EXPERIMENTS IN AUTHORSHIP PROFILING 
The uses of these features can be seen both in authorship 
attribution and in authorship profiling, where we seek to 
determine characteristics of a text’s author (such as sex, age, or 
personality), even in the absence of any specific candidate 
authors. We describe here some experiments we have done on 
authorship profiling for author sex, age, native language, and 
personality.12 
In these experiments, we compared the use of functional 
lexical features as above with content-based features, namely, 
                                                          
12 See Shlomo Argamon et al., Automatically Profiling the Author of an 
Anonymous Text, COMM. ACM, Feb. 2009, at 119. 
308 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
individual words. In order to keep the number of features 
reasonably small, we consider just the 1,000 words that appear 
sufficiently frequently in the corpus and that discriminate best 
between the classes of interest (determined by “information-
gain” on a holdout set).  
We note that the use of content-based features for authorship 
studies can be problematic. One must be even more wary of 
content markers potentially being artifacts of a particular writing 
situation or experimental setup and thus producing overly 
optimistic results that will not be borne out in real-life 
applications.  For example, were we to seek to identify Arthur 
Conan Doyle’s writing by the high frequency of the words 
“Sherlock,” “Holmes,” and “Watson,” we would misattribute 
any works not part of that detective series. We will therefore be 
careful to distinguish results that exploit content-based features 
from those that do not. 
Whatever features are used in a particular experiment, we 
represent a document as a numerical vector X. Once labeled 
training documents have been represented in this way, we can 
apply machine-learning algorithms to learn classifiers that assign 
new documents to categories. Generally speaking, the most 
effective multiclass (i.e., more than two classes) classifiers for 
authorship studies all share the same structure: we learn a 
weight vector Wj for each category cj and then assign a 
document, X, to the class for which the inner product Wj * X is 
maximal. The weight vector is learned based on a training set of 
data points, each labeled with its correct classification. There are 
a number of effective algorithms for learning such weight 
vectors; we use here Bayesian Multinomial Regression 
(“BMR”),13 which we have found to be both efficient and 
accurate. BMR is a probabilistically well-founded multivariate 
variant of logistic regression, which tends to work well for 
problems with large numbers of variables (as here).14 BMR has 
                                                          
13 See Alexander Genkin et al., Large-Scale Bayesian Logistic Regression 
for Text Categorization, 49 TECHNOMETRICS 291, 291–304 (2007). 
14 When seeking to construct predictive models from data with a very 
large number of variables, it is possible that a model can easily be found to 
fit the known data accidentally, just because there are many parameters in the 
model that can be adjusted. Such a model will then not classify new data 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 309 
also been shown specifically to be effective for text classification 
and related problems.15 Other learning methods such as support 
vector machines16 generally work just as well. 
A. Test Data 
In the experiments described below, we sought to profile 
documents by four common author characteristics: sex, age, 
native language, and personality type. The first three of these 
have obvious application in the investigative and forensic 
contexts. Personality type is more useful for investigations but 
can also provide corroborative evidence for identification when 
personality information about a suspect is known. We first 
describe in this section the data sets, comprising labeled 
collections of texts, that we used to learn and test our 
classification models. In the following section, we will describe 
the experimental procedure and results. 
Sex and Age. Our corpus17 for both author sex and age 
consists of the full set of postings of 19,320 blog authors (each 
text is the full set of posts by a given author) writing in English. 
The (self-reported) age and gender of each author is known and 
for each age interval the corpus includes an equal number of 
male and female authors. The texts range in length from several 
hundreds to tens of thousands of words, with a mean length of 
7,250 words per author. Based on each blogger’s reported age, 
we label each blog in our corpus as belonging to one of three 
                                                          
well. This problem is known as overfitting. See Tom Dietterich, Overfitting 
and Undercomputing in Machine Learning, ACM COMPUTING SURVS., Sept. 
1995, at 326–27. BMR, and other modern learning algorithms, seek to 
minimize this problem by various mathematical methods. 
15 See Genkin et al., supra note 13; see also Moshe Koppel et al., 
Automatically Classifying Documents by Ideological and Organizational 
Affiliation, PROC. 2009 IEEE INT’L CONF. ON INTELLIGENCE & SECURITY 
INFORMATICS, at 176. 
16 See NELLO CRISTIANINI & JOHN SHAWE-TAYLOR, AN INTRODUCTION 
TO SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINES AND OTHER KERNEL-BASED LEARNING 
METHODS 7 (2000). 
17 First described in Jonathan Schler et al., Effects of Age and Gender on 
Blogging, AAAI SPRING SYMPOSIUM: COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO 
ANALYZING WEBLOGS, 2006, at 199. 
310 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
age groups: thirteen to seventeen (42.7%), twenty-three to 
twenty-seven (41.9%) and thirty-three to forty-seven (15.5%). 
Intermediate age groups were removed to avoid ambiguity since 
many of the blogs were written over a period of several years. 
Our objective is to identify to which of these three age intervals 
an anonymous author belongs. 
Native Language. We used the International Corpus of 
Learner English (“ICLE”),18 which was assembled for the 
precise purpose of studying the English writing of nonnative 
English speakers from a variety of countries. All the writers in 
the corpus are university students (mostly in their third or fourth 
year) studying English as a second language. All are roughly the 
same age (in their twenties) and are assigned to the same 
proficiency level in English. All texts are short student essays on 
a similar set of topics, so they are in the same genre. We 
consider five subcorpora from Russia, the Czech Republic, 
Bulgaria, France, and Spain. To balance the corpus, we took 
258 authors from each subcorpus (randomly discarding any 
surplus). All texts in the resulting corpus are between 579 and 
846 words long. Our objective is to determine which of the five 
languages is the native tongue of an anonymous author writing 
in English. 
Personality. We used essays written by psychology 
undergraduates at the University of Texas at Austin collected by 
James W. Pennebaker.19 Students were instructed to write a 
short “stream of consciousness” essay wherein they tracked their 
thoughts and feelings over a twenty minute free-writing period. 
The essays range in length from 251 to 1,951 words. Each 
writer also filled out a questionnaire testing for the “Big Five” 
personality dimensions: neuroticism, extraversion, openness, 
conscientiousness, and agreeableness. We consider here just the 
dimension of neuroticism (roughly, tendency to worry or be 
anxious), as methods and results for other personality factors are 
qualitatively similar. We defined “positive” examples to be the 
                                                          
18 International Corpus of Learner English, UNIVERSITE CATHOLIQUE DE 
LOUVAIN, http://www.uclouvain.be/en-cecl-icle.html (last visited Mar. 2, 
2013). 
19 Shlomo Argamon et al., Lexical Predictors of Personality Type, PROC. 
JOINT ANN. MEETING INTERFACE & CLASSIFICATION SOC’Y N. AM., 2005. 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 311 
participants with neuroticism scores in the upper third of the 
authors, and ‘negative’ examples to be those with scores in the 
lowest third. The rest of the data were ignored, and the final 
corpus consists of 198 examples. 
B. Procedure and Results 
Accuracy results for the above profiling tasks are given in 
Table 1 for different combinations of features. Recall that a 
training set is required for the system to learn a classification 
model for any given task. The accuracy of the system must be 
evaluated on data separate from the training data, since even 
perfect performance on the training data is easy to achieve and 
meaningless in terms of the real-world potential accuracy of the 
system. Hence each dataset needs to be divided into disjoint 
training and test sets for evaluation. To maximize use of limited 
data, a standard technique, called ten-fold cross-validation, is 
used to divide the data randomly into ten equal parts, then to 
perform ten train-test runs, each run training on nine-tenths of 
the data and testing on the remaining tenth. The average 
accuracy over these ten runs is a good estimate of the actual 
performance of the system on new data. 
Accuracy is measured simply as the percentage of text 
examples that the system classified correctly. In any given 
classification problem, there is a baseline performance, given by 
the percentage of the data falling into the majority class. This 
percentage indicates the performance of the trivial classifier that 
just classifies every example as that majority class. If the 
accuracy of our classification system is significantly higher than 
this baseline performance, the system can be said to work; the 
higher the accuracy, the better it works. 
Consider now the results for authorship profiling given in 
Table 1. We first note that while in most cases (other than 
neuroticism) content words help, style features often give good 
results on their own. More informative are the highest weighted 
features for each output class, given in Table 2. For sex, the 
style features that prove to be most useful for gender 
discrimination are determiners and certain prepositions (markers 
of male writing) and pronouns (markers of female writing), 
312 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
which is consistent with other studies. For age, we see a 
preference for more formal writing in the older bloggers 
(prepositions and determiners), though the content features in 
this case give more insight, in terms of the usual concerns of 
people in different age groups. For native language, we see 
some interesting stylistic patterns, in that native speakers of 
Slavic languages have clear preferences for personal pronouns, 
particularly first person, while Romance language speakers have 
distinctive (and different) patterns of verb auxiliary use. The 
content features in this case, while more dispositive, are clearly 
not useful in any context where deception would come into play, 
as they can be easily planted by a deceptive writer.  
Finally, we see that neurotics tend to refer more often to 
themselves, use pronouns as subjects rather than as objects in a 
clause, and consider explicitly who benefits from some action 
(through prepositional phrases involving, e.g., “for” and “in 
order to”); nonneurotics, on the other hand, tend to use less 
precise specification of objects or events (determiners and 
adjectives such as “a” or “little”) and show more concern with 
how things are or should be done (via prepositions such as “by” 
or “with” and modals such as “ought to” or “should”).  
In other experiments we have done using features of 
lexicogrammar indicative of writers’ attitudes, we found 
(unsurprisingly) texts by neurotic individuals to be characterized 
more by focus on, e.g., negative orientation and affect, whereas 
texts by nonneurotics focused more on positive orientation and 
appreciation.20 That is, neurotics evaluated objects and 
propositions more negatively and more in terms of feelings, 
while nonneurotics did so more positively and more in terms of 
objective characteristics.  
                                                          
20 See id. 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 313 
Table 1. Classification accuracy (10-fold cross-validation) for authorship 
profiling using different feature sets. 
 Baseline Style Content Style+Content 
Gender  
(2 classes) 
50.0 72.0 75.1 76.1 
Age  
(3 classes) 
42.7 66.9 75.5 77.7 
Language  
(5 classes) 
20.0 65.1 82.3 79.3 
Neuroticism  
(2 classes) 
50.0 65.7 53.0 63.1 
 
  
314 JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 
Table 2. Most important Style and Content features (by information gain) for 
each class of texts in each profiling problem. 
Class Style Features Content Features 
Female personal pronoun, I, 
me, him, my
cute, love, boyfriend, 
mom, feel
Male determiner, the, of, 
preposition-matter, as
system, software, game, 
based, site
Teens im, so, thats, dont, cant haha, school, lol, wanna, 
bored
Twenties preposition, 
determiner, of, the, in
apartment, office, work, 
job, bar
Thirties+ preposition, the, 
determiner, of, in
years, wife, husband, 
daughter, children 
Bulgarian conjunction-extension, 
pronoun-interactant, 
however, pronoun-
conscious, and
bulgaria, university, 
imagination, bulgarian, 
theoretical  
Czech personal pronoun, 
usually, did, not, very
czech, republic, able, 
care, started
French indeed, conjunction-
elaboration, will, 
auxverb-future, 
auxverb-probability
identity, europe, 
european, nation, gap 
Russian can’t, i, can, over, every russia, russian, crimes, 
moscow, crime
Spanish determiner-specific, 
this, going_to, because, 
although
spain, restoration, 
comedy, related, 
hardcastle
Neurotic myself, subject 
pronoun, reflexive 
pronoun, preposition-
behalf, pronoun-
speaker
put, feel, worry, says, 
hurt 
Nonneurotic little, auxverbs-
obligation, nonspecific 
determiner, up, 
preposition-agent
reading, next, cool, tired, 
bed 
 AUTOMATED AUTHORSHIP ANALYSIS 315 
III. DISCUSSION 
We have sketched here a framework for addressing 
authorship attribution as a question of evaluating codal variation 
by estimating the probabilities of different grammatical choices 
by different authors or kinds of authors. These features perform 
as well or better in our empirical tests as other sorts of features 
and (often) have the advantage of giving meaningful insight into 
the underlying stylistic differences between authors.  
As we have argued above and elsewhere,21 such insight 
should be considered a key criterion for authorship attribution 
methods, along with accuracy and reliability. Without such 
understanding, it is extremely difficult, or impossible, to have 
real confidence that results in any specific instance are reliable, 
due to the large number and variety of possible confounding 
factors (dialect and register variation and the like). Results that 
can be meaningfully interpreted, however, also make the task of 
conveying their import to nonexperts, including judges and 
juries, much easier. 
It also seems likely that an operationalization of idiolect as a 
systematic skewing of probabilities in system taxonomies, as 
developed above, helps to put the problem of author analysis 
into a larger theoretical context. This context recognizes 
language variation due to code, as in authorial differences, as 
well as variation due to register and genre. By identifying author 
analysis as one aspect of a continuum of similar kinds of 
variation, we may hope to disentangle the omnipresent effects of 
register and genre variation when analyzing authorship. 
                                                          
21 See, e.g., Shlomo Argamon & Moshe Koppel, The Rest of the Story: 
Finding Meaning in Stylistic Variation, in THE STRUCTURE OF STYLE: 
ALGORITHMIC APPROACHES TO UNDERSTANDING MANNER AND MEANING 79 
(Shlomo Argamon et al. eds., 2010); see also Argamon et al., supra note 7. 
