Time Profiles for Identifying Users
in Online Environments
Fredrik Johansson
Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI)
Stockholm, Sweden
Email: fredrik.johansson@foi.se
Lisa Kaati
Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI)
Stockholm, Sweden
Email: lisa.kaati@foi.se
Amendra Shrestha
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden
Email: amendra.shrestha@it.uu.se
Abstract—Many people who discuss sensitive or private is-
sues on web forums and other social media services are using
pseudonyms or aliases in order to not reveal their true identity,
while using their usual accounts when posting messages on non-
sensitive issues. Previous research has shown that if those indi-
viduals post large amounts of messages, stylometric techniques
can be used to identify the author based on the characteristics
of the textual content. In this paper we show how an author’s
identity can be unmasked in a similar way using various time
features, such as the period of the day and the day of the week
when a user’s posts have been published. This is demonstrated
in supervised machine learning (i.e., author identification) ex-
periments, as well as unsupervised alias matching (similarity
detection) experiments.
I. INTRODUCTION
An increasing amount of many people’s life is spent
online. People are using Internet and social media in order
to communicate, express their opinions and beliefs, discuss
topics of interest to them, etc. While much of the information
is expressed publicly, there is also more sensitive information
available in web forums and other social media services that
potentially could be harmful to the author if it became widely
known who the physical person behind the user that is posting
information is in reality. There are many examples related
to the analysis of terrorist activities on the Web (see e.g.,
[1], [2]), such as the spreading of extremism propaganda and
discussions on how to make improvised explosive devices.
In such settings, it can be of fundamental importance to
intelligence analysts to find out what a person writes and
who the physical person behind some pieces of texts really is.
This is the main motivation and driving factor for the research
presented in this paper. However, the Web is, fortunately, not
only used for activities related to terrorism. Ordinary citizens
may also want to preserve their anonymity when discussing
private issues such as religion, sexual preferences, political
ideas, diseases, etc. in public. Obviously, what is considered
as private and sensitive information varies from country to
country and individual to individual. Many people would like
to be able to freely express their ideas and beliefs, while at the
same time avoid revealing their true identity to e.g., friends,
employers, police, or intelligence services.
A common approach to preserve anonymity is to create
user accounts or aliases with no obvious connection to a
person’s true identity and to make use of this when discussing
”sensitive issues”, while using their usual user accounts when
posting information they consider to be non-sensitive. A rather
obvious problem with such an approach is that the used
Internet service provider and social media service can log the
used IP-address and identify the user from this information,
unless the providers can be fully trusted by the user or if extra
counter-measures are applied, such as logging in from various
Internet cafes or making use of tools such as Tor1 [3]. A less
obvious problem is that it can be possible to reveal the user’s
identity from his or her writing style. It has for a long time been
known that stylometric techniques can be used to identify an
author among a small set of candidate authors given a large
enough data material, but more recent research experiments
presented in [4] suggest that this can be accomplished with
reasonable accuracy also on large-scale datasets. A user who is
aware of such techniques can in theory obfuscate their writing
style intentionally, but this is probably quite unusual.
In previous work [5], we implemented a subset of the
features suggested in [4] and used them for alias matching (i.e.,
the problem of identifying multiple aliases belonging to the
same individual in an unsupervised fashion). In addition to the
use of stylometric features we also used timeprints to increase
the possibility to detect users with multiple aliases. A timeprint
is a property that reflect something about the characteristics
of an individual’s activity. In our previous work the timeprints
were based on the publishing times when a user post messages,
capturing the distribution of messages over the hour-of-the-
day. By using timeprints in combination with stylometry, the
detection rate of finding multiple aliases increases significantly
[5].
In this paper, we are exploring various time features in
more depth in order to increase the quality of the used
timeprints. More specifically, this is accomplished by ex-
plorative studies and experiments using the ICWSM fo-
rum dataset, containing data from the Irish forum site
https://www.boards.ie/. We show that a set of time features
can be powerful for unmasking an author’s identity in both a
supervised (author identification) and an unsupervised (alias
matching or similarity detection) setting. We also use feature
selection methods to find out which the most informative
features are.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In Section
II, we present various time features which potentially can be
useful components of a timeprint, and show how the time
features are varying among different users and over time.
Moreover, we explain the concept of ”circadian topology” or
1https://www.torproject.org/
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Hour of Day
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
of
Po
st
s
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Fig. 1: Distribution of messages for a single user throughout the day for five years
”chronotype” as a motivation for why people can be expected
to have timeprints which are different from other individuals’
timeprints. This section is followed up with more systematic
machine learning experiments, presented in Section III. In
these experiments, we evaluate how well a classifier can learn
to predict the correct author or user among a larger set of
potential candidates by using time features. Hence, this is an
example of how the classic problem of author identification
can be tackled using non-textual features. In Section IV, the
problem of alias matching is described. In the case of alias
matching we compare each user identity to all other identities
and group together users (aliases) which are more similar
than a certain threshold. We have also identified the most
informative features (as calculated by using information gain)
and use them in the unsupervised problem of alias matching.
In Section V, we briefly discuss under which circumstances
the obtained results can be expected to hold in ”the wild” and
which implications our experimental results are likely to have.
Finally, we present some conclusions and directions for future
work in Section VI.
II. TIMEPRINTS AND ACTIVITY PROFILES
A chronotype or a circadian typology is an individual
difference in personality, which is believed to be the cause
of why some individuals prefer to work and exercise in
the morning hours while other prefers evening hours. Such
circadian preferences are based on genetic influence. The
circadian typology classifies individuals according to three
different types: morning-type, evening-type, and neither-type.
The existence of such a circadian typology has been validated
in several studies and several countries [6]. The circadian
typology seems to have an impact on the behavior of an
individual and various studies have for example suggested that
evening types spend more time in front of the screen [7] or
that evening types have a higher tendency for cigarette craving
and alcohol usage [8].
1 2 3 4 5 6
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Interval of Day
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
of
Po
st
s
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Fig. 2: Distribution of messages for a single user in four hour
intervals
When we are active on social media services may be
correlated to chronotypes. In a discussion forum such as
boards.ie, it is possible that a morning-type individual post
most of his/her messages during the morning hours, while
an evening-type prefers posting messages during the evening.
We believe that the chronotype is something that can be used
as a mean to identify a Internet user, or rather tell different
clusters of users apart. In addition to chronotypes, there might
be other distinguished features that are important and that are
characteristic for a user. Examples of such characteristics are
that people live in different time zones, have different working
and sleeping hours, goes on vacation every summer etc.
To obtain an understanding on how users behave, and
investigate if there are some features that seems to be more
characteristic than others, we studied the activity of a set of
randomly selected users that were active in the discussion
board. Figure 1 shows a random user’s distribution of posts
throughout a day. As can be noted if the figure, it seems
to be the case that this user has a quite similar behavior of
when he/she is active and not throughout all five years that
are compared. When analyzing users’ activity during various
time intervals we noted that the activity pattern or time profile
of a user seemed to be quite specific for each of the selected
users. We also noted that the activity of a user seemed to be
consistent over time (using data from different years). Some of
the features that we considered in our manual analysis were:
• Activity during each month
• Activity during each hour of the day
• Activity during weekdays and weekends
• Activity during four-hour intervals (early morning,
morning, midday, evening, night, midnight)
Figure 2 shows the distribution of messages (posts in the
discussion board) in four-hour intervals for a single user in the
boards.ie dataset. Each number on the x-axis represents a four
hour interval where 1 = 00-03.59, 2 = 04-07.59, and so on.
The same user has been active during 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006
and 2007, and the distribution of messages is shown for each
year. As can be noted in the graph, this user seems to have a
consistent behavior when it comes to distribution of messages
over the years.
Using activity profiles to identify individuals is something
that has been considered in previous studies. In [9], a temporal
analysis of the bloggosphere is done. The assumption was
that each blogger has a different preference for posting. A
dataset consisting of nearly 700,000 blog articles was analyzed
according to two factors: (1) day of the week and (2) time
of the day. One of the conclusions in the paper is that each
blogger has a different temporal preference for posting which
supports our thoughts that different discussion board users
have different preferences for posting, and therefore will have
timeprints that differ from each other.
III. AUTHOR IDENTIFICATION
Author identification, also known as authorship attribution,
can be defined as the problem of assigning a text of unknown
authorship to one candidate author, given a set of candidate
authors for whom texts of undisputed authorship are available
[10]. Authorship identification is a fairly well-studied problem,
where algorithms and various features have been extensively
described in, e.g., [11], [4], [12], and [13]. However, existing
approaches rely on linguistic/stylometric features (lexical, syn-
tactic, idiosyncratic, etc.), while we here study the usefulness
of time features based on when texts have been written or
published. To the best of our knowledge, time features have
not previously been used for author identification purposes.
Clearly, information about time is not always available, but
when analyzing posts from social media (e.g., Twitter, web
forums, etc.), such information can often be extracted.
A. Experiments on author identification
From the ICWSM boards.ie forum dataset, we have iden-
tified and extracted the posts for the top-1000 posters from
year 2007. The reason for choosing those users is that we
wanted to have as large data material as possible, since a
reasonable assumption is that the amount of data will have
an impact on the achieved results. Each user ui has been
split into five2 ”sub-users” ui1, ui2, . . . , ui5, where the user’s
first post has been assigned to ui1, the second post to ui2,
etc. The reason for using this approach is to construct several
(five) training instances for each user in order to facilitate the
learning phase. Based on the extracted posts, timeprint vectors
have been constructed (one for each sub-user), consisting of
the following sets of attributes:
• Hour Of Day: Hour1, Hour2, . . . , Hour24,
• Period Of Day: MidNight, EarlyMorning, Morning,
MidDay, Evening, Night,
• Month: Jan, Feb, . . . , Dec
• Day: Sunday, Monday, . . . , Saturday
• Type Of Day: WeekDay, WeekEnd
In the construction phase we first count the number of occur-
rences of each attribute and then express the values as relative
frequencies, so that the values of each set of attributes sums to
1 (e.g., WeekDay = 0.65 and WeekEnd = 0.35). In addition
to the features described above, we also incorporate the UserID
ui as the target class. Hence, we have five (different) data
instances for each UserID.
In our first experiment, we have varied the number of
potential authors from 100 to 1000 in steps of 100, and
compared the accuracy for two popular supervised learning
algorithms: a naive Bayes (NB) classifier and a support vector
machine (SVM) classifier. For the SVM, we have made use
of a linear kernel since this was shown to give better results
than a radial basis function in our initial experiments. In each
step we have performed 10-fold cross validation and the results
from the ten folds have been averaged into a single accuracy
value. The results from the experiment are shown in Figure 3.
As can be seen, both classifiers perform relatively well
on the classification task. The SVM classifier is consistently
outperforming the NB classifier, but this comes with a price.
The training and evaluation phase of the NB classifier took
a few minutes while the last steps took days to perform for
the SVM classifier on the standard computer we used for the
experiments.
Using the timeprint that only contains information about
the activity of a user, the correct user is almost always selected
when having 100 potential authors, and the accuracy is still
over 90% for the SVM classifier when increasing the number
2The number of slices has been arbitrarily selected, but turned out to work
well.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
98.8 98
94.8
89.6
86
81.7
78.6
73.4
68.9
65.3
99.4 99.3 96.7
93.7
90.7 88.6 85.9
81.7
77.5 75.1
No. of Users
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Naive Bayes SVM
Fig. 3: Accuracy results from classification with a naive Bayes classifier and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier.
Experiments conducted on the 1000 users that made most posts in year 2007.
of users to 500. The accuracy decreases when even more po-
tential authors are added, but it is still over 65% when reaching
1000 potential authors also for the quite simple NB classifier,
while the corresponding accuracy for the SVM classifier is
75%. The achieved results imply that time features can be
very useful for author identification when having access to
large amounts of data material. Those results are significantly
higher than those obtained for author identification with textual
(stylometric) features on a forum dataset reported in [11]. It
should however be noted that it is not the same forum datasets
that have been used in those experiments.
An important part of the explanation to the decrease in
accuracy when the number of potential authors is increased is
obviously that there are more candidates to chose among for
the classifiers, but a contributing factor may also be that there
is less data material for the users further down in the list. To
get a better understanding of what impact the amount of posts
has on the results, we have in a second experiment modified
the original dataset so that each user’s timeprint vector is built
from the user’s first 444 posts instead of all its posts (the
threshold has been based on the amount of messages posted
by the thousandth user). When adjusting the experiment in this
manner, the results shown in Figure 4 were obtained.
As seen in Figure 4, the results become significantly lower
when adjusting the available data material in this way. This
suggests that the success of the used features are sensitive
to how much posts that are available. However, the obtained
results are still highly compatible compared with the results
presented for stylometric features in [11] (this comparison is
only valid for 100 users since Abbasi and Chen did not test
the algorithms on larger problem instances). As can be seen,
the SVM classifier is outperforming the NB classifier also in
this experiment.
IV. ALIAS MATCHING
In the author identification problem we compare each
anonymous user (the users present in a test set) to a fixed set of
pre-defined known entities (the UserIDs present in the training
set). In this way, we assume that the anonymous user is one of
the exhaustive list of candidate authors present in the training
set. However, in an alias matching setting (described in more
detail in [5]), we can’t assume that we have knowledge of
all potential authors. The problem is instead to compare each
anonymous identity to all other identities and group together
users (aliases) which are more similar than a certain threshold.
Hence, while author identification can be seen as a supervised
machine learning problem, alias matching is an unsupervised
problem where the same algorithms cannot be used. Instead,
we are for the alias matching problem using a distance function
(in this case Manhattan distance) to calculate the similarity
among user profiles.
In addition to publishing time, i.e., timeprints, there are
also other kinds of features which can be used for alias
matching. One obvious candidate is the use of stylometric
features. In some contexts, it can also be useful to include
string-based features (for matching based on alias names) and
social network-based features (for matching based on thread
or friend information). The usefulness of such features is
described in more detail in [5] and [14]. However, in the
experiments presented here we restrict our focus to time-based
features.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
57.2
49.6 47.7 45.1 42.7 40.8 39.8 38.2 36.9 36.5
55.2
50.3 48.1 47.9 45.7 45.4 44.6 43.3 42.6 43
No. of Users
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Naive Bayes SVM
Fig. 4: Accuracy results from classification with a naive Bayes classifier and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier.
Experiments conducted on the 1000 users that made most posts in year 2007, using only the first 444 posts.
A. Experiments on alias matching
In our first alias matching experiment we have chosen
the same set of users as in the previously described author
identification experiments. From this set of users, we first
selected a smaller set of users (n = 100) (where the selection is
based on the descending order of the users’ amount of posts).
Each of these users have been split into two separate users
uia and uib, where 1 ≤ i ≤ 100 and odd posts are assigned
to user uia and even posts to uib. Now, each user in the set
{u1a, u2a, u3a, ..., una} is compared, one at a time, with all
the users in the set B = {u1b, u2b, u3b, ..., unb}. Based on the
results from the time-based matching we rank the members of
set B according to how similar they are to the selected user
(where the similarity among two vectors is calculated using
Manhattan distance). The most similar member of the set B is
ranked as number one, the next most similar as number two
and so on.
The reported accuracy is calculated as the fraction of times
the index of the selected alias is found within the top-N
rankings (where the results for N = 1 and N = 3 are
reported). This kind of experiment has then been conducted
for increasing values of the number of users n, where we have
varied n from 100 to 1000 in steps of 100.
The used methodology is the same that previously has been
reported in [5], except for that we now use a threshold of a
minimum of 200 posts instead of 60 posts and use data from
2007 instead of 2008. The motivation for those changes is to
study the impact of the number of posts on the results.
The results from the experiment are summarized in Figure
5. As can be seen, high accuracies are obtained, irrespectively
if we look at the top-1 or top-3 statistics. Expectedly, there
is a decrease in accuracy as the number of users is increased,
but the top-1 accuracy is almost 80% for 1000 users and the
corresponding top-3 accuracy is almost 90%. These numbers
are significantly higher than the results reported in [5] (where
the corresponding numbers for the time profile were 33% and
47%, respectively), which once again shows the importance of
having a lot of data available when building the time profiles.
A change from Euclidean to Manhattan distance has also been
improving the results somewhat, but only a few percentages.
In our last experiment, the same experimental setup as in
our former experiment has been used, except for a change in
the time features that have been utilized. Instead of just using
the hour-of-day features, we have initially included a large
range of features (the same as described in Section III-A). In
next step, we have ranked the usefulness of the features using
information gain, which is an entropy-based feature selection
method [15]. The results from the information gain indicated
that there were two sets of time features that seemed to be
most useful:
• Period of Day
• Month.
One possible explanation to why the feature Period of Day
is useful is that dividing the day into four hour blocks captures
the chronotype of a user better than considering the activity of
a user each hour. The feature Month captures the difference in
behavior over a longer time period. Since the dataset we have
used is an Irish forum, we can assume that most active users
have their origin in Ireland and that the country’s seasonal
shifting may influence how much time is spent in front of the
computer. In the summer it is common to have vacation and
in some cases that affect the behavior of a user significantly.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
100 99.5
98
95.8
94
90.8
88.6
84.4
81.7
79.3
100 100 100
99.3
98.2
96.8
95.3
92.1
90.3
88.2
No. of Users
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Top 1 Top 3
Fig. 5: Accuracy result from experiments with alias matching using a timeprint with the feature Hour Of Day as in [5]
When the features Period of Day and Month are used the
accuracy becomes as high as 100% for all the tested user sizes
(in both top-1 and top-3 statistics). This is a very strong result
and a comparison with the use of a timeprint with the feature
Hour Of Day (top-1 statistics) is shown in Figure 6. As can
be noted, the accuracy for using the features Period of Day
and Month outperform the feature Hour Of Day.
V. DISCUSSION
The experiment results presented in the previous sections
indicate that timeprints can be very useful for both author
identification and alias matching. However, it should be noted
that the results have been obtained in quite well-controlled
experimental settings which does not necessarily hold true in
a real-world environment. In our alias matching experiments,
we have been able to control so that posts have been evenly
distributed among sets A and B. ”In the wild”, posts from two
aliases belonging to the same individual could potentially be
more unevenly distributed, so that the posts for one alias have
been created during a completely other time period than the
posts for the first alias. If this would be the case, this would
have a negative impact on the obtained accuracy.
For the author identification problem, we have split the
available posts for a user into five separate training samples.
This has proved to work quite well, but the number of training
samples per user has been arbitrarily selected. The optimal
value of training samples is probably dependent upon the
number of potential authors as well as how much posts we
have available for each user, but finding such an optimal value
has been outside the scope of this paper. However, as a rule
of thumb, the more posts we have for a certain user, the more
high-quality training samples we can create.
One positive interpretation of the obtained results is that
police and intelligence services around the world can become
more effective in finding the author of large quantities of
terrorist propaganda and other crime- or terrorism-related
content. A more negative interpretation is that the anonymity of
ordinary citizens in worst case may be weakened. This raises
the question of whether the use of time-based features can be
defended against by an individual who wants to preserve his or
her anonymity. A potential solution could be to use software
which does not publish posts directly as they are written, but
rather delay the creation time of new posts randomly.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented the idea that a user’s
timeprint (which can be extracted from the publishing times
of a large number of social media services) can be useful
for identifying users who make use of multiple aliases. This
idea has been motivated by arguments such as the existence
of individual differences in personality preferences related to
time (morning-type, evening-type, neither-type) and the fact
that people have different working hours and sleeping hours.
By selecting a few users and looking at their behavior over
time we have noted that many users seem to have a quite
stable activity behavior over time. This information can be
captured in what we refer to as a timeprint. Our initial manual
analysis has indicated that there might be a possibility to tell
individuals apart based on their timeprints. However, by just
looking at a set of users’ behavior over time we can not say
much about how unique a timeprint is.
To get a better understanding of the uniqueness of individ-
uals’ timeprints, we have made supervised machine learning
experiments where we have attempted to learn classifiers to
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
70%
80%
90%
100%
100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
100 99.5
98
95.8
94
90.8
88.6
84.4
81.7
79.3
No. of Users
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Period of Day and Month Hour Of Day
Fig. 6: Accuracy for alias matching using two different timeprints. One with the features Period of Day and Month and one
with the feature Hour Of Day.
tell users apart based on various time features. This can be
thought of as author identification based on activity rather than
textual style. The results suggest that high accuracy can be
obtained also for large number of potential authors (over 90%
up to 500 users), but that the accuracy is highly dependent
upon the number of posts from which the timeprints are
created. In a second set of experiments, we have tested the
usefulness of various time features for the unsupervised alias
matching problem. We show that by using information gain
and selecting the most informative features, good performance
can be achieved. Once again, the results are highly dependent
on the amount of posts that are used to construct the timeprints.
The results in the paper are encouraging from an in-
telligence and security perspective, but they might pose a
threat towards privacy and online anonymity. If this kind of
techniques can be used to reveal the true identity of a potential
terrorist, there is a risk that the same techniques can be used
also for other purposes, even though the usefulness of the
technique decline as the number of users is increased. If
time features are combined with textual features (such as in
[5]), the classification accuracy can be expected to become
higher than what has been reported here. One way to defend
against the use of ”timeprint attacks” could be to use tools
that automate the process of publishing. A more drastic defense
could be that some individuals choose to stop posting sensitive
information at all, but this would obviously have potentially
severe consequences for democracy and individuals’ right to
freedom.
A. Future work
In this paper we have only considered users in a discussion
forum, but it is possible that the results can be transferred to
other social media services as well. As future work we plan to
test the usefulness of the developed timeprints on other social
media services such as Twitter. We also aim at cross-platform
experiments, in which correlations among discussion forums
and other social media services can be explored. We also would
like to carry out large-scale experiments like those in [4],
where the full set of their stylometric features are combined
with the timeprint features developed in this paper.
Another direction for future work is to do more experi-
ments on how much data that is needed to create a timeprint
that is useful for identification of users. Our experiments shows
that the amount of data is significant for the results. Another
factor that influences the experiments we have conducted is
the experimental setup. Hence, we also would like to conduct
more experiments using different setups in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was financially supported by the Swedish
Armed Forces Research and Development Programme.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Abbasi and H. Chen, “Affect intensity analysis of dark web forums,”
in Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on Intelligence
and Security Informatics, 2007.
[2] J. Brynielsson, A. Horndahl, F. Johansson, L. Kaati, C. Mårtenson,
and P. Svenson, “Analysis of weak signals for detecting lone wolf
terrorists,” in Proceedings of the 2012 European Intelligence and
Security Informatics Conference, 2012, pp. 197–204.
[3] D. Goldschlag, M. Reed, and P. Syverson, “Onion routing,” Communi-
cations of the ACM, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 39–41, 1999.
[4] A. Narayanan, H. Paskov, N. Gong, J. Bethencourt, E. Stefanov, E. Shin,
and D. Song, “On the feasibility of internet-scale author identification,”
in 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), may 2012, pp.
300 –314.
[5] F. Johansson, L. Kaati, and A. Shrestha, “Detecting multiple aliases in
social media,” in Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM 2013).
ACM, 2013, pp. 1004–1011.
[6] A. Adan, S. N. Archer, M. P. Hidalgo, L. Di Milia, V. Natale, and
C. Randler, “Circadian typology: a comprehensive review,” Chronobi-
ology international, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1153–1175, 2012.
[7] R. Urban, T. Magyarodi, and A. Riga, “Morningness-eveningness,
chronotypes and health-impairing behaviors in adolescents.” Chrono-
biology International, vol. 28, pp. 238–247, 2011.
[8] A. Adan, “Chronotype and personality factors in the daily consumption
of alcohol and psychostimulants.” Addiction, vol. 89, pp. 455–462,
1994.
[9] B. Lee, “A temporal analysis of posting behavior in social media
streams,” International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
2012.
[10] E. Stamatatos, “A survey of modern authorship attribution methods,”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 538–556, 2009.
[11] A. Abbasi and H. Chen, “Writeprints: A stylometric approach to
identity-level identification and similarity detection in cyberspace,”
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 7:1–7:29, Apr. 2008.
[12] R. Zheng, J. Li, H. Chen, and Z. Huang, “A framework for authorship
identification of online messages: Writing-style features and classifi-
cation techniques,” J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 57, no. 3, pp.
378–393, 2006.
[13] P. Juola, “Authorship attribution,” Found. Trends Inf. Retr., vol. 1, no. 3,
pp. 233–334, 2006.
[14] J. Dahlin, F. Johansson, L. Kaati, C. Mårtenson, and P. Svenson, “Com-
bining entity matching techniques for detecting extremist behavior on
discussion boards,” in Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference
on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM 2012),
2012, pp. 850–857.
[15] C. Lee and G. G. Lee, “Information gain and divergence-based fea-
ture selection for machine learning-based text categorization,” Formal
Methods for Information Retrieval, vol. 42, pp. 155–165, 2006.
