Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution:
an n-gram textbite approach
Alison Johnson & David Wright
University of Leeds
Abstract. Forensic authorship attribution is concerned with identifying authors
of disputed or anonymous documents, which are potentially evidential in legal
cases, through the analysis of linguistic clues left behind by writers. The forensic
linguist “approaches this problem of questioned authorship from the theoretical
position that every native speaker has their own distinct and individual version of
the language [. . . ], their own idiolect” (Coulthard, 2004: 31). However, given the
diXculty in empirically substantiating a theory of idiolect, there is growing con-
cern in the Veld that it remains too abstract to be of practical use (Kredens, 2002;
Grant, 2010; Turell, 2010). Stylistic, corpus, and computational approaches to text,
however, are able to identify repeated collocational patterns, or n-grams, two to
six word chunks of language, similar to the popular notion of soundbites: small
segments of no more than a few seconds of speech that journalists are able to
recognise as having news value and which characterise the important moments
of talk. The soundbite oUers an intriguing parallel for authorship attribution
studies, with the following question arising: looking at any set of texts by any
author, is it possible to identify ‘n-gram textbites’, small textual segments that
characterise that author’s writing, providing DNA-like chunks of identifying ma-
terial? Drawing on a corpus of 63,000 emails and 2.5 million words written by
176 employees of the former American energy corporation Enron, a case study
approach is adopted, Vrst showing through stylistic analysis that one Enron em-
ployee repeatedly produces the same stylistic patterns of politely encoded direc-
tives in a way that may be considered habitual. Then a statistical experiment
with the same case study author Vnds that word n-grams can assign anonymised
email samples to him with success rates as high as 100%. This paper argues that,
if suXciently distinctive, these textbites are able to identify authors by reducing a
mass of data to key segments that move us closer to the elusive concept of idiolect.
Keywords: Authorship attribution, email, Enron, idiolect, Jaccard, n-grams, style, textbites.
Resumo. A atribuição de autoria forense consiste em identiVcar os autores de
documentos anónimos ou cuja autoria é contestada, e potencialmente elemento
de prova em casos jurídicos, através da análise de pistas linguísticas deixadas
pelos escritores. O linguista forense “aborda o problema da autoria questionada
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
a partir do pressuposto teórico de que cada falante nativo de determinada lín-
gua possui a sua própria versão distinta e individualizada da língua [. . . ], o seu
próprio idiolecto” (Coulthard, 2004: 31). No entanto, considerando a diVculdade
em sustentar empiricamente uma teoria do idiolecto, existe uma preocupação
crescente nesta área relativamente ao facto de ser um conceito demasiado ab-
stracto para ter utilidade prática (Kredens, 2002; Grant, 2010; Turell, 2010). As
abordagens estilísticas, de corpora e computacionais ao texto, no entanto, per-
mitem identiVcar padrões colocacionais repetidos, ou n-gramas, fragmentos lin-
guísticos entre duas e seis palavras, semelhantes à conhecida noção de soundbites
– pequenos segmentos de apenas alguns segundos de fala que os jornalistas con-
seguem identiVcar como possuindo valor noticioso, e que caracterizam momentos
importantes da fala. O soundbite proporciona um fascinante paralelo para os es-
tudos de atribuição de autoria, colocando-se a seguinte questão: observando um
qualquer conjunto de textos de determinado autor, é possível identiVcar “textbites
de n-gramas”, pequenos segmentos de texto que caracterizam a escrita do autor,
fornecendo segmentos de material identiVcativo semelhantes ao DNA? Partindo
de um corpus de 63.000 emails e 2,5 milhões de palavras escritas por 176 fun-
cionários da antiga empresa de energia americana Enron, realizamos um estudo
de caso, que mostra, em primeiro lugar, recorrendo a uma análise estilística, que
um funcionário da Enron produz repetidamente os mesmos padrões estilísticos
de pedidos educadamente codiVcados, de uma forma que pode ser considerada
habitual. De seguida, uma experiência estatística utilizando o mesmo autor do
estudo de caso revela que os n-gramas de palavras permitem atribuir amostras
de email anonimizadas a esse autor com taxas de sucesso da ordem dos 100%.
Este artigo defende que, quando suVcientemente distintivos, estes textbites têm
capacidade para identiVcar os autores reduzindo um volume de dados massivo a
segmentos-chave que nos aproximam do esquivo conceito de idiolecto.
Palavras-chave: Atribuição de autoria, email, Enron, idiolecto, Jaccard, n-gramas, estilo,
textbites.
Introduction
Journalists listening to live speech are able to single out soundbites, small segments of no
more than a few seconds of speech that they recognise as having news value and which
characterise the important moments of talk. Though ‘soundbite syndrome’ (Mazzoleni and
Schulz, 1999: 251) is seen as a reductionist trend representing a “tendency towards shorter
and more sensational texts or ‘soundbite news”’ (Knox, 2007: 28), it oUers an intrigu-
ing parallel, thinking laterally, for authorship attribution studies. The following question
arises: looking at any set of texts by any author, is it possible to identify ‘n-gram textbites’,
small two to six word portions of text that characterise the writing of that author, provid-
ing DNA-like chunks of identifying material? Using the DNA metaphor, if textual chunks
or ‘textbites’ (Ancu, 2011) are suXciently distinctive, they may be able to identify authors
by reducing the mass of words to meaningful and key segments that move us closer to
the abstract and elusive concept of a ‘linguistic Vngerprint’, which Coulthard (2004: 432)
describes as “the linguistic ‘impressions’ created by a given speaker/writer [which] should
be usable, just like a signature, to identify them”. Coulthard (2004: 432) eschews the DNA
metaphor as “unhelpful” and “impractical” because of the need for “massive databanks
38
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
consisting of representative linguistic samples”. The Enron email corpus (Cohen, 2009),
however, consisting of a large population of authors (we use a 176-author corpus) and their
63,369 emails spanning several years (1998-2002), provides a real opportunity to search for
distinctive and individuating small text segments that can be manually identiVed or com-
putationally extracted for authorship attribution and author proVling in emails, adding
to our knowledge of the generic lexical features of that text type and to writing charac-
teristics of some of the employees who inhabit it. This “specialised corpus” (Flowerdew,
2004) therefore enables us to focus on identifying features which represent small sections
of the individual genetic code, and allows us to evaluate their usefulness in authorship
attribution against a background of a population-level reference corpus; thus, attempting
to identify DNA-like textbites becomes a manageable undertaking.
Solan (2013) in his paper on intuition versus algorithm, details the current trends
in forensic authorship analysis and the divergence between qualitative and stylistic ap-
proaches on the one hand and computational and statistical approaches on the other. Ear-
lier, Solan and Tiersma (2004: 463) highlighted the importance for admissibility of ex-
pert evidence of methods which “employ linguistically motivated analyses in combination
with quantitative tools”, and the usefulness of corpora in combining such methods for the
purposes of authorship analysis has been noted elsewhere (Cotterill, 2010; Kredens and
Coulthard, 2012; Solan, 2013). There have been a number of recent studies which com-
bine stylistic (Turell, 2010; Queralt and Turell, 2012), grammatical and multidimensional
(Nini and Grant, 2013) approaches with quantitative methods. Turell (2010: 212), not only
demonstrates the usefulness of a combined qualitative and quantitative approach in a real
case where authorship is disputed, but also points out the beneVts of empirical research
for “expert witness performance”, especially, noting Coulthard’s (1994) contribution to the
study of corpus-based evaluation of markers of authorship. Drawing on the beneVts af-
forded to researchers by using corpora, and combining corpus analysis with stylistic and
computational methods, we focus on word n-grams (groups of one, two, or more words)
as features for analysis, arguing that these can be considered ‘textbites’ that are evidence
of distinctive text-encoding by authors. This paper reports a case study of one Enron em-
ployee, James Derrick, in which both corpus stylistic and computational approaches are
used to investigate and identify an individual’s distinctive language use. This case study
has three research aims:
1. Using a corpus linguistic, stylistic, and computational approach that employs both
qualitative and quantitative methods, we investigate whether n-grams are distinc-
tive and characteristic of an individual author’s style, in this case their professional
business email style.
2. Focusing on an individual’s distinctive linguistic behaviour within a speciVc type
of speech act—please-mitigated directives—we highlight the distinctive ways in
which individual authors express this particular speech act, and how this speech
act gives rise to author-distinct collocational preferences and identiVable word n-
grams or n-gram textbites.
3. Using computational and statistical tests, we assess and evaluate the eUectiveness
of word n-grams of between one and six words in the successful attribution of
large and small samples of emails to their actual author.
Using a combination of computational tools (Wordsmith Tools, (Scott, 2008); Jangle,
(Woolls, 2013)) this case study utilises the Enron corpus in two ways; the Vrst research
39
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
aim relies on the corpus as a large-scale reference corpus representing a population of
writers against which an individual’s style can be compared, while the computational
attribution experiment in the third research aim uses the Enron corpus as a large pool of
176 candidate authors. As a result of the triangulated approach, we are able to compare the
results of the diUerent methods to see whether they are complementary and conVrmatory,
to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of both approaches and underline the eUectiveness
of n-grams as important markers of authorship. Finally, we can consider the implications
for authorship studies and methods for use in evidential cases.
N-grams, idiolect and email
The co-occurrence of lexical items within a short space of each other is known in cor-
pus linguistics as ‘collocation’, and was Vrst introduced by Firth (1957), later developed
by Sinclair (1991), Stubbs (2001) and Hoey (2005) amongst others, and continues to be at
the forefront of corpus linguistic research (Gries, 2013). The associations that people build
between words and the ways in which they produce them in combinations is a psycholin-
guistic phenomenon, and has been analysed in terms of ‘lexical phrases’ (Nattinger and
DeCarrico, 1992), ‘formulaic sequences’ (Wray, 2002, 2008), ‘lexical priming’ (Hoey, 2005;
Pace-Sigge, 2013), and usage-based theories of lexico-grammar such as exemplar theory
(Barlow, 2013). One factor which these diUerent approaches have in common is that they
all emphasise the personal or ‘idiolectal’ nature of preferences for certain word combina-
tions and collocational patterns. Schmitt et al. (2004: 138), discussing formulaic sequences,
argue that “it seems reasonable to assume that they [people] will also have their own
unique store of formulaic sequences based on their own experience and language expo-
sure”. Similarly, Hoey (2005: 8–15), in his argument that collocation can only be accounted
for if we assume that every word is primed for co-occurrence with other words, grammat-
ical categories or pragmatic functions, claims that “an inherent quality of lexical priming
is that it is personal” and that “words are never primed per se; they are only primed for
someone”. He goes on to explain that:
Everybody’s language is unique, because all our lexical items are inevitably
primed diUerently as a result of diUerent encounters, spoken and written. We
have diUerent parents and diUerent friends, live in diUerent places, read diUerent
books, get into diUerent arguments and have diUerent colleagues. (Hoey, 2005:
181)
Collocations and sequential strings of lexical words are referred to in linguistics by a wide
range of diUerent names, such as ‘concgrams’, ‘Wexigrams’, ‘lexical bundles’, ‘multi-word
expressions’, ‘prefabricated phrases’, ‘skipgrams’ (Nerlich et al., 2012: 50). In authorship
attribution, Juola (2008: 265) refers to them simply as word n-grams—lexical strings of n
words—and describes them as a means by which to take advantage of vocabulary and syn-
tactic information in texts and an eUective way of capturing words in context. Collocations
and lexical strings in this study are referred to as n-grams and we also consider the extent
to which they can be called ‘n-gram textbites’, small portions of text that characterise the
writing of a particular author.
The idiolectal nature of collocations has been investigated, to a limited extent, in
corpus linguistics. Mollin (2009) used a corpus-based statistical approach to analysing
idiolectal collocations in the text of former UK Prime Minister, Tony Blair, and Barlow
(2010, 2013) examined the relative frequencies of two- and three-word sequences used by
40
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Vve White House Press secretaries. Distinctive lexical choices and sequences have also
been used as evidence of idiolect in authorship identiVcation (Coulthard, 2004, 2013) and
plagiarism detection (Johnson and Woolls, 2009; Culwin and Child, 2010) and the useful-
ness of formulaic sequences as style markers in forensic authorship attribution has been
evaluated (Larner, 2014). In addition, word n-grams have been used as input features
for automated techniques of distinguishing and identifying authors with both encourag-
ing (Hoover, 2002, 2003; Coyotl-Morales et al., 2006; Juola, 2013) and poor (Grieve, 2007;
Sanderson and Guenter, 2006) results.
Frequencies of function words (Mosteller and Wallace, 1964; Burrows, 2002; Argamon
and Levitan, 2005), and increasingly character n-grams (Chaski, 2007; Stamatatos, 2008,
2013; Luyckx and Daelemans, 2011; Koppel et al., 2011, 2013) have been preferred over
content words in authorship research, as it is argued that the latter are too heavily de-
pendent on topic, context and writing situation (Stamatatos, 2009: 540; Koppel et al., 2009:
11). However, as Coulthard (2013: 447–8) argues, although the occurrence of lexical items
shared between topically related texts is signiVcant in authorship attribution, “much more
signiVcant is the shared occurrence of co-selected items or what linguists call collocates”.
In other words, although diUerent writers may write about the same topics or with the
same purpose, the way in which they write about these things can quickly become lin-
guistically unique. Moreover, computational authorship analysts (Argamon and Koppel,
2013: 300; Stamatatos, 2013: 428) are increasingly acknowledging that the feature sets used
and results obtained from automated techniques are diXcult, if not impossible, to explain
and interpret in linguistic and stylistic terms. In contrast, building on the research of
Nattinger and DeCarrico (1992), Wray (2002), and Hoey (2005) outlined above, theoretical
explanations can be oUered for variation observed between authors in their production of
n-grams. They are identiVable and computationally accessible manifestations of individ-
uals’ idiolectal, primed and perhaps prefabricated collocational and phraseological pref-
erences, resulting from a lifetime of unique linguistic exposure and experience. As such,
word n-grams are linguistic features that may serve to bridge the gaps between cognitive,
computational, and stylistic approaches to authorship analysis, an increasingly important
aim of current research in the Veld (Nini and Grant, 2013; Argamon and Koppel, 2010,
2013).
The particular focus of this paper is on individuals’ distinctive linguistic behaviour
within a speciVc type of ‘speech act’ (Austin, 1962; Searle, 1969): please-mitigated direc-
tives. Linguistic research into email as a text type has continually identiVed the mak-
ing of commands and requests for action as major communicative functions of emails
(Sherblom, 1988; Baron, 1998; Gimenez, 2000). By extension, there has been a wave of
research into politeness and requests in emails of various languages, particularly in in-
stitutional settings such as academia and commerce (Duthler, 2006; Lampert et al., 2008;
Merrison et al., 2012; Chejnová, 2014). Variation has been a central component of much of
this research, with comparisons being made in email behaviour across diUerent contexts
(organisational/educational) (Gains, 1999; Waldvogel, 2007), diUerent languages, varieties
and cultures (Lan, 2000; Bou-Franch and Lorenzo-Dus, 2008; Merrison et al., 2012), gen-
ders (Van Den Eynden, 2012), within speciVc communities of practice (Luchjenbroers and
Aldridge-Waddon, 2011) and diUerent social and hierarchical participant relationships and
roles (Bou-Franch, 2011; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2011; Najeeb et al., 2012). This paper
aims to add to this list the idiolectal nature of directives, highlighting the distinctive ways
41
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
in which individual authors express this particular speech act, and how this speech act
gives rise to author-unique collocational preferences and identiVable n-grams or n-gram
textbites. Since requests and orders are diXcult to diUerentiate, given that both have the
function of getting someone to do something, we follow Bax’s (1986: 676) distinction,
where in a request “the requesting person beneVts from the future act” and there is a “re-
ciprocal social relation” between the interactants, whereas in a directive “the person does
not necessarily have to beneVt from [the act]” and the addressee is in an “inferior social
relation”.
Data and method
This section introduces the Enron email corpus, the particular version we created as ap-
propriate for authorship research, and the case study of one employee, James Derrick. We
evaluate the combined case study, corpus comparison, and experimental evaluation ap-
proach and we introduce the statistical (Jaccard) and computational (Jangle) tools used
and created for this research.
The Enron email corpus
The corpus used for this study is a dataset of 63,369 emails and 2,462,151 tokens written
and sent between 1998 and 2002 by 176 employees of the former American energy com-
pany Enron. The Enron email data was Vrst made publicly available online as part of the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s legal investigation into the company’s account-
ing malpractices (FERC, 2013), which led to the ultimate bankruptcy and demise of the
company in the early 2000s. Many versions of the data have emerged across the web. The
source of the database used in this study is the version collected and prepared by Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU) (Cohen, 2009), as part of its ‘Cognitive Assistant that Learns and
Organises’ (CALO) project. The data have subsequently been extracted, cleaned-up, and
prepared speciVcally for the purposes of authorship attribution by Woolls (2012). The ex-
traction process mined all of the sent emails from all of the various ‘sent’ folders for each
of the authors, retaining only the newest email material in each thread, and removing any
previous email conversation, to ensure that only the material written by the sender was
included and available for analysis. This process was vital, to create a corpus suitable for
authorship research, because, as it stands, the Enron corpus (Cohen, 2009) is unsuitable
for this purpose. Each email in the corpus is accompanied by a range of metadata: the
date and time the email was sent, along with the ‘From:’, ‘To:’, ‘Subject:’, ‘Cc:’ and ‘Bcc:’
Velds, and the subject line (Example 1). In the cleaned-up corpus metadata is contained in
angle brackets so that it is not considered by the computational tools used to analyse the
authors’ textual choices in this study.
The data were further cleaned by Wright, in particular where the authors’ sent folders
contained emails sent by their assistants or secretaries. Such emails were relatively easy
42
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
to identify and remove and, in cases in which there was more than one email sent from
the same assistant, these emails were extracted and saved as belonging to this assistant,
creating a separate set of Vles for this individual and treating them as an additional au-
thor. Finally, blank emails and emails containing only forwarded or copied and pasted
material were also removed. The resulting 176 author, 63,369 email and 2,462,151 word
corpus is a gold-standard corpus, making it particularly useful for authorship studies. It
contains only naturally occurring email language data about which we can be sure of the
‘executive author’ (Love, 2002: 43), that is, the individual responsible for “formulating the
expression of ideas and ma[king] word selections to produce the text” (Grant, 2008: 218).
Since digital texts such as text messages, instant messages, and emails are becoming in-
creasingly prominent in forensic casework, including email cases containing threatening,
abusive, or defamatory material (e.g. Coulthard et al., 2011: 538), this corpus represents
a unique opportunity for empirical research with implications for authorship attribution
casework.
James Derrick
The analyses focus on a case study of one Enron employee, James Derrick. Case studies are
a beneVcial method when “‘how’ or ‘why’ questions are being posed” and when particular
“phenomena” are being studied (Yin, 2009: 2) and, in this case, we want to know how
an individual makes directives. The case study approach is complemented by a corpus
linguistic approach, which allows us to examine the uniqueness of his choices against the
larger Enron population. Derrick was an in-house lawyer at Enron (Creamer et al., 2009;
Priebe et al., 2005), in fact Enron’s chief lawyer and General Counsel, or chief legal oXcer,
with a staU of “200 in-house lawyers” and able to call on “more than 100 outside law Vrms
from around the world” between 1991 and 2002 (Ahrens, 2006). He is a former Adjunct
Professor of Law at the University of Texas Law School between 1984 and 1990, and is
currently a managing partner in a US law Vrm.
He is represented in the corpus by 470 emails, a total of 5,902 tokens and 911 types.
He was chosen as a case study because of the relatively small amount of data in his sent
box. Although he has slightly more emails than the mean per author for the corpus (mean
= 360), he has far fewer than the mean tokens per author (mean = 13,989). Derrick is
therefore a curious case in that his emails are much shorter than average, but this is per-
haps unsurprising given his status as chief lawyer and awareness of legal discovery1. He
has a mean of 12.9 words per email, while the mean for the corpus is 41.74. Further, 155
of his 470 emails (32.9%) contain only one word. These single-word emails contain two
types: FYI (for your information 22.5%) and FYR (for your reference/review/records 10.4%).
These most minimal of messages are sent chieWy to one addressee for each type. 67% of
the FYI emails are to j.harris@enron, one of the lawyers in Derrick’s team, and all of the
FYR single-word messages are sent to c.williams@enron. The relatively small amount of
data available for Derrick, in theory, makes any analysis of style and any subsequent attri-
bution tasks more diXcult than it would be with an author with more data (Grant, 2007;
Koppel et al., 2013; Luyckx and Daelemans, 2011). The advantage of using a case study for
authorship research is twofold. First, the small amount of data presents a similar challenge
to that in real cases where data is often limited. And second, while a case study allows
1Legal discovery (called disclosure in the UK) requires the defendant (in a criminal case) or adverse party (in
a civil case) to disclose anything that is asked for by the other side, which is needed in the preparation of
the case prior to trial. This can include electronic documents such as email.
43
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
us to identify an individual authorial style with a high degree of detail, it also allows for
comparison with the larger population of Enron employees. As Hoover (2010: 250) says,
“style is [. . . ] essentially, if not always explicitly, comparative. Any remark on a stylistic
characteristic implies a comparison, even if it does not state one”.
In the corpus stylistic analysis, Derrick’s style is compared with that of the other
175 authors in the Enron corpus, which serves as a reference corpus against which the
rarity or expectancy of particular n-grams are found in Derrick’s emails. In the attribution
experiment, the corpus represents a large pool of 176 candidate authors (including Derrick)
from which to attempt to correctly attribute samples of Derrick’s emails.
Computational tools
Two computational tools are used: Wordsmith Tools (Scott, 2008) and the specially-
designed Jangle (Woolls, 2013). Wordsmith Tools is used to generate word lists and key-
word lists from the data, as well as concordance results for any given search word or
phrase. CFL Jaccard N-gram Lexical Evaluator (Jangle) is a Java-based program which
is used to run the attribution experiments. The program automatically generates random
samples of emails for any one author, of any proportion the user requires, and separates
these samples from the remainder of that author’s emails. The program then runs a series
of pair-wise comparisons, with the sample Vle being compared with one other set of emails
at any one time (either the entire set of remaining emails of the author in question, or the
entire email set of another Enron employee). Finally, Jangle then produces Jaccard results
measuring how similar this pair of Vles is in terms of the word n-grams shared between
them.
Jaccard’s similarity coeXcient
Jaccard’s coeXcient, (or ‘Jaccard Index’, ‘Jaccard’, or ‘intersection distance’) measures the
fraction of the data that is shared between any two sets (A∩B) compared to all data avail-
able in the union of these two sets (A∪B) (Naumann and Herschel, 2010: 24). Jaccard is
widely used as a similarity metric across a range of scientiVc disciplines such as ecology
(Jaccard, 1912; Izsak and Price, 2001; Pottier et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2013) forensic psychol-
ogy and crime linkage (Bennell and Jones, 2005; Woodhams et al., 2008; Markson et al.,
2010) and document comparison (Rajaraman and Ullman, 2011; Deng et al., 2012; Man-
asse, 2012). Drawing on these various diUerent uses of the coeXcient, Jaccard has been
introduced into forensic authorship analysis as a way of measuring the similarity or dis-
tance between questioned and known documents based on a range of diUerent linguistic
features (Grant, 2010, 2013; Wright, 2012; Larner, 2014; Juola, 2013). In this study, Jaccard
is used to measure the similarity between any two sets of emails based on the number
of items—in this case word n-grams—found in both sets, divided by the number of total
number of items in the two sets combined:
or
44
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Jaccard normally produces results between zero and 1, with zero indicating complete dis-
similarity and 1 indicating that the two datasets are identical (Grant, 2010: 518). However,
in the interests of clarity, the results in this study have been multiplied by 100 and are
expressed as percentages, so that 0% indicates that any two sets are completely diUerent
and 100% indicates that the datasets are identical. Jaccard is a binary correlation analysis
in that it hinges on the appearance or non-appearance of a particular word n-gram in the
two samples compared, rather than how frequently this feature appears.
Experimental set up
The second part of the Derrick case study involves running an attribution experiment to
evaluate how accurate and reliable n-grams are in successfully identifying Derrick as the
author of a random sample of his emails. Ten diUerent random samples of 20%, 15%, 10%,
5% and 2% of his emails were extracted from his 470 email set, resulting in a total of 50 test
samples (Table 1).
Emails 20% 15% 10% 5% 2%
(n) (93) (70) (46) (23) (9)
1 1,018 537 350 281 94
2 901 679 555 192 88
3 776 672 606 288 82
4 831 666 411 229 84
5 762 746 622 229 74
6 1,116 875 479 174 109
7 1,220 836 404 398 78
8 1,034 767 419 200 145
9 980 692 525 156 55
10 876 654 478 358 77
Mean 951 712 485 251 87
SD 141.7 92.4 86.4 79.8 24.2
Table 1. Details of Derrick’s sample sizes in terms of total tokens in the attribution task,
including mean tokens and Standard Deviation (SD).
Previous stylometric studies have used test and sample datasets between 1,000 and
39,000 tokens in size (e.g. Hoover, 2004; Argamon and Levitan, 2005; Burrows, 2005; Labbé,
2007; Savoy, 2012). The sample sizes in this study range from the largest 20% samples at
1,220 and the smallest 2% sample at 55 tokens, and so are relatively small when compared
with such stylometric research. They are more similar in size to those used in studies
which have tested with smaller samples of between 140 and 1,300 tokens (van Halteren
et al., 2005; Koppel et al., 2011, 2013; Hirst and Feiguina, 2007; Luyckx and Daelemans,
2011), and those in a forensic context that have used exceptionally small test sets of be-
tween 105 and 341 tokens (Chaski, 2001; Grant, 2007; Rico-Sulayes, 2011).
Using Jangle, in each of the tests in this experiment, the extracted sample (2%, 5%,
10%, 15% or 20%) is compared against Derrick’s remaining emails (either 98%, 95%, 90%,
85% or 80%) and the entire email sets of the other 175 Enron employees, in order to measure
how similar the sample is to these other groups of texts. These comparisons are based on
45
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
word n-grams ranging from single words through to six words in length. In a way which
captures semantic as well as lexical and grammatical information, the n-grams used are
sequential strings of words which co-occur within punctuated sentence boundaries, as
opposed to a ‘bag-of-words’ approach, which does not take into account word order or
punctuation. Whereas Derrick’s samples are controlled for size, the comparison sets of the
other Enron employees are not, and they range from as small as two emails and twenty
tokens (Gretel Smith) to as large as 3,465 emails (Sara Shackleton) and 170,316 tokens
(JeU Dasovich). There is a total pool of 176 candidate authors used in this experiment
(including Derrick), and this is relatively large in stylometric terms, with others using three
(Grant, 2007), six (Juola, 2013), 10 (Rico-Sulayes, 2011: 58–9), 20 (Zheng et al., 2006: 387),
40 (Grieve, 2007: 258) and 145 (Luyckx and Daelemans, 2011: 42). There are exceptions
such as Koppel et al. (2006, 2011), however, which use open candidate sets of thousands
of potential authors. Overall though, the combination of small sample sizes and a large
number of candidate authors makes the attribution task in this study a relatively diXcult
one.
Case study of James Derrick
This case study employs two diUerent approaches to analysing James Derrick’s use of n-
grams. The Vrst approach (in the subsection Identifying Derrick’s professional authorial
style) is a corpus stylistic one, which examines Derrick’s professional authorial style, in
particular through the distinctive ways in which he constructs directives (Example 2 be-
low). He habitually uses email-initial please as well as a Vnal thank you in appreciation of
anticipated compliance, making these mitigated directives.
The second part of the case study (in the Attribution task subsection) uses a statisti-
cal and quantitative approach in the form of an attribution experiment using the Jaccard
measure described above (in the Experimental set up section). Finally, the section on ‘Der-
rick’s discriminating n-grams’ compares the results of these two approaches in terms of
their reliability, complementarity, and compatibility.
Identifying Derrick’s professional authorial style
A starting point for any corpus analysis of authorial style is to create a frequency word
list and then a keyword list (Hoover, 2009), to identify those words “whose frequency is
unusually high [in a particular dataset] in comparison with some norm”, because “key-
words provide a useful way to characterise a text or genre” (Scott, 2010: 156). First, the
Enron dataset is compared with the 450-million-word Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA) (Davies, 2012), to identify which words are key in the Enron corpus.
Second, Derrick’s data are then compared with the whole Enron corpus, to identify which
words are key in his emails, when tested against the Enron population from which he is
46
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
drawn. Wordsmith Tools (Scott, 2008) was used to create a word list. In any wordlist,
function words are the most common, and that is the case in the Enron corpus, as we see
in Table 2, column 1 (the, to, I, and, a, you, of, for, is, and in make up the top 10). The most
common lexical words, therefore, more usefully characterise a text than function words.
In the Enron corpus the top two lexical words are thanks and please (Table 2, column 1),
giving a clear indication that the Enron dataset is representative of a community of practice
in which interlocutors are generally linguistically polite to one another, and also suggesting
that requests or mitigated directives are this community’s principal speech act. Indeed,
please and thanks are found in 165 and 164 of the 176 employees’ emails respectively.
This is made even clearer by a keyword analysis, which Vnds that thanks and please are
the top two key words in the entire Enron corpus (Table 2, column 2). In turn, a second
keyword analysis comparing Derrick’s emails with the emails of the other 175 authors
(Table 2, column 3), Vnds that thank (you) is the most signiVcant key word and please is
the seventh most important in his emails. More importantly, in terms of the proportion
of Derrick’s vocabulary, thank accounts for 2.24% of his vocabulary, whereas it accounts
for 0.05% of the Enron vocabulary, and please accounts for 1.85% against 0.46%. These two
words, therefore, account for a total of 4.1% of Derrick’s vocabulary, compared to 0.5% for
the Enron authors in general, indicating that even within this corpus, which is generally
indicative of very polite discourse, Derrick appears exceptionally linguistically polite.
Table 2. Enron top 25 words and keywords, compared with Derrick’s top 25 key words.
47
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Figure 1. Rate per 1,000 words of please in the Enron corpus (top 5 users), along with
dispersion.
This is further supported by Figure 1, which shows the top Vve users of please in the
corpus. Derrick is the Vfth most frequent user of please among the 176 employees, but
looking at the dispersion rates in Figure 1 (the rate at which please is dispersed across the
author’s text) (Figure 1, column 6), and the number of words in each Vle (column 3), we
can see that employees one to four do not really count, since their Vle size is well below
500 words and dispersion across their emails is generally low (apart from in the Vle for
Akin: Akin-l-Dedup [Edited].txt). This makes Derrick arguably the most polite employee
in the corpus, or at least the person who makes most politely mitigated directives.
Furthermore, the keyword analysis of the whole Enron corpus shows that thanks (top
ranked keyword in Table 2, column 2) is far more popular than thank (ranked 444th key-
word, with Derrick alone accounting for 10% of its frequency). In contrast, Derrick’s usage
is entirely the reverse of this; his Vrst keyword is thank (which occurs with you in all 132
instances), while thanks is used only ten times and is a negative keyword in his dataset,
meaning that he uses it signiVcantly less than all of the other authors in the Enron corpus.
To put this another way, in the Enron corpus thanks is more than 11 times more frequent
than thank you, whereas for Derrick thank you is 15 times more frequent than thanks.
Examples 3 and 4 are typical of the way that Derrick uses please and thank you, using
pre-posed please to serve a politeness function and mitigate the face threat in the directive
(Bax, 1986: 688). He follows up with thank you, assuming compliance, punctuated with
a full stop and followed by his name. As such, not only is Derrick a linguistically polite
communicant, but these quantitative and preliminary qualitative results indicate that he
is polite in such a way that is very distinctive in this large population of Enron writers.
In addition, his use of Thank you+full stop, to follow up his directive, indicates his status
and authority to make these orders.
Given the obvious frequency, saliency and signiVcance of linguistic politeness in the use
of please and thank(s) in the Enron corpus, and in particular in Derrick’s emails, we might
say that this marks the construction of politeness and politeness strategies as an important
aspect of his professional authorial style within the Enron corporation, a phenomenon
which we deal with in detail below.
48
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Please and other politeness phenomena
The most eUective way of analysing Derrick’s distinctive construction of politely mitigated
directives is through taking a collocational approach. Wordsmith Toolswas used to identify
the collocates that Derrick co-selects with please (Figure 2). The Vrst point to note is that
of Derrick’s 109 please occurrences, 69 (63%) appear in message-initial position (after the
greeting or no greeting). This is a marked use of please in relation to the Enron corpus;
of the 10,952 instances of please that are found in the emails of the other 175 authors,
only 2,092 (19%) are message-initial across 118 of the authors (e.g. Example 5), though this
pattern is apparent in Table 3.
Figure 2. Concordance of I would appreciate your verb-ing in the Enron corpus.
Instead, as well as using pleasewithin the body of the email, the other authors in the Enron
corpus often modalise the directive with can, could, would, or will (See the L2 collocates in
Table 3 – can you please call; could you please send; will you please review.). Derrick never
uses can, could, or will to modalise directives, though he once uses would (Example 6). In
this case, though, he grammatically marks the sentence as a question, signalling his lack of
conVdence that it can be carried out. Therefore, the use of unmodalised please directives
49
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
and the use of please in email-initial position can be considered highly distinctive of Der-
rick. When message-initial please is combined with his choice of greeting form, Derrick’s
style stands out; he never uses Hi or Hi: (as in Dasovich, Example 5) and he consistently
uses comma after the addressee’s name, tending to follow up with thank you (Example 6).
Thank you is discussed further below.
On eight occasions he constructs indirect directives with would (Figure 2), in all cases
with your+present participle, using the subjunctive mood with a gerund, producing the
collocational string: I would appreciate your verb-ing. This grammatical choice is ex-
tremely rare in the wider corpus, with only three other examples, one each for Cash and
Shackleton (lines 8 and 10 in Figure 2) and one for Beck (I would appreciate your not shar-
ing this plan). The highly distinctive indirect directive I would appreciate your verb+ing is
an important variation from the please+directive form, but, signiVcantly, it is not a choice
for 172 of the Enron authors. The Enron corpus shows the other authors’ grammatical
choices with I would appreciate as containing the following six patterns and choices (in
decreasing order of frequency):
1. I would appreciate +NP (e.g. a quick call; discretion; it.) 56 occurrences
2. I would appreciate your +noun (e.g. I would appreciate your assistance) 24
3. I would appreciate it if you could +verb (e.g. I would appreciate it if you could join
us) 10
4. I would appreciate +verb-ing (e.g. I would appreciate hearing about) 8
5. I would appreciate if you could+verb (e.g. I would appreciate if you could call him)
7
6. I would appreciate you +verb-ing (e.g. I would appreciate you coordinating) 2
In terms of similar grammatical constructions to Derrick’s subjunctive + gerund, we can
see that the most frequent is to nominalise (pattern 1 or 2): I would appreciate a quick
call, or I would appreciate your assistance/feedback/help/input/views, rather than I would
appreciate your calling/assisting. After that patterns 3 and 5 use the conditional if and
patterns 4 and 6 use the present participle with or without you, but not your. The corpus
norms therefore seem to be a grammatical choice of nominalising, using the conditional,
or using the present participle, with Derrick’s pattern being almost unique to him and
shared with only three other authors (Shackleton, Cash and Beck). However, these au-
thors, do not use the subjunctive plus gerund pattern exclusively with I would appreciate,
as Derrick does. Instead they vary across the other six patterns (Shackleton uses 1, 2, and
5; Cash uses 1, 2, 3, and 4; Beck uses 1 and 2). The exclusive use of the subjunctive plus
gerund is therefore a unique marker of Derrick’s style, and importantly, as Turell (2010:
50
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
213) notes in relation to other grammatical markers, it is a grammatical marker that is “so-
ciolinguistically constrained”. She notes that “there are authorship markers, which apart
from carrying grammatical substance, may contain sociolinguistic information about the
author” (Turell, 2010: 214–215). In Derrick’s case it identiVes him as the most grammat-
ically distinct (some might say most grammatically correct) user of this string. I would
appreciate your verb-ing becomes a 5-gram textbite for him. We return to this below.
Table 3. Enron authors’ collocation patterns to the left (L1 to L4) and right (R1 to R4) of the
node: please (Greyed out cells point to the message-initial placement of please).
It would not be possible to deal with please-mitigated directives in email without
referring to the most frequent string of collocates with please: please let me know (Table
3). The top line of the R1 to R4 collocates in Table 3 shows this string; in the Enron
corpus 110 of 176 authors use this, including Derrick. Taking the top verbs to the right
of please, the R1 collocates show those which are most frequent for the Enron authors:
let, call, review, send. Comparing the Enron top 10 lexical verb collocates with Derrick’s
in Table 4 (print, see, format, handle, let, respond, proceed, call, notify, advise), we Vnd
that only let, see and print are in the top 10 for the other Enron authors and we also
see that print and see are Derrick’s most frequent lexical verbs, rather than let and call
for the other Enron employees, pointing to Derrick’s reduced use of this phrase. Please
let me know is found in Derrick’s emails three times less frequently than it is across the
corpus generally. At this point it is worth raising a problem with this use of the reference
population to make comparisons. While please let me know, is three times more frequent
in the wider Enron corpus than in Derrick’s emails, Derrick is not the least common user.
Taking the normalised frequency of rate per thousand words (using Wordsmith), Derrick
appears 67th out of 110 in terms of frequency, so there are 43 authors who use it less
than him and 66 who do not use it at all. In terms of dispersion (the extent to which the
phrase is distributed across all his emails) he is 60th out of 110 authors who use it. So
while comparing Derrick’s use with the reference corpus as a whole shows his use to be
distinctive, when we compare him with the individual authors in the Enron corpus, the
population shows a wide variation in use from 7.30 uses per thousand words for Shapiro
to 0.03 for Kean, with Derrick using it 0.54 times per 1,000 words. Nevertheless Derrick’s
twelve verb collocates account for 93 (85.3%) instances of all his please occurrences and
the fact that many of Derrick’s recurrent collocates are far more common in his emails
than in the Enron corpus generally (Table 4), indicates that these are likely to be important
bigrams in the experimental approach (Attribution task section). When looking at the
percentage use of these collocates, Derrick uses please see three times more often than it
51
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
appears in the emails of the other 175 authors (11.01/3.77), please print nine times more
often, please handle and please respond ten times more, please notify 30 times more, please
proceed 46 times more and please format as much as 413 times more often. Given that the
raw frequencies are low in some cases (e.g. please format: 9 to 2 occurrences), some of the
collocates are evidence of more consistent collocational diUerences, and, as we note above,
the comparison with the Enron reference corpus masks some of the individual diUerences.
Most of these collocations are used by a good number of authors, from 10 with please
notify to 57 with please see.
Table 4. Derrick’s lexical verb collocates of please.
As noted above, please format is not found frequently elsewhere and please handle is
a particularly important bigram (two-word n-gram) for Derrick. All of the seven instances
of please handle in Derrick’s emails are message initial and intransitive (Example 8). Of
the 70 instances in the rest of the Enron corpus, used by 18 authors, 12 are transitive (e.g.
TK, Would you please handle this. Thanks, Kim) and a further 32 are non-message initial
(e.g. Ray and Rob: Can you 3 help her out on 1 & 2? Tracy: Please handle.) This leaves
29 instances of please handle in the Enron corpus that are intransitive and message initial,
and these instances are shared by eight of the other 175 authors. However, all of Derrick’s
instances of please handle are consistently followed by Thank you and a sign-oU using his
name (Example 8). None of the 29 instances elsewhere in the Enron corpus shares this
pattern; instead, they co-occur with the far more common thanks, just the author’s name,
for me, or by nothing at all (Examples 9-12). As such, message-initial, intransitive please
handle followed by thank you and the author’s name is only used by Derrick in the Enron
corpus, and so is entirely unique and individuating of his email style.
Table 5 shows the recurring three and four word n-grams with please in Derrick’s
52
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
emails, as a proportion of all 109 instances of please in his dataset. The greyed out cells in
the Enron column show that, in addition to ‘please handle. Thank you.’, six additional tri-
and four-grams are unique to Derrick: please print the message(s), please see the proposed,
please format and (print), please format the attachment, and please proceed with your. All
the rest are distinctive of him, apart from please let me and please let me know (discussed
above), having much higher frequencies for Derrick that the reference corpus generally.
To illustrate Derrick’s distinctiveness, for example, in the case of please print the, which he
uses more than 100 times more than the other authors (32.11% versus 0.29%), other authors
use this, and, and attachment more as collocates of please print.
Table 5. Derrick’s recurring three and four word n-grams starting with please.
Although the stylistic analysis has clearly highlighted distinctive patterns of encoding
polite directives in Derrick’s emails, a further examination is even more revealing. For
example, in 29 of the 32 instances of please print the attachment(s), he is entirely consistent
in following this with thank you (Example 13). In contrast, none of the seven instances
in the rest of the Enron data is followed by thank you or indeed any sign-oU at all, with
for me and thanks being the most recurrent patterns (Examples 14 and 15). As such, as
with please handle above, please print the attachment(s) + thank you is a pattern unique
to Derrick in this corpus.
Similarly, all seven of his uses of please see the message(s) are followed by below (Examples
16 and 17). However, although this four-gram appears four times in the remaining Enron
data, only three of them are followed by below, each in a diUerent author (Example 18).
53
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Furthermore, as Grant and Baker (2001) and others have explained, when style markers
are aggregated, they quickly make a style unique. Taking together please respond to,
please print the attachment, and please see the (from Table 5), and I would appreciate
your (discussed above), Derrick is the only author out of all 176 to use these four n-grams,
making these highly identiVable textbites for Derrick in relation to his use of mitigated
directives.
Finally, apart from the linguistic politeness of Derrick’s please-mitigated directives, he
is additionally polite in thanking his addressees. He follows up with Thank you+full stop
(See Figure 3.). This co-selection is very frequent in Derrick’s dataset; of his 109 pleases,
93 (85.3%) co-occur with thank you. Thank you, co-occurring with please, is therefore
distinctive of Derrick’s emails. However, in the wider Enron corpus, although far less
common than thanks (14,856) thank you is still used 1,144 times by 125 of the other 175
authors. However, the way in which Derrick uses thank you is still distinctive, as he
consistently uses it as a sign-oU (Wright, 2013 also found that Enron sign-oUs can be
remarkably distinctive.). Of the 132 instances of thank you in his emails, 109 (82.6%) are
used as part of the email farewell or sign-oU formula, either as a standalone thank you,
or followed by his name, as seen in Figure 3. In the rest of the Enron corpus, 539 (47.1%)
of the 1,114 instances of thank you are used either as standalone farewells or followed by
the author’s name, far fewer than in Derrick’s data. The predominant pattern in Derrick’s
emails is to use thank you followed by only his Vrst name (e.g. lines 81-83 in Figure 3), and
he does this 40 times in 132 instances of thank you (30.3%), compared with only 172 out of
1,114 occurrences of thank you in the rest of the Enron corpus (15.4%). Overall, not only is
Derrick’s preference for thank you over thanks distinctive when compared with the other
Enron authors, but his use of it is distinctive when compared with how those other 125
authors use it, most notably the ways in which he uses it as part of a sign-oU, in particular
as a standalone sign-oU in combination with his Vrst name only, and, most distinctively,
as a follow-up to a mitigated directive.
Summary of Vndings
Overall, this stylistic analysis has focused on one particularly important aspect of Der-
rick’s professional authorial style, the distinctive ways in which he lexico-grammatically
frames politeness in directives mitigated with please. In the Vrst instance, proportional
frequency results show that the frequency with which Derrick uses please and thank you
is marked when compared with the rest of the Enron data. Moreover, qualitative examina-
tion of the position in which Derrick uses these words, in terms of message-initial or Vnal,
and the combination of them, has revealed further distinctive patterns. Most importantly,
though, a collocational n-gram approach has identiVed the ways in which lexical strings
beginning with please can quickly become distinctive of Derrick, and several strings are
unique. By combining as few as 4 distinctive strings, though individually these are shared
across authors in the corpus, this combination becomes unique to Derrick. Even within a
corpus in which politeness is a very frequent and salient linguistic strategy and directives
are a common speech act, n-gram textbites can be found for an author. This can be ex-
54
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Figure 3. Screenshot of Wordsmith Tools concordances showing Derrick’s use of Thank
you.
plained with reference to the relationship between cognition and linguistic output central
to lexical priming and formulaic sequences (Hoey, 2005; Wray, 2002). It may be that the
repetitive nature with which Derrick constructs these sequences has ‘primed’ and stored
these collocation patterns in his mind, and he reproduces these in distinctive ways. Or it
may be that because he repeatedly Vnds himself within the relevant communicative con-
text with regard to making the same directives, with the same purpose and recipient(s),
the expression of these directives has become formulaic.
Beyond this speculation, this section has shown that as the number of n-grams in
the textbite increases, so too does both the rarity and the distinctiveness of the lexical
strings in question. This aligns with the Vndings of others (Coulthard, 2004; Johnson and
Woolls, 2009; Culwin and Child, 2010). However, there are a number of ways in which
this particular set of results for Derrick is exceptionally noteworthy. First, all of the n-
grams presented here have been used at least twice by Derrick in his emails. Thus, as
well as displaying inter-author diUerences in the corpus, and being distinctive of or even
unique to his style, there is also a degree of intra-author consistency, rather than being
strings used only once, which we might expect to be rarer generally, when tested against
a population. Second, many of the n-grams identiVed as being distinctive of Derrick refer
to things to do with emails and emailing; words such as print, format, attachment, and
message are all related to computer-mediated communication and emails in particular.
55
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
The signiVcance of this is that although all 176 authors in the Enron corpus share the same
email mode of communication, the explicit references to such shared features that Derrick
makes are framed in such a way that is distinctive of his style. However, most importantly,
the Enron corpus is a very polite one; please was the second most common keyword in
the corpus (Table 2), being used 11,061 times by 165 of the 176 employees. Despite this,
the collocational analysis has found politeness structures that are particularly distinctive
of Derrick’s style, such as the indirect directive with the gerund (I would appreciate your
verb+ing), when compared against this very polite corpus, a population of writers whom
one may assume would be most stylistically similar to him.
Moreover, Derrick’s choices become individuating very quickly; even some bigrams
are distinctive of his emails, and, by the time the lexical string is three or four words long,
most of the patterns are unique to him. This is considerably shorter than the required ten
word strings postulated by Coulthard (2004) to be unique, and even shorter than the six
reported by Culwin and Child (2010). Although these two studies used the web as corpus—
a far larger comparison corpus—it can be argued that the speciVcity and relevance of the
Enron corpus used here makes the comparison equally valid. Regardless, using a stylistic
approach, and using the Enron corpus as a reference dataset, these results provide evidence
to suggest that bigrams, trigrams, and four-grams have strong discriminatory potential for
authorship analysis, particularly when focused on a particular function of language use,
in this case the polite encoding of directives. The implication of this is that n-grams may
oUer a powerful means of attributing the authorship of disputed texts, even when applied
in a pool of candidate writers writing within the same mode of communication and within
the same community of practice. The remainder of the case study which follows sets out
to test this hypothesis in an authorship attribution task.
Attribution task
This section reports the results of the attribution experiment outlined in the Experimental
set up section. Ten random samples of 20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 2% of Derrick’s emails—
ranging between 1,220 and 55 tokens in size—were extracted from his set and compared
with the remainder of his emails and all of the emails of the other 175 authors in the
corpus, giving a total of 176 candidate authors. Similarity between the sample sets and the
comparison sets is measured by Jaccard’s similarity coeXcient and in terms of all of the
unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, four-grams, Vve-grams and six-grams that are found in both
the sample and comparison texts, as a proportion of all n-grams of that size in the two sets
combined. The expectation is that because Derrick authored the samples, the remainder
of his emails should be most similar to them, and should therefore obtain the highest
Jaccard similarity score of all 176 comparison sets and candidate authors in every test. In
the analyses that follow, the accuracy, success and reliability of the diUerent n-grams in
attributing the various sample sets to Derrick are evaluated in two ways:
i. ‘Raw attribution accuracy’. The most straightforward way of assessing success is by
the number of correct attributions each n-gram achieves when applied to the diUerent
sample sizes. In any given test, if Derrick’s remaining emails achieve the highest
Jaccard score as compared to the samples of the other 175 authors, then attribution
has been successful; if they do not, attribution has been unsuccessful.
ii. ‘Mean Jaccard score’. The second way involves considering the mean Jaccard scores
obtained by all 176 candidate authors over the ten tests for each sample size using the
diUerent n-gram types. This is an important measure given that, although Derrick
56
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
may not always achieve the highest Jaccard score in a given individual test, he may
achieve Jaccard scores consistently high enough in each sample size so that he has the
highest mean Jaccard score over the ten tests. In such a case, attribution is considered
successful.
Results
Figure 4 compares the raw attribution accuracy of the diUerent n-grams in identifying Der-
rick as the author of each of the ten samples for each size. First, with the smallest samples
of 2% (9 emails, 55–145 tokens), performance is generally poor, with the best results being
obtained by four-grams and Vve-grams which each have a success rate of 30%, attributing
three of the ten samples to Derrick. Trigrams and six-grams only successfully attribute
one sample each, while the shortest n-grams of unigrams and bigrams have no success
at all. Whereas unigrams and bigrams continue to misattribute all ten 5% samples (23
emails, 156–398 tokens), n-grams from three to six words in length achieve a 60% success
rate. When the samples reach 10% of Derrick’s emails in size (46 emails, 350–622 tokens)
trigrams and four-grams achieve 90% success rate, outperforming bigrams and Vve-grams
which both achieve 80% success rates and six-grams and unigrams lagging behind at 40%
and 30% success rates respectively. With the 15% sample sizes (70 emails, 537–875 tokens)
bigrams, trigrams and four-grams perform perfectly, attributing all ten samples accurately
to Derrick, while unigrams and six-grams also perform well with 90% accuracy and Vve-
grams with 80%. Finally, by the time the samples to be attributed comprise 20% of Derrick’s
emails (93 emails, 763–1018 tokens), unigrams through to Vve-grams all achieve 100% ac-
curacy, and six-grams follow closely behind with identifying Derrick as the author of nine
of the ten samples.
Figure 4. Accuracy rate of n-grams in successfully attributing samples of Derrick’s emails.
Overall, these results are encouraging. Although there is not yet a consensus as to
‘how good is good enough’ when it comes to success and error rates in authorship re-
search, a number of studies (Zheng et al., 2006; Grieve, 2007; Koppel et al., 2011) consider
70%-75% accuracy in an attribution task to be ‘successful’, ‘satisfactory’, or ‘passable’. If
the less conservative 70% end of this threshold is applied, then everything to the right of
the bold black line in Figure 4 can be considered ‘successful’. This includes the results for
57
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
bigrams, trigrams, four-grams and Vve-grams when applied to 10% samples, and the re-
sults for all of the six n-gram measures when tested on the 15% and 20% samples. What is
most encouraging about the results in Figure 4 is that the number of accurate attributions
beyond the 70% mark is not inconsiderable for the larger sample sizes. Despite not reach-
ing the 70% threshold for the 2% and 5% samples, accuracy rates of 30% and 60% can be
considered successful to some extent, particularly when the small sample sizes are taken
into consideration (55–398 tokens). In fact, the three 2% samples successfully attributed
by trigrams and four-grams are only 77, 84 and 109 tokens in size (see Table 1), which is
remarkably small for computational authorship techniques. In a forensic case involving
email, the analyst may have a very small number of disputed emails which they are asked
to attribute, a few emails or maybe even only one. These small samples of between 77
and 109 tokens that have been successfully attributed to Derrick represent around nine of
his emails. However, as noted above, he has a much lower words-per-email mean (12.9
tokens) than the rest of the authors in the corpus (41.74 tokens). Samples of these sizes
would therefore comprise around two to three emails for the average Enron employee,
which goes some way towards demonstrating the potential eUectiveness of this method in
forensic applications, especially as there are likely to be fewer candidate authors in any
given case.
Based on the evidence provided by these results, the most accurate and reliable n-
gram measure in identifying Derrick as the author of the samples is four-grams. Each
n-gram measure underwent 50 tests, one for each sample (Vve sample sizes, ten samples
each). Out of their 50 tests, four-grams correctly attributed 38 samples to Derrick (76%),
closely followed by trigrams which successfully attributed 36 of the 50 samples (72%) and
Vve-grams which attributed 35 (70%). On the other hand, unigrams and bigrams are the
worst performers, successfully identifying Derrick as the author of only 22 (44%) and 28
(56%) samples respectively. While longer n-grams generally perform better than shorter
ones, accuracy does not continue to rise with the length of the n-gram, with four-grams
outperforming Vve- and six-grams. Although longer word strings are more likely to be
distinctive of individual authors, it may be that these strings are less likely to be repeated
by authors, while four-grams and even trigrams are more pervasive and consistent in a
person’s authorial style.
What these results do not take into account, though, is how closely Derrick comes
to being identiVed as the author of the samples when he does not achieve the highest
Jaccard score. Although he may not rank as being most similar to the sample in any one
test, he may be the second or third most similar, or he may be in one-hundred-and-third
place. Considering mean Jaccard scores of all 176 candidate authors across all ten tests of
each sample size helps to circumvent this issue (Table 6). The table presents the authors
with the three highest mean Jaccard scores for all ten tests for every sample size, for all
six n-gram measures. With the 2% samples, Derrick does not achieve the highest mean
Jaccard score over the ten samples using any of the six measures. He does, however,
rank second using six-grams, and while unigrams perform very badly, ranking him at
60th of all 176 candidates, bigrams through to Vve-grams rank him between 15th and
18th. In a pool of 176 possible authors, n-grams between two and six words in length
consistently rank Derrick as being in the top 10% (18/176) of authors. Given the very small
size of these 2% samples, this is a promising result, and indicative of a better performance
of the method than the raw attribution results (Figure 4) would suggest. With the 5%
58
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
samples, Derrick is successfully identiVed as the author of the ten samples using bigrams
and trigrams, while four-, Vve- and six-grams rank him as 5th, 6th and 8th most similar
respectively, or in other words within the top 5% of authors (8/176). While bigrams did not
attribute a single 5% sample to Derrick (Figure 4) across the ten tests, the Jaccard scores
obtained using bigrams were consistently high enough for him to score the highest mean
of all the candidate authors. When the 10% samples were tested, Derrick achieved the
highest mean Jaccard score using unigrams through to Vve-grams, with six-grams ranking
him second. However, by the time the samples are 15% and 20% all six n-gram measures
successfully identify Derrick as being most similar to the samples. Overall, with these
mean Jaccard score results, if the performance of unigrams is disregarded, Derrick is never
ranked outside the top 10% of the 176 candidate authors, and amongst these results bigrams
and trigrams outperform the others as they are the only measures to successfully attribute
the 5% samples to Derrick.
Table 6. Authors with the highest mean Jaccard scores across all ten samples of each size.
Using this approach, we can also identify which of the other 175 Enron authors appear
to be most similar to Derrick. Kaye Ellis appears in the top three authors 18 times in
Table 6. Similarly, Joannie Williamson (10), Dean Clint (8), Cathy Phillips (7) and Vladi
Pimenov (6) all repeatedly appear in the top three ranked authors, with samples being
misattributed to Williamson and Pimenov on Vve occasions. The repeated appearance of
these authors in the results attests to the consistency of the method; rather than the samples
being misattributed to diUerent authors each time, or dozens of diUerent authors being
scored as similar to Derrick, this way the method consistently identiVes these authors as
being the closest to him in stylistic terms. Combined with Derrick’s consistent ranking
in the top 10% of authors, these results provide evidence to suggest that besides being an
eUective method of attributing authorship of samples of varying sizes, the word n-gram
approach may also be used to dramatically reduce the number of candidate authors in
cases where the number of suspect writers is very large.
The Vrst part of this case study (Identifying Derrick’s professional authorial style) used
59
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
a corpus-based stylistic approach to demonstrate how distinctive Derrick’s collocation pat-
terns are. Following from this, the results of this attribution experiment complement and
conVrm the Vndings of the stylistic analysis, in that they have shown word n-grams be-
tween one and six-words in length to be accurate and reliable in identifying Derrick as the
author of the samples. In order to fully bridge the gap between the stylistic and computa-
tional approaches, the third and Vnal part of the case study examines the actual n-grams
that are responsible for the accurate attribution of authorship in these experiments.
Derrick’s discriminating n-grams
One of the main advantages of Jangle is that, as well as running comparisons and calcu-
lating Jaccard scores, the program also displays the actual n-grams operating behind the
statistics and accounting for the Jaccard scores. This kind of information about which spe-
ciVc linguistic choices were most important in attribution tasks is often not made available
in stylometric studies. In this particular attribution case, this facility allows us to pinpoint
the n-grams that were most useful in identifying Derrick as the author of the disputed
samples, and to observe any recurrent patterns (textbites), and compare these with those
identiVed in the corpus stylistic analysis. The examination here focuses on the bigrams,
trigrams, four-grams and Vve-grams which contributed to the accurate attribution of the
5% sample sets. Although bigrams were not successful in attributing the individual 5%
samples, they were successful in scoring Derrick the highest mean Jaccard score across all
ten tests with this sample size, and for this reason the shared bigrams in all ten 5% samples
are examined here. In contrast, the trigrams, four-grams and Vve-grams were successful in
attributing six of the ten individual 5% samples, and the n-grams considered here are those
shared between the samples and the remainder of Derrick’s emails in these successful tests.
In total there were 311 diUerent bigrams that were found in both the sample set and the
remainder of Derrick’s emails across the ten 5% sample tests, and there were 122 trigrams,
64 four-grams and 28 Vve-grams that were found in both sets of emails in the six or seven
successful tests. One major criticism of using content words or combinations of content
words in authorship analysis is that they are indicative of topic rather than of authorship.
Indeed, there is a risk that Derrick’s samples have been attributed to him on the basis
that the emails in the two diUerent sets made reference to the same topics, such as people,
place or company names. However, only 57 (18%) of the 311 bigrams could be considered
to refer to topic speciVc entities, for example jim derrick, steph please, enron letterhead,
southwestern legal, and the litigation. Similarly, 24 of the 122 trigrams (19.7%), 19 of
the 64 four-grams (29.7%) and 11 of the 28 Vve-grams (39.3%) can be considered as being
topic-dependent in this way. Such n-grams have been removed from the analysis that
follows. Thus, although the proportion of topic-dependent n-grams gradually increases as
the length of the n-gram is extended, the majority (61%-82%) of the useful n-grams are
topic independent; that is, they are not shared between the samples and the remainder of
Derrick’s emails simply because Derrick is talking about the same things or about/to the
same people.
Table 7 presents bigrams which appeared in both the sample sets and Derrick’s re-
maining emails in Vve or more tests, and the tri-, four-, and Vve-grams which were shared
between Derrick’s sample and his remaining emails in three or more successful tests. The
n-grams displayed in the table collectively represent a pool of the most characteristic and
discriminatory n-gram textbites repeatedly used by Derrick. They have all contributed to
the successful attribution of his 5% sample sets which, varying between 156 and 398 words
60
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
in length, are the smallest sample sets accurately attributed in the experiment besides three
2% samples (Results section).
Table 7. Useful n-grams in the successful attribution of Derrick’s 5% email samples (green
highlights unique to Derrick; yellow indicate Derrick is top frequency author among shared
n-grams).
One recurring n-gram pattern that emerges from these results is strings which begin with I,
for example the trigram I have talked, the four-grams I assume you will, I would appreciate
your, and the Vve-grams I am ok with your, I have no objection to, and I will support your
recommendation (Note the appearance of I would appreciate your in Example 7 and in
Figure 2 in the stylistic analysis). All of these n-grams are productive in discriminating
Derrick’s email style from that of the other candidate authors, and useful in correctly
attributing his samples.
However, the most obvious pattern in these results is the recurrence of please and
thank you initial n-grams. These appear from bigrams such as please print, please see and
thank you to four-grams such as please print the attachment and Vve-grams such as please
see the message below and thank you for the message. What the stylistic analysis identiVes
that the computational analysis does not, is the co-selection of pleasewith Thank you. This
is a limitation of the search for n-grams within punctuated sentences. However, the corpus
analysis complements this and the within-sentence rule ensures that meaningful strings
are preserved. Other distinctive patterns are the word n-grams which are contained within
the longer politeness strings, for example bigrams such as format and and the message
to four-grams and Vve-grams such as see the message below and format and print the
attachment. These results complement and conVrm what was found in the corpus stylistic
analysis in the section Identifying Derrick’s professional authorial style. The qualitative
stylistic analysis in the Vrst instance found that Derrick was remarkably formulaic in his
use of politeness structures, and that there are a number of n-grams that are distinctive of
61
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
him in the Enron corpus. In turn, this section has found that it is exactly these n-grams
that are most inWuential in the statistical attribution experiment.
Using these results, we can return again to a corpus approach to identify how common
or rare these textbites are in the rest of the Enron corpus. In other words, are these n-grams
found in the emails of the other 175 Enron authors? Those highlighted in green in Table
7 are those that are unique to Derrick; when searched for using Wordsmith Tools, the
only results returned are from his emails. Taking results from across the four lengths of
n-gram we can identify Vve n-gram textbites that are unique to him: please format and
print the attachment, I will support your recommendation, please proceed with your, am
OK with your proposal and see the message below from. In addition, those in yellow are
those that are shared with other authors in the corpus, but Derrick is the top frequency
user per 1,000 words of text. For example, please print the is used by twelve authors in the
corpus, but Derrick uses it with a greater relative frequently than the other eleven. With
the green and yellow n-grams combined, we have a pool of textbites that are distinctive
of Derrick and characterise his authorial style when compared with the other authors in
the Enron population. These Vndings show the value of returning to the corpus approach
in validating the n-grams further, and provide an explanation for why these particular
n-grams were useful in the successful attribution of Derrick’s samples.
The methodological implications of this successful triangulation of approaches are
considerable. On the one hand, the statistical attribution task conVrms and supports the
reliability of the stylistic results in terms of the distinctiveness and usefulness of Derrick’s
please-initial n-grams. At the same time, the stylistic analyses in the Vrst half of the case
study oUers a clear linguistic explanation for the statistical and computational results in
terms of why n-grams are an accurate and useful linguistic feature for distinguishing an
individual’s writing style and attributing authorship. Throughout his life, Derrick has
amassed a unique series of linguistic and professional experiences culminating in being a
legal educator and practitioner, and word collocations and patterns are stored and primed
in his mind based on these unique experiences. As such, when Derrick Vnds himself
within the relevant communicative context with regard to purpose and recipient of the
email, he accesses and produces stored and frequently used collocation patterns which,
in turn, prove to be distinctive of his email style. Moreover, he produces such patterns
regularly and repeatedly, reinforcing the priming and making them increasingly habitual.
The result is that a word n-gram approach can be used not only to identify and isolate a
number of n-gram textbites that distinguish his professional email style from that of other
employees in the same company, but also to successfully identify him as the author of text
samples, including some as small as 77, 84 and 109 tokens.
Conclusion
Turell (2010) notes the important role that research studies in authorship attribution play in
beneVting the performance of expert witnesses in cases of disputed authorship. In the 21st
century forensic linguistic casework increasingly involves texts created in online modes,
including email. This research, therefore, provides much-needed empirical results that
might provide knowledge for expert witness reports in the future. We now know that
focusing on one style-marker, please, and one speech act, politely encoded directives, can
produce both stylistically and statistically revealing results, even though we know that
please is one of the most frequent lexical items in email and that directives are one of the
most important speech acts in emails. Even so, it is possible to Vnd distinctive uses of these
62
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
items and habitual behaviours within a large pool of authors. In most authorship casework
reports focus on a whole range of diUerent linguistic style markers (lexical, syntactic,
orthographical, etc.), but this research has shown that this is not necessary, when stylistic
analysis is combined with statistical Jaccard similarity testing. This reinforces the beneVts
of a triangulation of approaches: corpus stylistic, statistical, computational, and case study,
following the call by Solan and Tiersma (2004: 463) to test and validate methods “with
proven reliability in determining authorship” in order that the legal system Vnds the expert
evidence of forensic linguists acceptable.
The statistical attribution method illustrated and tested in the Attribution task section
has an accuracy rate of 100% for larger samples, and promising results for very small sam-
ples. It allows us to reduce a mass of data to meaningful “textbites” that can characterise
and identify authors, in this study one author: James Derrick. The combination of corpus
stylistic, computational, and statistical methods, then coming back to the corpus to verify
results, produces a set of unique and highly distinctive textbites for Derrick. This also
shows us what a corpus like the Enron corpus can enable researchers to do in the forensic
linguistic Veld. Having a dataset of authors as large as 176, allows us to explore author
email style, understanding more fully how writers who are (socio)linguistically close in
many ways, writing within the same text type, in the same company, at the same time,
can do so in ways that are distinctive. Even though they are selecting the same word
(please), the collocations and co-selections they make vary to form recurrently diUerent
n-grams that are both stylistically and statistically observable and quantiVable. The iden-
tiVcation of these n-gram textbites moves us closer to the elusive concept of idiolect.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank David Woolls of CFL Software Limited
(www.cWsoftware.com) for supplying us with the Jangle program, without which this
research would not have been possible in its current form. Automising the process of
producing random samples and calculating the Jaccard similarity at the touch of a button
is something (forensic) linguists can only wonder at. Then giving the linguist the raw out-
puts of the program, in addition, so that we can verify and analyse the n-grams that have
produced the results, puts the linguistic evidence at the forefront of the computational
technique.
David Wright’s contribution was supported by an AHRC studentship: Grant number:
AH/J502686/1.
References
Ahrens, F. (2006). The Vrst thing we do, let’s hire all the lawyers. The Washington Post,
http://blog.washingtonpost.com/enron/2006/04/the_Vrst_thing_we_do_lets_hir_1.html.
Ancu, M. (2011). From soundbite to textbite: Election ’08 comments on twitter. In J.
Hendricks and L. L. Kaid, Eds., Techno Politics in Presidential Campaigning. New Voices,
New Technologies, and New Voters, 11–21. London: Routledge.
Argamon, S. and Koppel, M. (2010). The rest of the story: Finding meaning in stylistic vari-
ation. In S. Argamon, K. Burns and S. Dubnov, Eds., The Structure of Style: Algorithmic
Approaches to Understanding Manner and Meaning, 79–112. London: Springer.
Argamon, S. and Koppel, M. (2013). A systemic functional approach to automated author-
ship analysis. Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2), 299–316.
63
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Argamon, S. and Levitan, S. (2005). Measuring the usefulness of function words for author-
ship attribution. In Proceedings of ACH/ALLC Conference, 1–3: University of Victoria,
BC, Association for Computing and the Humanities.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Barlow, M. (2010). Individual usage: A corpus-based study of idiolects. Paper presented at
34th International LAUD Symposium. Landau, Germany.
Barlow, M. (2013). Exemplar theory and patterns of production. Paper presented at Corpus
Linguistics 2013. Lancaster, UK.
Baron, N. S. (1998). Letters by phone or speech by other means: The linguistics of email.
Language and Communication, 18(2), 133–170.
Bax, P. (1986). How to assign work in an oXce. A comparison of spoken and written
directives in American English. Journal of Pragmatics, 10, 673–692.
Bennell, C. and Jones, N. J. (2005). Between a ROC and a hard place: A method for linking
serial burglaries by modus operandi. Journal of Investigative Psychology and OUender
ProVling, 2(1), 23–41.
Bou-Franch, P. (2011). Openings and closings in Spanish email conversations. Journal of
Pragmatics, 43(6), 1772–1785.
Bou-Franch, P. and Lorenzo-Dus, N. (2008). Natural versus elicited data in cross-cultural
speech act realisation: The case of requests in Peninsular Spanish and British English.
Spanish in Context, 5(2), 246–277.
Burrows, J. (2002). “Delta:” A measure of stylistic diUerence and a guide to likely author-
ship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267–287.
Burrows, J. (2005). Andrew Marvell and the “Painter Satires”: A computational approach
to their authorship. Modern Language Review, 100(2), 281–297.
Chaski, C. E. (2001). Empirical evaluations of language-based author identiVcation tech-
niques. Forensic Linguistics: The International Journal of Speech, Language and the
Law, 8(1), 1–65.
Chaski, C. E. (2007). Multilingual forensic author identiVcation through n-gram analysis.
Paper presented at the 8th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and
Law. Seattle, WA.
Chejnová, P. (2014). Expressing politeness in the institutional e-mail communications of
university students in the Czech Republic. Journal of Pragmatics, 60, 175–192.
Cohen, W. W. (2009). Enron email dataset. [online] http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ enron/ (Ac-
cessed November 2010).
Cotterill, J. (2010). How to use corpus linguistics in forensic linguistics. In A. O’Keefe and
M. McCarthy, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics, 578–590. London:
Routledge.
Coulthard, M. (1994). On the use of corpora in the analysis of forensic texts. Forensic
Linguistics: The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 1(1), 27–43.
Coulthard, M. (2004). Author identiVcation, idiolect, and linguistic uniqueness. Applied
Linguistics, 24(4), 431–447.
Coulthard, M. (2013). On admissible linguistic evidence. Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2),
441–466.
Coulthard, M., Grant, T. and Kredens, K. (2011). Forensic linguistics. In R. Wodak, B. John-
stone and P. Kerswill, Eds., The SAGE Handbook of Sociolinguistics, 531–544. London:
Sage.
64
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Coyotl-Morales, R. M., Villaseñor-Pineda, L., Montes-y-Gómez, M. and Rosso, P. (2006).
Authorship attribution using word sequences. In Proceedings of the 11th Iberoamerican
Congress on Pattern Recognition, 844–853, Berlin: Springer.
Creamer, G., Rowe, R., Hershkop, S. and Stolfo, S. J. (2009). Automated social hierarchy
detection through email network analysis. In H. Zhang, M. Spiliopoulou, B. Mobasher,
C. L. Giles, A. McCallum, O. Nasraoui, J. Srivastava and J. Yen, Eds., Proceedings of the
9th International Workshop on Mining Web Data, WEBKDD 2007, and the 1st Interna-
tional Workshop on Social Network Analysis, SNA-KDD 2007.
Culwin, F. and Child, M. (2010). Optimising and automating the choice of search strings
when investigating possible plagiarism. In Proceedings of the 4th International Plagia-
rism Conference, Newcastle, UK [online], http://www.plagiarismadvice.org/research-
papers/item/optimising-and-automating-the-choice-of-search-strings-when-
investigating-possible-plagiarism (Accessed July 2013).
Davies, M. (2012). The Corpus of Contemporary American English: 450 million words,
1990-present [online]. http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
Deng, F., Siersdorfer, S. and Zerr, S. (2012). EXcient Jaccard-based Diversity Analysis of
Large Document Collections. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM international Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’12), 1402–1411.
Duthler, K. W. (2006). The politeness of requests made via email and voicemail: Support
for the hyperpersonal model. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(2),
500–521.
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2011). “Please answer me as soon as possible”: Pragmatic
failure in non-native speakers’ e-mail requests to faculty. Journal of Pragmatics, 43,
3193–3215.
FERC, F. E. R. C. (2013). Information released in Enron investigation. [online] http://www.
ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/wec/enron/info-release.asp.
Firth, J. R. (1957). A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955. In F. Palmer, Ed., Selected
Papers of J.R. Firth 1952-1959, 168–205. London: Longman.
Flowerdew, L. (2004). The argument for using English specialized corpora to understand
academic and professional language. In U. Connor and T. A. Upton, Eds., Discourse in
the Professions: Perspectives from Corpus Linguistics, volume 16, 11–33. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Gains, J. (1999). Electronic mail – a new style of communication or just a new medium?
An investigation into the text features of e-mail. English for SpeciVc Purposes, 18(1),
81–101.
Gimenez, J. C. (2000). Business e-mail communication: Some emerging tendencies in
register. English for SpeciVc Purposes, 19(3), 237–251.
Grant, T. (2007). Quantifying evidence in forensic authorship analysis. International Jour-
nal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1), 1–25.
Grant, T. (2008). Approaching questions in forensic authorship analysis. In J. Gibbons
and M. T. Turell, Eds., Dimensions of Forensic Linguistics, 215–229. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Grant, T. (2010). Txt 4n6: Idiolect free authorship analysis? In M. Coulthard and A. John-
son, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics, 508–522. London: Routledge.
Grant, T. (2013). Txt 4n6: Method, consistency, and distinctiveness in the analysis of SMS
text messages. Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2), 467–494.
Grant, T. and Baker, K. (2001). Identifying reliable, valid markers of authorship: A response
to Chaski. International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(1), 66–79.
65
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Gries, S. T. (2013). 50-something years of work on collocations: What is or should be
next. . . . International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 18(1), 137–165.
Grieve, J. (2007). Quantitative authorship attribution: An evaluation of techniques. Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing, 22(3), 251–270.
Hirst, G. and Feiguina, O. (2007). Bigrams of syntactic labels for authorship discrimination
of short texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 22(4), 405–417.
Hoey, M. (2005). Lexical Priming: A new theory of words and language. London: Routledge.
Hoover, D. L. (2002). Frequent word sequences and statistical stylistics. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 17(2), 157–180.
Hoover, D. L. (2003). Frequent collocations and authorial style. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 18(3)(3), 261–228.
Hoover, D. L. (2004). Testing Burrows’s Delta. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19(4),
453–475.
Hoover, D. L. (2009). Word frequency, statistical stylistics and authorship attribution. In D.
Archer, Ed.,What’s in a word list? Investigating word frequency and keyword extraction,
35–51. Surrey: Ashgate.
Hoover, D. L. (2010). Authorial style. In D. McIntyre and B. Busse, Eds., Language and
Style, 250–271. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Izsak, C. and Price, A. R. (2001). Measuring beta-diversity using a taxonomic similarity
index, and its relation to spatial scale. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 215, 69–77.
Jaccard, P. (1912). The distribution of the Wora in the alpine zone. The New Phytologist,
11(2), 37–50.
Johnson, A. and Woolls, D. (2009). Who wrote this? The linguist as detective. In S.
Hunston and D. Oakey, Eds., Introducing Applied Linguistics: Concepts and Skills, 111–
118. London: Routledge.
Juola, P. (2008). Authorship Attribution. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval.
Delft: NOW Publishing.
Juola, P. (2013). Stylometry and immigration: A case study. Journal of Law and Policy,
21(2), 287–298.
Knox, J. (2007). Visual-verbal communication on online newspaper home pages. Visual
Communication, 6(1), 19–53.
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2009). Computational methods in authorship attri-
bution. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1),
9–26.
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2011). Authorship attribution in the wild. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 45(1), 83–94.
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2013). Authorship attribution: What’s easy and
what’s hard? Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2), 317–332.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., Argamon, S. and Messeri, E. (2006). Authorship attribution with
thousands of candidate authors. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development on Information Retrieval, Seattle, Washington.
Kredens, K. (2002). Towards a corpus-based methodology of forensic authorship attri-
bution: A comparative study of two idiolects. In B. Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk, Ed.,
PALC’01: Practical Applications in Language Corpora, 405–437. Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang.
Kredens, K. and Coulthard, M. (2012). Corpus linguistics in authorship identiVcation. In
P. Tiersma and L. Solan, Eds., The Oxford Handbook of Language and Law, 504–516.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
66
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Labbé, D. (2007). Experiments on authorship attribution by intertextual distance in English.
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 14(1), 33–80.
Lampert, A., Dale, R. and Paris, C. (2008). The nature of requests and commitments in
email messages. In Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Enhanced Messaging 2008,
42–47.
Lan, L. (2000). Email: A challenge to Standard English? English Today, 16(4), 23–29.
Larner, S. (2014). A preliminary investigation into the use of Vxed formulaic sequences as
a marker of authorship. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law,
21(1), 1–22.
Love, H. (2002). Attributing Authorship: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Luchjenbroers, J. and Aldridge-Waddon, M. (2011). Paedophiles and politeness in email
communications: Community of practice needs that deVne face-threat. Journal of Po-
liteness Research: Language, Behaviour, Culture, 7(1), 21–42.
Luyckx, K. and Daelemans, W. (2011). The eUect of author set size and data size in author-
ship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26(1), 35–55.
Manasse, M. (2012). On the eXcient determination of most near neighbors: Horseshoes,
hand grenades, web search, and other situations when close is close enough. San Rafael:
Morgan and Claypool.
Markson, L., Woodhams, J. and Bond, J. W. (2010). Linking serial residential burglary:
Comparing the utility of modus operandi behaviours, geographical proximity, and tem-
poral proximity. Journal of Investigative Psychology and OUender ProVling, 7(2), 91–107.
Mazzoleni, G. and Schulz, W. (1999). “Mediatization” of politics: A challenge for democ-
racy? Political Communication, 16(3), 247–261.
Merrison, A. J., Wilson, J. J., Davies, B. L. and Haugh, M. (2012). Getting stuU done:
Comparing e-mail requests from students in higher education in Britain and Australia.
Journal of Pragmatics, 44(9), 1077–1098.
Mollin, S. (2009). “I entirely understand” is a Blairism: The methodology of identifying
idiolectal collocations. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 14(3), 367–392.
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company Inc.
Najeeb, Z. M., Maros, M. and Nor, N. F. M. (2012). Politeness in e-mails of Arab students
in Malaysia. GEMA Online Journal of Language Studies, 12(1), 125–145.
Nattinger, J. R. and DeCarrico, J. S. (1992). Lexical Phrases and Language Teaching. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Naumann, F. and Herschel, M. (2010). An introduction to duplicate detection. Synthesis
Lectures on Data Management, 2(1), 1–87.
Nerlich, B., Forsyth, R. and Clarke, D. (2012). Climate in the news: How diUerences
in media discourse between the US and UK reWect national priorities. Environmental
Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture, 6(1), 44–63.
Nini, A. and Grant, T. (2013). Bridging the gap between stylistic and cognitive approaches
to authorship analysis using systemic functional linguistics and multidimensional anal-
ysis. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 20(2), 173–202.
Pace-Sigge, M. (2013). Lexical Priming in Spoken English Usage. New York: Palgrave
MacMillan.
Pottier, J., Dubuis, A., Pellissier, L., Maiorano, L., Rossier, L., Randin, C. F., Vittoz, P. and
Guisan, A. (2013). The accuracy of plant assemblage prediction from species distribution
67
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
models varies along environmental gradients. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 22(1),
52–63.
Priebe, C. E., Conroy, J. M., Marchette, D. J. and Park, Y. (2005). Scan Statistics on Enron
Graphs. Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory, 11(3), 229–247.
Queralt, S. and Turell, M. T. (2012). Testing the discriminatory potential of sequences of
linguistic categories (n-grams) in Spanish, Catalan and English corpora. In Paper pre-
sented at the Regional Conference of the International Association of Forensic Linguists
2012, Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia): University of Malaya.
Rajaraman, A. and Ullman, J. D. (2011). Mining of Massive Datasets. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Rico-Sulayes, A. (2011). Statistical authorship attribution of Mexican drug traXcking on-
line forum posts. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 18(1),
53–74.
Sanderson, C. and Guenter, S. (2006). Short text authorship attribution via sequence ker-
nels, Markov chains and author unmasking: An investigation. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Engineering, 482–
491, Morristown, NJ: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Savoy, J. (2012). Authorship attribution: A comparative study of three text corpora and
three languages. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 19(2), 132–161.
Schmitt, N., Grandage, S. and Adolphs, S. (2004). Are corpus-derived recurrent clusters
psycholinguistically valid? In N. Schmitt, Ed., Formulaic Sequences: Acquisition, Pro-
cessing and Use, 127–151. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Scott, M. (2008). Wordsmith Tools version 5. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
Scott, M. (2010). Wordsmith Tools Help. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. London: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Sherblom, J. (1988). Direction, function and signature in electronic mail. The Journal of
Business Communication, 25(4), 39–54.
Sinclair, J. M. (1991). Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Solan, L. (2013). Intuition versus algorithm: The case for forensic authorship attribution.
Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2), 551–576.
Solan, L. and Tiersma, P. M. (2004). Author identiVcation in American Courts. Applied
Linguistics, 25(4), 448–465.
Stamatatos, E. (2008). Author identiVcation: Using text sampling to handle the class im-
balance problem. Information Processing and Management, 44(2), 790–799.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(3), 538–556.
Stamatatos, E. (2013). On the robustness of authorship attribution based on character n-
gram features. Journal of Law and Policy, 21(2), 421–440.
Stubbs, M. (2001). Words and Phrases: Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Tang, Z., Fang, J., Chi, X., Feng, J., Liu, Y., Shen, Z., Wang, X., Wang, Z., Wu, X., Zheng, C.
and Gaston, K. J. (2013). Patterns of plant beta-diversity along elevational and latitudinal
gradients in mountain forests of China. Ecography, 35(12), 1083–1091.
Turell, M. T. (2010). The use of textual, grammatical and sociolinguistic evidence in foren-
sic text comparison. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 17(2),
211–250.
68
Johnson, A. and Wright, D. - Identifying idiolect in forensic authorship attribution
Language and Law / Linguagem e Direito, Vol. 1(1), 2014, p. 37-69
Van Den Eynden, N. (2012). Politeness and gender in Belgian organisational emails. In
P. Gillaerts, E. de Groot, S. Dieltjens, P. Heynderickx and G. Jacobs, Eds., Researching
Discourse in Business Genres: Cases and corpora, 33–52. Bern: Peter Lang.
van Halteren, H., Baayen, H., Tweedie, F., Haverkort, M. and Neijt, A. (2005). Newmachine
learning methods demonstrate the existence of a human stylome. Journal of Quantita-
tive Linguistics, 12(1), 65–77.
Waldvogel, J. (2007). Greetings and closings in workplace email. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 12(2), 456–477.
Woodhams, J., Hollin, C. and Bull, R. (2008). Incorporating context in linking crimes:
An exploratory study of situational similarity and if-then contingencies. Journal of
Investigative Psychology and OUender ProVling, 5(1), 1–23.
Woolls, D. (2012). Description of CFL extraction routines for CMU Enron
Sent email database. [Online] http://www.cWsoftware.com/CFL_CMU_Enron_Sent_
email_Extraction.mht.
Woolls, D. (2013). CFL Jaccard n-gram Lexical Evaluator. Jangle version 2. CFL Software
Limited.
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic Language and the Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wray, A. (2008). Formulaic Language: Pushing the boundaries. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wright, D. (2012). Existing and innovative techniques in authorship analysis: Evaluating
and experimenting with computational approaches to ‘big data’ in the Enron Email Cor-
pus. In Paper presented at The 3rd European Conference of the International Association
of Forensic Linguists, Porto, Portugal.
Wright, D. (2013). Stylistic variation within genre conventions in the Enron email corpus:
Developing a text-sensitive methodology for authorship research. International Journal
of Speech, Language and the Law, 20(1), 45–75.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case Study Research Design and Methods. London: Sage Ltd, 4th ed.
Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H. and Huang, Z. (2006). A framework for authorship identiVcation
of online messages: Writing-style features and classiVcation techniques. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(3), 378–393.
69
