8 IT Pro  July/August 2013 P u b l i s h e d  b y  t h e  I E E E  C o m p u t e r  S o c i e t y  1520-9202/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
Security: DArPA
Patrick Juola and John I. Noecker Jr., Juola & Associates
Ariel Stolerman, Drexel University
Michael V. Ryan and Patrick Brennan, Juola & Associates
Rachel Greenstadt, Drexel University
Using a large corpus of keyboard behavior based on temporary workers 
employed in a simulated office environment, the authors show that 
stylometric techniques can help systems accurately distinguish between 
different users.
H
ow do you know who’s at your com-
puter? The “keyboard dilemma” is 
a major issue in computer security,1 
because once you’ve logged in, the 
computer assumes you’re the user and main-
tains that assumption until you log out. A better 
system would use “active authentication,” which 
considers how the person is using the computer 
to determine whether his or her usage pattern 
matches yours. 
To help DARPA realize its goal of using com-
puter-captured biometrics “to uniquely recognize 
humans” with high accuracy and minimal intru-
siveness,2 we created a detailed corpus of computer 
data using only standard  computers and off-the-
shelf logging software. We then  authenticated 
specific people among up to 79 other participants 
with as little as 10-minutes worth of data, using 
a wide variety of sources, ranging from purely 
behavioral data (such as mouse movements) to 
high-order linguistic content analysis (such as the 
parts of speech used when typing). 
Active Authentication  
through Language
One of the most important ways of interacting with 
a computer is through the keyboard (and mouse), 
and keyboard interaction includes not just behav-
ioral data (such as typing speed) but also cognitive 
and linguistic data.  Researchers have successfully 
applied the analysis of  language usage to infer the 
authorship of written documents,3–6 but these 
Keyboard-
Behavior-Based 
Authentication
 computer.org/ITPro  9
technologies aren’t commonly used for authenti-
cation. The theory behind stylometric technology 
is that everyone has their own unique stylome,7 a 
unique set of idiolectal choices that describe their 
speaking and writing style. At a group level, this is 
why we walk on “pavements” in the UK but “side-
walks” in the US. At an individual level, you might 
place a fork “to” the left of the plate instead of 
“on” or “at” the left of the plate. Quantifying these 
choices—for example, by making a histogram of 
function words or of character n-grams—lets in-
vestigators develop a computationally tractable 
summary of stylistic choices to help them form 
judgments based on these summaries.
The application of stylometric technology to 
authentication is fairly straightforward. Instead 
of using a training set of documents, we use a 
pseudodocument containing the user’s long-term 
behavior, and we verify that the recent behavior 
at the keyboard is consistent with this long-term 
behavior. A significant inconsistency, of course, 
would trigger a security response. Here, we present 
preliminary findings in developing such a system.
Collecting the Data
Any experiment in authentication requires a set 
of validated data attached to ground-truth identi-
ties. The simplest way for us to collect this data 
was to create a work environment. We set up a 
simulated office environment in downtown Pitts-
burgh and hired temporary workers for a week 
at a time, presenting them a set of writing tasks 
and a standardized computer. Each computer had 
tracking software, including Free Key Logger and 
GhostSpy (which measured keyboard dynamics, 
including key presses and timing, mouse move-
ments and clicks, applications launched and the 
mapping of text to applications, the use and text 
of the clipboard, and browsing history).
Over 12 weeks, we hired 80 temporary workers 
to perform a long-term blogging task (research 
and write blog articles on topics “related to Pitts-
burgh in some way”) over the course of a normal 
workweek. Every day, the last two hours were de-
voted to microtasks—small, focused, and explicitly 
defined tasks, such as describing a local landmark 
or event—which provided data subsets on more 
directly comparable tasks. We report here on an 
initial analysis of 63 subjects working a total of 
more than 300 person-days, creating more than 
4.2 Gbytes of data, including 1,057 documents 
from Microsoft Word alone, containing 47,411 
words (2,969,814 characters). We consider this to 
be among the largest corpora developed for this 
kind of authentication purpose.
In addition to collecting raw interaction data, we 
also asked subjects to take a battery of psychometric 
tests, including a basic demographic survey (that in-
cluded gender, education, native language, age, and 
dominant hand), the Rosenberg Self- Esteem Scale, 
the Myers-Briggs Personality Inventory (MBTI), 
the NEO-R, the Multiple Intelligences Develop-
mental Assessment Scales, and the Learning Styles 
Inventory. These provided higher-level psychomet-
ric classifications, which we plan to use to further 
refine the eventual authentication system.
Feature Extraction
We extracted from this corpus various linguistic 
and behavioral features of interest—features that 
have proven useful in identification, forensic, or 
security contexts.1,3–6,8 One example of these fea-
tures is lexical statistics—such as word length, 
distribution of characters, character bigrams, the 
percentage of letters/digits/uppercase letters, and 
numbers (including single, 2-digit, and 3-digit 
numbers). Other examples include syntactic sta-
tistics—such as function words, part-of-speech 
tags, and n-grams—and content features—such 
as common words and word n-grams. We also 
extracted behavioral features, including do-
main visits, keyboard intervals and dwell times, 
mouse dynamics (such as direction, distance, and 
 curvature angle), and button dwell times.
Depending on the features, we applied vari-
ous forms of pre- and post-processing. For ex-
ample, special (nonprintable) characters were 
 replaced with printable placeholders (for exam-
ple, “backspace” was replaced by “”), while case 
unification was applied to character n-grams. To 
increase the semantic coherence of content fea-
tures, we applied special characters—for example, 
“heHelolo” becomes “hello.” We also applied 
a degree of normalization—for example, dividing 
calculated frequencies by the total window size 
from which the windows were generated.
Data Analysis
We independently analyzed the data using several 
different methods, including the Java Graphical 
Authorship Attribution Program (JGAAP) for sty-
lometric analysis,3,9 which uses a centroid-based 
10 IT Pro  July/August 2013
Security: DArPA
1-nearest neighbor classification scheme. Each 
analysis reserved one day’s worth of keystrokes 
as the sample requiring identification. We used 
another four days of keystrokes for that person 
as positive examples of training data, while using 
keystrokes for the other 62 subjects as training ex-
amples of distractor data. Features used for these 
analyses included (case-unified) character big-
rams and trigrams as well as the 100 most com-
mon words. In addition to analyzing the user’s 
identity, we also reported on analyses for MBTI 
personality type, gender, and dominant hand.
We performed a second set of analyses with the 
JStylo framework (see http://psal.cs.drexel.edu), 
which uses smaller amounts of captured text 
based on a sliding window of 500 or 1,000 char-
acters. We analyzed these character sets with a 
one-multiclass sequential-minimal-optimization 
support vector machine with a polynomial kernel 
(derived from WEKA, the Waikato Environment 
for Knowledge Analysis10).
Active Stylometric Analysis
Table 1 presents our results, which generally 
show that authentication can be performed 
using keyboard behavior with extremely high 
accuracy, even before sophisticated fusion 
techniques are applied. In that sense, we have 
achieved what we consider to be a proof-of-
concept of this  approach’s viability. Although 
our system isn’t yet at the accuracy levels that a 
commercial product would demand, we expect 
the accuracy to improve as we incorporate more 
features—in particular, the higher-order cogni-
tive features.
A key ongoing aspect of this research is the 
application of decision-fusion techniques to im-
prove detection accuracy. In general, we apply 
a set of weights to the various features to de-
velop the most accurate classifier in accordance 
with the Neyman-Pearson Decision Rule.11 As 
a proof of concept, our initial analysis focused 
on mouse and keyboard sensors8—specifically, 
on mouse movements (direction and distance), 
button-press intervals, and button-dwell times. 
More detailed (ongoing) analyses incorporate 
mouse curvature angle and distance, keystroke 
interval and dwell times, website visit frequency, 
and some of the more traditional stylistic features 
 described earlier. With this fusion, we expect to 
Table 1. Accuracy of active stylometric analyses.
Task Classes Features No. of subjects Analysis Data size Accuracy (%)
identification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject iD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writeprints 
feature set 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
One vs. one sequential-
minimal-optimization 
support vector  
machine 10-fold  
cross validation
500  
characters
exact: 55.30
in top 3: 70.30
1,000 
characters
exact: 63.98
in top 3: 79.30
character 
bigrams 
60 
 
One vs. all, L1 distance 
Leave-one-out cross 
validation
One day 
 
exact: 19.60
in top 3: 85.30
Myers-Briggs 
Personality 
inventory (MBti) 
 
 
 
 
 
extrovert/ 
introvert
character 
bigrams 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One vs. all, Jaccard 
distance 
Leave-one-out cross 
validation 
 
 
 
 
One day 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78.4 
Sensing/ 
intuition
73.0 
thinking/ 
Feeling
76.5 
Judging/ 
Perceiving
80.1 
Gender 
 
 
Male/ 
female 
 
100 most 
frequent 
words 
60 
 
 
One vs. all, Jaccard 
distance 
Leave-one-out cross 
validation
One day 
 
 
76.6 
 
 
Dominant hand 
 
 
right/left character 
bigrams 
(no case 
unification)
60 
 
 
One vs. all, Jaccard 
distance 
Leave-one-out cross 
validation
One day 
 
 
99.2
right/left/ 
ambidextrous
96.2 
 computer.org/ITPro  11
increase the accuracy of our identification analy-
sis to over 99 percent.
O ne major concern at this point is scal-ing. How many minutes (or seconds) of data are necessary to make an identifica-
tion? Alternatively, how responsive can we make 
the system while maintaining acceptable accu-
racy levels? Clearly, requiring a full day’s worth 
of data is too much—even 30 minutes is probably 
too long in a high-security environment. On the 
other hand, we understand DARPA’s ultimate vi-
sion to be a fusion of many different modalities 
beyond what we ourselves have studied (creating, 
of course, even more opportunities for data and 
decision fusion), which will mitigate this issue.
A more serious concern, however, is the ad-
versarial user. A sufficiently sophisticated user 
might, for example, fake the writing style of an 
authorized user or use replay-style attacks to du-
plicate the mouse and keyboard timing from a 
record of a real session. The analysis of such ad-
versaries is a key aspect of any real-world  security 
system and an important research topic going 
forward. 
Acknowledgements
This material is based on work supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under grant no. OCI-1032683 and by DARPA 
under BAA-12-06. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 
or  recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
 authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National 
Science Foundation or DARPA.
References
 1. C.E. Chaski, “Who’s at the Keyboard: Authorship 
Attribution in Digital Evidence Investigations,” Int’l 
J. Digital Evidence, vol. 4, no. 1, 2005.
 2. “Broad Agency Announcement: Active Authentica-
tion,” DARPA, solicitation no. DARPA-BAA-12-06, 
12 Jan. 2012; www.fbo.gov/index?tab=documents&t
abmode=form&subtab=core&tabid=494b6b2c612c4
fd3db6cb018d4467e21.
 3. P. Juola, “Authorship Attribution,” Foundations and Trends 
in Information Retrieval, vol. 1, no. 3, 2006, pp. 233–334.
 4. M. Koppel, J. Schler, and S. Argamon, “Computa-
tional Methods in Authorship Attribution,” J. Amer. 
Soc. Information Science and Technology, vol. 60, no. 1, 
2009, pp. 9–26.
 5. E. Stamatatos, “A Survey of Modern Authorship At-
tribution Methods,” J. Amer. Soc. Information Science 
and Technology, vol. 60, no. 3, 2009, pp. 538–556.
 6. M.L. Jockers and D. Witten, “A Comparative Study of 
Machine Learning Methods for Authorship Attribu-
tion,” Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 25, no. 2, 
2010, pp. 215–23.
 7. H. van Halteren et al., “New Machine Learning 
Methods Demonstrate the Existence of a Human 
Stylome,” J. Quantitative Linguistics, vol. 12, no. 1, 
2005, pp. 65–77.
 8. N. Zheng, A. Paloski, and H. Wang, “An Efficient 
User Verification System via Mouse Movements,” 
Proc. 18th ACM Conf. Computer and Communications Se-
curity (CCS 11), ACM, 2011, pp. 139–150.
 9. P. Juola et al., “JGAAP 4.0—A Revised Author-
ship Attribution Tool,” Proc. Digital Humanities 2009, 
Maryland Inst. for Technology in the Humanities, 
Univ. of Maryland, 2009, pp. 357–359.
 10. M. Hall et al., “The WEKA Data Mining Software: 
An Update,” SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, vol. 11, 
no. 1, 2009, pp. 10–18.
 11. S. Thomopoulos, R. Viswanathan, and D. Bougou-
lias, “Optimal Decision Fusion in Multiple Sensor 
Systems,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 
Sept. 1987, pp. 644–653.
Patrick Juola is the director of research, CEO, and a 
founder of Juola & Associates, a text analysis firm. He is 
also an associate professor of computer science at Duquesne 
University. Contact him at pjuola@juolaassociates.com.
John I. Noecker Jr. is a founder and staff scientist at 
Juola & Associates. Contact him at jnoecker@juolaassoci-
ates.com.
Ariel Stolerman is a PhD student and research assistant 
at the Privacy, Security and Automation laboratory in the 
Department of Computer Science at Drexel University. 
Contact him at ams573@cs.drexel.edu.
Michael Ryan is a founder and staff scientist at Juola 
& Associates. Contact him at mryan@juolaassociates.com.
Patrick Brennan is the president of Juola & Associates. 
Contact him at pbrennan@juolaassociates.com.
Rachel Greenstadt is an assistant professor of com-
puter science at Drexel University. Contact her at 
rachel.a.greenstadt@drexel.edu.
