International Journal For Technological Research In Engineering 
Volume 1, Issue 11, July-2014                                                ISSN (Online): 2347 - 4718 
 
 
www.ijtre.com                      Copyright 2014.All rights reserved.                                                                            1407 
 
DEGRADED DOCUMENT IMAGE ENHANCEMENT USING 
GLOBAL THRESHOLDING 
 
Niti Kamboj
1
, Vinay Kumar
2
 
1
department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Ssgi, Yamunanagar, Kurukshetra University, Haryana, India 
2
Deputy Engineer, Department Naval System Bel (Bengaluru), Karnataka, India 
 
 
Abstract: Recent years have witnessed the rapid growth of 
degraded images due to the increasing power of computing 
and the fast development of Internet. Because of this 
tremendous increase of quality of degraded images, there is 
an urgent need of image content description to facilitate 
automatic retrieval. Image is described by several low level 
image features, such as color, texture, shape or the 
combination of these features .Shape is an important low 
level image feature. In this thesis, enhancement of quality 
of degraded image using Global Thresholding. This thesis 
is primarily concerned with the extracting numerical 
features from binary images. Image processing is very vast 
field & one of the most important part of image processing 
is thresholding. Thresholding, which is an important pre-
processing steps for the degraded image to enhance their 
quality & has been studies in relation to various images. 
There are different algorithms that have been used & 
studied for various factors of image analysis. The value of 
thresholding is based on which segmentation has been 
performed.  
Keywords: Binarization, Noisy Documents, Threshold 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Degraded documents are archived and preserved in large 
quantities worldwide. Electronic scanning is a common 
approach in handling such documents in a manner which 
facilitates public access to them. Such document images are 
often hard to read, have low contrast, and are corrupted by 
various artifacts. Thus, given an image of a faded, washed 
out, damaged, crumpled or otherwise difficult to read 
document, one with mixed handwriting, typed or printed 
material, with possible pictures, tables or diagrams, it is 
necessary to enhance its readability and comprehensibility. 
Documents might have multiple languages in a single page 
and contain both handwritten and machine printed text. 
Machine printed text might have been produced using 
various technologies with variable quality. It is common for 
libraries to provide public access to historical and ancient 
document image collections. For such type of document 
images require specialized processing in order to remove 
background noise and become more legible. In this paper, we 
define a hybrid binarization approach for improving the 
quality of old documents using a combination of global and 
local thresholding. Firstly, a global thresholding technique 
specifically designed for old document images is applied to 
the entire image. Then, the image areas that still contain 
background noise are detected and the same technique is  
 
reapplied to each area separately. Hence, we achieve better 
adaptability of the algorithm in cases where various kinds of 
noise coexist in different areas of the same image while 
avoiding the computational and time cost of applying a local 
thresholding in the entire image. Evaluation results based on 
a collection of historical document images indicate that the 
proposed approach is effective in removing background 
noise and improving the quality of degraded documents 
while documents already in good condition are not affected.  
Recognition/classification of objects and patterns 
independent of their position, size, orientation and other 
variations in geometry and colors has been the goal of much 
recent research. Image thresholding converts the gray level 
image in to binary one. The two binary levels may represent 
objects& background or more gerenelly to classes in an 
image. Pixels whose value exceeds the critical value are 
assignees to one category & the rest to other. The 
thresholding is global if the same critical value is used over 
the whole images. Many algorithms have been proposed for 
selecting the threshold appropriate for the given image. 
Some algorithms only used the histogram of value in the 
image. That is the no of pixels at each gray level. Global 
histogram based algorithms are the most commonly used 
despite the benefits that can accrue from using contextual 
information & allowing the threshold to vary over an image. 
They can simple understand & implement. Several groups of 
features have been used for this purpose, such as simple 
visual features (edges, contours, textures, etc.). The 
interpretation of images is still a complex problem and is 
primordial in lots of applications (spatial, military, industrial 
and medical). Since the beginning of the 80‟s, lots of 
research works have been achieved for the conception of 
vision systems in order to recognize objects in an image.  
An essential stage concerns the strategy of object recognition 
because an object can appear at different places in the image 
or at different orientations and scales. Document images as a 
substitute for paper document main. It consists of common 
symbols as hand written or machine printed characters, 
symbols & graphics. In some application, we only need to 
keep the contents of the documents. So it is sufficient to 
represent the text &diagram in binary formats. It also makes 
further processing such as character recognition & feature 
extraction with shadows etc. Use of Bi-level information 
decreases the computational load &enables the utilization of 
the simplified analysis method compared to second level of 
gray scale & color image information. 
 
International Journal For Technological Research In Engineering 
Volume 1, Issue 11, July-2014                                                ISSN (Online): 2347 - 4718 
 
 
www.ijtre.com                      Copyright 2014.All rights reserved.                                                                            1408 
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
A. Intermean Method 
Let I = gray level (0-255) & yi = no. of pixels with gray level 
I = height of level I in the 
 histogram. 
Three partial sums are calculated as : 
Three partial sums are calculated as : 
In this method t can be calculated as an integral part of 
Bn/An. This is an initial guess for t. 
The mean gray levels in the two classes defined by the 
threshold below & above it are calculated as: 
 t is calculated as : 
 
then     &     are recalculated & a new value of t is obtained. 
This process is repeated until convergence. 
 
B. Minerror Method 
In this method, histrogram can be viewed as an estimate of 
the probability density function p (g) of the mixture of the 
population comprising the gray levels of objects & 
background pixels. 
P(g/I) = prob. Density function 
Two components 1 – 1, 2 
    = mean of mixture 
   = standard deviation 
pi= a priori probability 
Supposing gray level data is thresholding at T then: 
 
Where a = 0     i=0 
 T+1                 i = 2 
 b = T               i –1 
 n                     i – 2 
 
C. Moment Preserving Threshold 
Color image processing by using binary quaternion-moment-
preserving thresholding technique. This paper presents a new 
moment-preserving thresholding technique, called the binary 
quaternion moment preserving (BQMP) thresholding, for 
color image data. Based on representing color data by the 
quaternions, the statistical parameters of color data can be 
expressed through the definition of quaternion moments. 
Analytical formulas of the BQMP thresholding can thus be 
determined by using the algebra of the quaternions. The 
computation time for the BQMP thresholding is of order of 
the data size. By using the BQMP thresholding, quaternion-
moment-based operators are designed for the application of 
color image processing, such as color image compression, 
multiclass clustering of color data, and subpixel color edge 
detection. The experimental results show that the proposed 
operator for proposed edge operator can detect the color edge 
at the subpixel level. Therefore, the proposed BQMP 
thresholding can be used as a tool for color image 
processing. 
Mathematical Calculations: Let p0 & p1 denote the fractions 
of the below & above threshold pixels in f respectively. 
The first three moments of g are just: 
Zi= gray values & preserving the first three moments: 
mi=mi    I=1,2,3 
p0+p1=1 
After solving the above we get: 
P0 is obtained & corresponding value of T is: 
(1/n)        p0 
zj < 1 
 
D. Otsu Method: 
Otsu‟s method is used in computer vision to perform 
thresholding. If each pixel p of an image has been assigned 
an „interest‟ score, f(p) then Otsu creates a histogram off 
over the image; and selects a threshold to maximize the 
between class variance. In statistics, a histogram is a 
graphical display of tabulated frequencies; a histogram is the 
graphical version of a table which shows what proportion of 
cases fall into each of several or many specified categories. 
The categories are usually specified as no overlapping 
intervals of some variable. The categories (bars) must be 
adjacent. The histogram is one of the seven basic tools of 
j
I 0
Bj   (i * yi)


j
I 0
Ai   yi


j
I 0
Cj   (i * I * yi)


t  Bt / At
(Bn Bt)
t
(An At)



( t t )
2
 

i
I
Mi pj(zj)I        i 1,2,3 

nj
b
g a
Pi(T) h(g)


b
g a
i(T) g * h(g) / pi(T)

 
& i & i(T) {g i(T) * g i(T)} * h(g) /pi(T)    
International Journal For Technological Research In Engineering 
Volume 1, Issue 11, July-2014                                                ISSN (Online): 2347 - 4718 
 
 
www.ijtre.com                      Copyright 2014.All rights reserved.                                                                            1409 
 
quality control, which include the histogram. Pareto chart, 
check sheet, control chart, cause and effect diagram, 
flowchart and scatter diagram. 
 
E. Flow Chart 
 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The propose work compare four algorithms which used to 
improvement the quality of degraded images using global 
threshold. The methods are Intermean method gives the result 
of improve the quality used threshold value 5.and Minerror 
method gives threshold value 8. and Moment preserving  
method improve the qualiy at threshold value 9. and last 
method Otsu method improve the quality at threshold value 
12. Otsu‟s method is used in computer vision to perform 
thresholding. If each pixel p of an image has been assigned 
an „interest‟ score, f(p) then Otsu creates a histogram off over 
the image; and selects a threshold to maximize the between-
class variance. First, a global thresholding technique 
specifically designed for old document images is applied to 
the entire image. Then, the image areas that still contain 
background noise are detected and the same technique is 
reapplied to each area separately. Hence, we achieve better 
adaptability of the algorithm in cases where various kinds of 
noise coexist in different areas of the same image while 
avoiding the computational and time cost of applying a local 
thresholding in the entire image. Certain kinds of histograms, 
however, help decide an appropriate thresholding method 
that offers good result for that type of images. 
 
A. Intermean Method 
Output 1 
 
Output 2  
 
Output 3 
Output 4 
 
Output 5 
 
International Journal For Technological Research In Engineering 
Volume 1, Issue 11, July-2014                                                ISSN (Online): 2347 - 4718 
 
 
www.ijtre.com                      Copyright 2014.All rights reserved.                                                                            1410 
 
B. Moment Preserving Thresholding   
Output 1 
 
Output 2 
 
 
Output 3   
 
Output 4 
 
Output 5 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
The discussion of the various aspects has studies together to 
conclude which of these four algorithms considered is better 
the enhancement of the image. The algorithm used in this 
project solves the purpose of segmentation & enhance the 
quality of the image but different algorithms have different 
computational time. The user can use any of the algorithms 
depending on his ease to understand the concept. all the 
algorithms are applied on each part to increase its quality & 
in the output the gray level & the original image is shown 
with their respective histograms.otsu method best of blood 
images moment preserving best for noisy images. 
 
              REFERENCES 
[1] Masoud Alghoniemy and Ahmed H. Tewfik, 
“Geometric Distortion Correction through Image 
Normalization” IEEE Trans.  Vol  pp. 1291-1294, 
2000 
[2] M. Emre Celebi and Y. Alp Aslandogan, “A 
Comparative study of three moment based shape 
descriptors”, Pattern recognition.  
http://www.emre.uta.edu/publications/ITCC2005_2.
pdf 
[3] D. S. Zhang and G. Lu. "Content-Based Shape 
Retrieval Using Different Shape Descriptors: A 
Comparative Study". In Proc. of IEEE International 
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME2001), 
pp.317-320, Tokyo, Japan, August 22-25, 2001. 
[4] Cho-Huak Teh and R.T Chin  Member IEEE, “On 
image analysis by the methods of moments”, IEEE 
Trans. Pattern Analysis and machine intelligence, 
vol. 10, pp 496-513, july 1998. 
[5] Heloise Hse and A. Richard Newton, “Sketched 
Symbol Recognition Using Zernike Moments”, 
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on 
pattern Recognition, ICPR 2004. 
[6] Masoud Farzam and Shahram Shirani, “A Robust 
Multimedia Watermarking Technique Using 
Zernike Transform”, IEEE, pp 529-534, 2001. 
[7] Simon X.Liao and Miroslaw pawlak, “On the 
Accuracy of Zernike moments for image analysis”, 
IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and machine 
intelligence, vol 20, pp 489-497, December 1998. 
[8] Simon X.Liao and Miroslaw pawlak, “image 
analysis with Zernike moment descriptor”, IEEE 
Trans. Pattern Analysis and machine intelligence, 
pp 700-703,1997.  
[9] S.Ghosal and R. Mehrotra , “Zernike moment-
Based Feature Detectors”, IEEE Trans. , pp 934-
938, 1994. 
[10] A. Padilla, A. Martinez-Ramirez and F.Granados-
Agustin, “Digital Image Reconstruction by using 
Zernike moments”, Pattern recognition, 2003. 
http://www-optica.inaoep.mx/ 
investigadores/apadilla/memoria1.pdf 
[11]  Otsu, N. "A threshold selection method from gray-
level histograms". IEEE Trans. Systems Man, 
Cybernet. pp. 62-66, 9 (1), 1979.  
[12]  E. Kavallieratou, E. Stamatatos,   "Improving the 
Quality of Degraded Document Images", Second 
International Conference on Document Image 
Analysis for Libraries (DIAL '06), pp. 340-349, 
2006 
 
 
