What Can Stylometry Learn From Its
Application to Middle Dutch Literature?1
Mike Kestemont, University of Antwerp
Abstract
‘Stylometry’ is a rapidly evolving subdiscipline of computational philology, fo-
cusing on the quantitative study of (literary) style. In recent years, stylometry
has had some interesting applications in the field of Middle Dutch studies,
especially in the domain of authorship attribution and scribe identification. In
this paper I will highlight and discuss the main insights gained in these con-
tributions. It will appear that these studies raise some challenging issues that
deserve stylometry’s careful consideration in coming years.
Keywords: Middle Dutch literature, Stylometry, Authorship attribution, Stylistics,
Digital Humanities
When dealing with literary statistics it is best to err on the side of caution.2
Saskia Murk Jansen
Introduction
‘Stylometry’ refers to the quantitative study of (literary) style, nowadays often by
means of computation.3 Being a cross-disciplinary subfield within the so-called
‘Digital humanities’, stylometry currently attracts the interest of scholars from
widely diverging disciplines such as linguistics, literary criticism, artificial intelli-
gence and information science.4 Stylometry tends to present itself as one of the
more exact or empirical branches of modern philology, especially with its typical
use of large, digital text corpora and statistics. Stylometric research is generally
characterized by an emphasis on meta-data: the text itself is often of less interest
to researchers than information about the text. Many studies, for instance, envi-
sage the automatic inference of meta-data – such as authorship or date of compo-
sition – from a text’s stylistic properties.
Although stylometry has been used in various problem settings, authorship
attribution has undeniably been its most popular application in recent years.5
The automatic classification of texts in terms of authorship is of course a fascinat-
ing issue, especially in forensic contexts where one would like to verify the
46
authorship of a suicide note – possibly faked by a murderer – or single out a
bomb letter’s author from a number of suspects. Automatic plagiarism detection
is another widely studied issue, sometimes closely related to style-based author-
ship verification.6 Although such high-profile applications are of course easier to
‘sell’ to the larger audience, most of the seminal work in stylometry has actually
been done in the field of (historical) literary criticism. A good deal of our literary
heritage has survived only fragmentarily (e.g. damaged manuscripts) or has only
been published anonymously or pseudonymously. For these texts, an objective
methodology to automatically verify their authorship or attribute them to known
authors would be most welcome. Nevertheless, stylometric studies remain some-
what rare and disparate in medieval philology and do not seem to have entered
the mainstream literature yet.7
The field of Middle Dutch literary studies (ca. 1200-1550) is quite rich in cases
of unresolved authorship. Famous examples include the identity of the compiler
of the so-called Lancelot compilation – perhaps Lodewijk van Velthem, see Figure 1 –
or the delineation of the œuvre by the ‘Bible Translator of 1360’ (possibly Petrus
Naghel).8 Therefore, it does not come as a surprise that stylometry has recently
known a number of interesting case studies in the Low Countries’ literary history.
In this paper I intend to offer a concise overview of these publications, while,
furthermore, using this opportunity to introduce the broader audience of this
journal to the vibrant and rapidly evolving field of stylometry.9 This paper’s em-
phasis, however, will lie on a number of challenging issues and insights that
resulted from the studies discussed. It will be demonstrated that these are quite
relevant to the international stylometric community as well and deserve the field’s
careful attention in coming years.
Seminal Work
A milestone in twentieth century authorship attribution research has been the
pioneering study in 1964 by the statisticians Mosteller and Wallace into the Feder-
alist Papers, a collection of pamphlets advocating the ratification of the American
Constitution, published under the pseudonym of Publius (1787-1788).10 Although
authorship attribution had of course been widely practiced before, their study in-
troduced a groundbreaking novelty to the field. Previously, authorship attribution
had often remained a largely impressionistic affair, in which attributions were
only vaguely argued, based on the ‘manual’ and subjective reading experience of
scholarly readers.11 Scholars often turned to hand-selected ‘checklists’ of stylistic
features to characterize an author’s style and used these lists to accept or reject
someone’s authorship for a given text. These lists usually contained a limited set
of stylistic peculiarities that had struck the expert reader’s eye, such as the use of
conspicuous nouns or unusual syntactic constructions.
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 47
what can stylometry learn
Figure 1: The last leaf of the Lancelot Compilation (The Hague, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, MS
129 A 10, fol. 238r). The mysterious colophon (in red) reads: ‘Hier indet boec van lanselote
dat heren lodewijcs es van velthem’ (‘Here ends the Book of Lancelot, which belongs to Sir
Lodewijc van Velthem’). However, ‘van’ could also be understood as ‘written by’ or ‘compiled
by’.
48 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
The use of such ‘lists’ often turned out to be problematic.12 These lists tended, for
instance, to be quite short, while it usually remained unclear why only this speci-
fic subset of features was included in the list and others were not. The main prob-
lem, however, was the low frequency of many of the items on the lists. Because
usually stylistic peculiarities are already rare in an œuvre itself and often even
linked to a specific topic or genre, these features often did not scale well to other
(possibly shorter) texts. Moreover, precisely because of their infrequent appear-
ance, these features catch the human eye, which makes them extremely vulner-
able to stylistic imitation and forgery. Mosteller and Wallace suggested to radi-
cally move away from these conspicuous, low frequency elements and focus on
the exact opposite: a text’s most frequent words, its function words.
Function words such as articles (the), prepositions (under) or pronouns (she)
form a small and closed class of (typically short) common words, conveying only
a very generic meaning.13 Because the semantics of these function words is so
pale, the same set of function words is extremely frequent in all texts. This makes
these words very attractive for use in authorship attribution, not in the least be-
cause they are used by all authors writing in the same language and period and,
thus, provide a statistically reliable base of comparison. Even more interesting is
that these words are generally not related to a text’s content and can therefore be
used for attribution across different topics and genres. No matter what an author
writes about (from music to politics to science), he or she will always need to use
definite articles. A final advantage is that they are not usually under an author’s
conscious control and thus pretty robust to imitation.14
The earliest application of this revolutionary insight in Middle Dutch studies is
to be found in an exceptionally early, but poorly recognized paper in Dutch Crossing
(1988) by Saskia Murk Jansen.15 In this study the author described an experiment
concerning the authorship of the so-called mystic Mengeldichten (‘Mixed poems’).
Since not all these poems appear in the surviving manuscripts of Hadewijch’s
work (thirteenth century), a number of them are usually not attributed to the fa-
mous Brabantian beguine. In order to assess whether stylometry could add sup-
port to this thesis, Murk Jansen performed an experiment using Principal compo-
nents analysis (pca), a technique from multivariate statistics, nowadays commonly
used for text clustering in authorship attribution. Explicitly referring to the work
on the Federalist Papers by Mosteller and Wallace, Murk Jansen restricted her analy-
sis to a small set of thirteen highly frequent Middle Dutch function words.
Although her results offered neither a clear-cut confirmation nor a firm rejection
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 49
what can stylometry learn
of existing hypotheses, the author seemed right in concluding ‘that it would be
interesting to pursue this line of analysis’.16
The Early Swallows
One swallow does not make a summer and Murk Jansen’s experiment did not
immediately inspire followers. In the 1980s and 1990s, however, a clear trend
emerged in Middle Dutch studies, with several scholars increasingly exploring
the possibilities of quantification in style-related research. Initially, only limited
use was made of statistics in quantification and the computational aids that were
(sometimes) involved in the end remained relatively modest. In 1983, for instance,
Evert van den Berg completed his doctoral research about the development of
versification in Middle Dutch epic literature.17 In this study (and many subsequent
articles), Van den Berg pursued a line of quantitative stylistic research, with an
emphasis on the geographic and diachronic variation of features such as epithets
and other formulaic language use. Van den Berg’s work – however influential –
did not rely on any advanced computational quantification but did occasionally
include tests (e.g. Mann-Whitney) regarding statistical significance.
The same goes for Willem Kuiper’s dissertation, published in 1989, about Fer-
guut, the Middle Dutch adaptation (ca. 1240) of the Old French Arthurian novel
Fergus.18 Kuiper argued that Ferguut had been written by two distinct authors, ba-
sing this on the difference between two parts of the text regarding the frequencies
of various linguistic characteristics. He made extensive use of the well-known
Chi-Square test to determine the significance of the observed differences. New in
Kuiper’s approach was that he partially relied on a computational processing of
the text, for instance to automatically generate alphabetic word lists and concor-
dances. A similar strategy was adopted in Bart Besamusca’s investigations in 1991
of the so-called Lancelot compilation, a unique early fourteenth-century codex in
which an anonymous ‘compiler’ left us an extensive Arthurian narrative, welded
together from a collection of pre-existing Middle Dutch romances.19 Besamusca,
too, employed computer-generated word lists as an aid in his stylistic research
into the identity of the mysterious compiler of this codex.
Computational Middle Dutch studies, however, only received their most impor-
tant impetus in 1998, with the publication of the Cd-rom Middelnederlands (‘CD-
ROM Middle Dutch’), containing – apart from an entire digital dictionary of Mid-
dle Dutch – a near-exhaustive collection of the field’s most prominent texts.20 It is
hard to overestimate the impact of this acclaimed Cd-rom, since it has been the
most widely used resource in the field’s recent history. The main advantage this
text collection offered was that texts could not only be harvested from it in a
machine-readable format, but also that all texts were fully searchable. The Cd-
rom’s advanced search options have been heavily exploited in authorship studies
in the years following its publication.
50 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
In 2001 Westgeest attributed the so-called Leyden Lapidarium fragments to the
thirteenth-century poet Jacob van Maerlant, undoubtedly the most influential
author in Middle Dutch literary history.21 Exploiting the Cd-rom’s search possibili-
ties, Westgeest was the first to use the disc as a sort of control corpus. He argued
that stylistic features from the Lapidarium fragments were relatively typical of
Maerlant’s texts but infrequent in other works. Another well-known contribution
appeared in 2002.22 In this article, Joris Reynaert investigated the style of texts
within the so-called ‘Antwerp School’, a coherent collection of ethical and histo-
riographical texts that were all written in the first half of the fourteenth century by
(one or more) poets from the city of Antwerp. Only one of the authors in this
‘School’ is known by name: Jan van Boendale, a learned shipping clerk. Reynaert
argued that in fact many more, if not all works from this school should be attrib-
uted to Boendale. This ‘School’ of poets and texts might, in his eyes, well be a
scholarly fiction, since it would in reality coincide with a single œuvre, namely
Boendale’s. In his research, Reynaert had turned to the Cd-rom, much in the same
way as Westgeest had done. He argued that the Antwerp texts had a lot of stylistic
features in common that they did not share with the other texts on the Cd-rom.
Recently, in 2009, Marjolein Hogenbirk complemented Becamusca’s study of the
Lancelot compiler, adopting a methodology that was strongly reminiscent of Rey-
naert’s way of working in 2002.23
Joining the Digital Humanities
It seems characteristic for the earliest period that researchers were enthusiasti-
cally exploring the possibilities of computational research but at the same time
were still uncertain as to the methodologies that could be adopted. This situation
changed in the first decade of the following century, when researchers from Mid-
dle Dutch studies were increasingly inspired by international ‘Digital humanities’
research. The import of insights from abroad offered a remedy for one particular
shortcoming of the earlier studies, namely the misinformation about recent ad-
vances in international stylometric research.24
Perhaps the earliest example of this development can be found in a brief but
interesting book contribution from 2005 by Godfried Croenen, nowadays an im-
portant protagonist in computer-assisted medieval studies at the University of Li-
verpool.25 In this paper he revisited the possibility of a dual authorship in the
Grimbergsche oorlog (‘The war of Grimbergen’), a fictionalized rhymed account of
an early medieval feud between the lords of Grimbergen and the duke of Brabant.
Croenen divided the text into samples of 500 verse lines. Subsequently, he turned
to a statistic cluster analysis of these samples. Although his methodology is dis-
cussed only briefly, his results seemed to support the hypothesis that a second
author took over from the poet who had initiated the text. Moreover, the cluster
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 51
what can stylometry learn
analysis showed that the prologue could well be a later addition to the text by the
second author.
One of the most important publications so far has been one in Literary and
linguistic computing in 2007 by Karina van Dalen-Oskam and Joris van Zundert.26
In this paper they investigated the Roman van Walewein (‘Romance of Gawain’), an
indigenous Middle Dutch romance about King Arthur’s nephew, Walewein. With
its positive and subtle depiction of the epic hero, Walewein occupies a unique posi-
tion in the medieval European tradition and was recently fully translated into
modern English.27 The narrator of the text mentions that a certain Penninc had
started the text but did not finish it: the Walewein (ca. 11,000 verse lines in total)
would have been completed by a second author, Pieter Vostaert, adding ‘about’
3,300 lines to Penninc’s share, according to the narrator. Various scholars have
been speculating as to the exact location in the text where Vostaert took over from
Penninc, but at the time, conclusive evidence for one of the many existing hypoth-
eses was still lacking. Van Dalen-Oskam and Van Zundert wanted to use quantita-
tive authorship attribution to determine the exact spot of the authorial take-over
in Walewein.
To this end, they applied ‘Burrows’s Delta’ to the Walewein, a well-known stylo-
metric measure for estimating the distance in authorial style between two sam-
ples of text. The influential metric was originally proposed by John Burrows, one
of the founding fathers of modern stylometry.28 Simply put, Delta compares two
samples of texts in terms of the relative occurrences of a limited set of (e.g. fifty)
highly frequent words. It outputs a dissimilarity score (hence, ‘Delta’) by statisti-
cally comparing the differences in these frequencies to the ones found in a large
control corpus. A text of disputed signature can subsequently be attributed
through calculating the Delta of this text to those written by a number of candi-
date authors. The disputed text will be attributed to the author whose work is
most similar (viz. lowest Delta) to it. Empirical tests have shown that Delta,
although conceptually simple and intuitive, often yields reliable results.
For the case of the Walewein, Van Dalen-Oskam and Van Zundert proposed a
windowing procedure: they isolated the ‘suspected’ area where, roughly speaking,
the takeover could have taken place – around line 8,000 – and divided it in con-
secutive samples (‘windows’) of equal size. Then, they extracted a writing sample
from Penninc’s beginning and one from Vostaert’s completion (respectively well
before and after the suspected area). Subsequently, they looped through the win-
dows in the suspected area and calculated the Delta between on the one hand,
each suspicious window, and on the other hand, the samples written by Penninc
and Vostaert. They were hoping that the resulting list of values would show that
at a specific point in the text, the windows would start to show a rapidly decreas-
ing similarity to Penninc’s share, while displaying a fast increase in similarity to
Vostaert’s style. The location of this ‘crossfade’ would in that case be likely to
coincide with the authorial takeover.
52 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
 
Figures 2a & 2b: 2a shows the upper-left part of fol. 152v in the Walewein-manuscript
(Leiden, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Ltk. 195) with the change between the two scribes: the two
first lines on the verso side of this leaf are by the first scribe; the following by the second. 2b
shows the result of an experiment by K. van Dalen-Oskam and J. Van Zundert (‘Delta for
Middle Dutch’, p. 538, Fig. 19; courtesy of the authors), in which they were able to track the
scribal takeover using common word frequencies (cf. the peak around line 5784).
The crossfade between Penninc and Vostaert, around line 8,000 was indeed clear
from a number of their experiments. They made a strong case that Vostaert took
over around line 7,880 of the text. However, their results were a school-book ex-
ample of serendipity. Several of their graphs resulting from the windowing proce-
dure showed a remarkably extreme ‘peak’ (or change in style) around line 6,000
of the text. Strangely enough, the text itself did not contain a narrative event or
break in that region that could help explain this peak – which was in some experi-
ments even more prominent than the change in authors. The two researchers
quickly discerned that this peak coincided with the change in scribes that took
place around that line. For their experiments, Van Dalen-Oskam and Van Zundert
relied on an edition of the single complete manuscript of the Walewein that sur-
vives (Leiden, University Library, Ltk. 195). Paleographical research has shown
that two scribes have had ‘a hand’ in this textual witness, the first one being
responsible for the text up to line 5,783. The second scribe completed the copy
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 53
what can stylometry learn
after that point and states at the end of the text that he finished his work in 1350.
Van Dalen-Oskam and Van Zundert noted that Delta when applied to medieval
texts was in fact not only sensitive to authorship but also, and perhaps even
more, to the ‘style’ of the scribe who has copied the text. Scribal features there-
fore seem to interfere with authorial features in the computational analysis of
medieval texts.
Hunting the Scribe
The Walewein case study uncovered crucial theoretical insights that would cause a
turning point in computational scholarship. Apparently, modern attribution tech-
niques are suited for the analysis of medieval authorship but have to take into
account one major obstacle: the scribe. Before the invention of the printing press,
texts were individually hand-copied by scribes. The ‘autographs’ of authors are
moreover rarely extant. The absence of a standard language or spelling in the
Middle Ages often caused a considerable variation between the parallel witnesses
of texts, since scribes could freely adapt their exemplar to their own liking.29
Scholars within the paradigm of ‘Material Philology’ have indeed been eager to
stress that with each medieval copy of an old text, the opportunity arose to create
an entirely new text.30 For authorship studies, this evidently meant bad news,
since with each subsequent copy, an original author’s style risked fading even
further.
For manuscript studies, on the other hand, the Walewein case immediately
opened up exciting new research perspectives. If scribal features hinder author-
ship analyses, one could wonder just how stable these scribal features, e.g. spel-
ling and dialect, really are. Would these, for instance, be stable enough to be able
to perform scribe identification on medieval texts, much in the same way as peo-
ple perform author identification? This would imply the intriguing possibility to
recognize a scribe’s hand, without ever having seen his or her handwriting. This
could furthermore provoke a significant methodological advance in paleographic
attribution studies. There too, the recognition of a scribe’s hand can sometimes
be a rather controversial affair, since the methodologies adopted are often ‘ex-
pert-based’ and, if not ‘impressionistic’, at least difficult to objectify.31 That is
especially the case when scholars attempt to recognize hands across different
script types (e.g. littera textualis vs. littera cursiva). A computational methodology to
assist in such difficult tasks would, of course, be a valuable aid.
This idea was first explored in a conference contribution from 2009 by Karina
van Dalen-Oskam and myself.32 The idea in itself was straightforward: given a
large set of parallel copies of the very same authorial text, is it possible to compu-
tationally discriminate between the ‘scribal style’ of combinations of two copyists?
In a series of experiments – the details of which cannot be discussed here – we
tested this hypothesis on a diplomatic transcription of a series of parallel pas-
54 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
sages from Jacob van Maerlant’s Rijmbijbel (‘Rhyming Bible’) from fifteen parallel
manuscripts. From our experiments it became clear that although not all combi-
nations of scribes yielded equal results, a classification technique was generally
fairly apt at distinguishing between scribes, using only linguistic features, such as
spelling. The scribes in our corpus had apparently ‘appropriated’ the author’s text
to such an extent that we could tell them apart, with an accuracy that was signifi-
cantly above chance.
More interestingly, we compared the performance of certain ‘feature types’ in
this scribe identification task to their performance in a similar author identifica-
tion task (Penninc vs. Vostaert). It turned out that the more ‘superficial’ textual
features were (e.g. frequencies of single characters), the better they worked in
scribe discrimination and the worse they worked in author discrimination. On
the other hand, the ‘deeper’ the features used (the frequency of certain lemmas
or part-of-speech tags), the worse they performed for scribe recognition and the
better they worked for authorship attribution. The outcome of these experiments
was intriguing on two levels: on the one hand our paper offered a proof-of-con-
cept that – at least in this case study – it seemed possible to recognize Middle
Dutch scribes. On the other hand, we demonstrated that this need not imply that
this situation necessarily disqualifies authorship-related research, since authorial
characteristics – again, at least in this case study – seemed intact on another,
perhaps ‘deeper’ level of texts. This dual outcome naturally fostered a second line
of research in which Middle Dutch scholars started exploring under which cir-
cumstances, using which features, it would be possible to perform authorship
attribution in Middle Dutch literature.
Coming to Terms With the Author
The inauguration of Herman Brinkman as a professor at the University of Amster-
dam in 2009 has been significant for the development of stylometric research.
This appointment had been made possible through the generous support of
Brinkman’s host institution, the Huygens Institute (The Hague). The institute is
not mentioned as an aside, for the Huygens Institute has been positioning itself
in recent years as an important protagonist in the Low Countries’ ‘Digital huma-
nities’ initiatives. (In that respect, it does not come as a surprise that both Van
Dalen-Oskam and Van Zundert are also active at the Huygens.) Brinkman, who
until then had not yet really ventured into the adventure of ‘Digital humanities’,
surprised the audience with an excellent presentation entitled: Als de nachtuil. Au-
teurschap en overlevering van middeleeuwse teksten (‘Like the night owl. Authorship and
survival of medieval texts’). In his talk, Brinkman showed that state-of-the-art
techniques from stylometry (e.g. hierarchical clustering) were in fact able to sup-
port traditional research in a large number of cases of unresolved authorship.
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 55
what can stylometry learn
Nevertheless, Brinkman too stressed that authorship attribution for medieval
texts is not without problems. Research in medieval authorship attribution first
of all shares a number of practical limitations with its present-day counterpart. If
one is, for instance, to reliably attribute a text of disputed origin, both this text
and the example data for the candidate authors need to be large enough. In addi-
tion, Brinkman stressed, medieval scholarship needs to account for a large num-
ber of other problems that are unique to medieval philology – the aforementioned
scribal problems are the best example of this. In Brinkman’s view, authorship
attribution in medieval texts currently has to meet certain restrictions, if it is to be
methodologically sound. Brinkman proposed ‘ten commandments’ for author-
ship attribution in Middle Dutch studies (paraphrased in the box below). For the
authorial comparison of texts, commandment 5, 6 & 7, for instance, advocated a
unity of genre and date and place of composition. According to Brinkman, this
unity had to eliminate the disturbing influence of factors such as discourse, dia-
chronic language change and dialect. Only if one would adhere to these princi-
ples, according to Brinkman, an investigation into medieval authorship attribu-
tion would be fully methodologically sound.
Brinkman’s Ten Commandments33
1: Comparisons of authorial style based on word frequency analysis should be
restricted to texts surviving in a copy by the same scribe (unity of scribe);
2: Authorial style analyses should avoid words that are dependent or indicative
of specific content, genre, discourse or authorial perspective;
3: Writing samples need to be long enough to represent authorial usage (at
least 2000 words);
4: One should only compare writing samples of a uniform length;
5, 6, 7: One should keep the factors ‘genre’, ‘date of composition’ and ‘region
of composition’ stable across writing samples (unity of genre, date and re-
gion);
8: One needs to ensure a minimal distance between the original author’s ex-
emplar and the manuscript copy used;
9: In order to assess the differences between two texts, it is necessary to in-
clude a tertium comparationis;
56 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
10: A text that is to be analyzed in comparison to other texts is best divided into
parts of equal length in order to check the stability of the outcome of the test.
Brinkman in his first commandment expressed the need for a unity of scribe in an
authorship attribution experiment: if we compare the authorial style in two Mid-
dle Dutch texts, we could in principle only reliably compare them, when they
survive in a copy that has been produced by one and the same scribe. Only in that
way, we are able to isolate the impact of scribes on these texts. Already during his
presentation, however, Brinkman indicated that his commandments are fairly re-
strictive. Note that if we would always fully adhere to them, we are actually unable
to perform an authorial analysis on the bulk of the surviving Middle Dutch litera-
ture, since only a handful of texts have survived in a copy by the same scribe. In
that respect, we could for instance never establish whether two of our most fa-
mous (and recently translated) texts, Karel ende Elegast and Van den vos Reynaerde
were in fact written by one and the same author, since no copies of the texts by
the same scribe survive.34 It is clear that – although Brinkman’s commandments
will form an important touchstone for years to come – research is needed into
ways of easing the criteria imposed by them.
Ongoing Research
In my current research project, I investigate one way of nuancing Brinkman’s
methodological criteria: rhyme words. It is a remarkable feature of Middle Dutch
literature that a substantial share of it is rhymed, until well into the fourteenth
century. Although rhymed couplets (aabbcc…) have been a prominent feature in
many European medieval literatures, this stylistic device has occupied an extre-
mely stable position in the Low Countries. Middle Dutch studies have long ac-
knowledged that these rhyme words are an exceptional research object, not in
the least because they are a relatively stable element in medieval text transmis-
sion, pretty robust to scribal corruption. Because rhyme words were often used to
structure large, epic texts on the level of stylistics, scribes generally refrained from
changing a text’s rhyme words. It is indeed cumbersome to try and change a
text’s rhyme words, without having to rewrite a large portion of that text. Scribes
would sometimes alter the spelling of rhyme words, but generally speaking, they
seem to have left the underlying rhyme word (c.q. its lemma) intact. Interestingly,
restricting stylometric analyses to rhyme words might therefore eliminate scribal
interference in medieval rhymed texts, thus relaxing the criterion of Brinkman’s
first commandment.
In my research, I investigate whether these rhyme words can be used to attri-
bute for Middle Dutch epic texts. In particular, I explore the idea whether highly
frequent rhyme words can serve as a surrogate for highly frequent normal words
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 57
what can stylometry learn
(i.e. function words). Since a language’s rhyme word vocabulary is limited and
epic texts could be quite large, it has often been noted that poets repeatedly made
use of the same ‘stop-gaps’: a nifty set of formulaic rhyme words that could be
used over and over again in a variety of contexts. In a recent publication – joint
work with Walter Daelemans and Dominiek Sandra – we have indeed shown that
high-frequent rhyme words can safely be used for authorship attribution since
they share a lot of advantages with the function words in modern texts: the same
set of rhyme words is relatively context-independent and therefore frequent
throughout most texts.35 Moreover, it has been demonstrated that it is indeed
possible to ‘recognize’ authors based on a stylistic profile that takes into account
a poet’s usage of this set of highly frequent rhyme words. For the authors of the
Spiegel historiael, a thirteenth century vernacular adaptation of the Latin world
chronicle Speculum historiale, it has indeed been shown that techniques from stylo-
metry are reliably able to discriminate between the rhyming styles of Jacob van
Maerlant and Filip Utenbroeke, two authors who contributed to the Spiegel.36
In another case study, I have investigated the rhyming style of Lodewijk van
Velthem, a third author who added a substantial share to the Spiegel historiael in
the early fourteenth century.37 Although Velthem’s style too could be easily
modelled using computational techniques, it appeared that this was not true for
all of his additions to the Spiegel. Some parts of his contribution were in fact so
deviant in style from the rest of his œuvre, that they aroused suspicion. The lar-
gest fluctuation in style was observed in his famous account of the Battle of the
Golden Spurs (Courtrai, 11 July 1302), a military encounter between the king of
France and an untrained militia of Flemish townsmen, nowadays commemorated
on the annual holiday of the Flemish community in Belgium. The deviance in
style in Velthem’s account turned out to be similar to other passages in his œuvre
of which we know that the author did not write them himself but ‘silently bor-
rowed’ them from other sources. Follow-up research showed that there is indeed
ample reason to believe that Velthem – known to be a literary copycat – did not
write this account himself but superficially reworked a pre-existing source text.
To our knowledge, Velthem’s detailed account held the earliest and most exten-
sive Middle Dutch source of information on this well-known event. Stylometric
research, however, showed that his account could in fact be even older.
Highly frequent rhyme words as such prove to be an interesting stylistic cate-
gory for applied authorship attribution in historic literature. Apparently, a medie-
val author’s use of such rhyme words contains a ‘stylistic fingerprint’ that is both
constant and individual, so that we are able to model an author’s ‘stylome’.
Nevertheless, it has been noted that the stability of one author’s use of highly
frequent rhyme words in his œuvre cannot be exaggerated. In one particular ex-
periment we have looked into a single author’s entire œuvre, namely Jacob van
Maerlant’s.38 When applying a clustering technique (Correspondence Analysis)
to the fifty most frequent rhyme words in Maerlant’s entire œuvre, the results
58 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
showed that this text collection displayed a remarkable three-fold division.
Although our analysis was restricted to a set of content-neutral stop-gaps, the
Correspondence Analysis revealed three outspoken clusters: Maerlant’s chivalric
epics formed a first cluster, his historiographic works formed a second group,
while his texts in more didactic genres clustered in a third group. Naturally, this
raises the question of how strongly genre-related features in texts in fact interfere
with authorial style markers. Apparently, this question has not only been raised in
Middle Dutch studies, but also elsewhere. There is a remarkable lack of research
into an author’s stability of style across different genres.39 The little research that
has been done on this topic (e.g. cross-topic attribution) clearly indicates that the
international community currently underestimates the complexity of this issue. It
should be stressed that for now there is in fact no evidence that Brinkman’s fifth
commandment – the unity of genre – would not be true for all stylistic attribution
studies.
Conclusion: What Can Stylometry Learn From Its Application to
Middle Dutch Literature?
Stylometry’s potential for literary studies is enormous: the idea that one day we
might have objective methodologies to automatically infer, for example, a text’s
authorship, is fascinating. At the same time, one should be careful not to forget
that much work still needs to be done. Benchmark corpora to test existing meth-
ods generally remain under-exploited, so that it still remains unclear, for in-
stance, how long an anonymous writing sample should in fact be in order to be
able to attribute it to a known author.40 Some interesting directions for future
work have been proposed in Middle Dutch studies.41 The issue of scribal interven-
tions is perhaps the most remarkable one, since its effect could well be related to
editorial interventions we find in other periods. To give but one example: since
much empirical research into writing style is nowadays carried out on newspaper
articles, ‘there is a general worry with newspapers, that the texts of the authors
are often changed by editor(s)’.42 Techniques for recognizing scribal distortions
thus might well be interesting for research into such present-day editorial inter-
ventions too. From a more literary perspective, the genre issue which was dis-
cussed at the end of this paper seems relevant for the international community
too. The severe lack of cross-genre authorship attribution research makes it diffi-
cult to assess the real accuracy of contemporary attribution methods: even if tech-
niques have been shown to perform well within a single genre, this certainly does
not prove that they would work well outside the comfort zone of a single text
variety. This raises interesting questions about an author’s autonomy in writing.
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 59
what can stylometry learn
Acknowledgements
Mike Kestemont is a predoctoral researcher (aspirant) with the Research Founda-
tion of Flanders (FWO) and gratefully acknowledges the Foundation’s support.
The author would like to thank Frank Willaert and Walter Daelemans as well as
the anonymous reviewers of this journal for their valuable comments on earlier
versions of this paper.
Bibliography
Allen, John R., ‘On the Authenticity of the Baligant Episode in the Chanson de Roland’, in
Computers in the Humanities, ed. by John L. Mitchel (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 1974), pp. 65-72.
Argamon, Shlomo, ‘Interpreting Burrows’s Delta: Geometric and Probabilistic Founda-
tions’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 23:2 (2008), pp. 131-47.
van den Berg, Evert, Middelnederlandse versbouw en syntaxis. Ontwikkelingen in de versifikatie van
verhalende poëzie ca. 1200 – ca. 1400 (Utrecht: H&S, 1983).
Besamusca, Bart (ed.), Lanceloet. De Middelnederlandse vertaling van de Lancelot en prose overgele-
verd in de Lancelotcompilatie. Pars 2 (vs. 5531-10740). Met een inleidende studie over de vertaal-
techniek. (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1991).
Besamusca, Bart, The Book of Lancelot. The Middle Dutch Lancelot Compilation and the Medieval
Tradition of Narrative Cycles (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2003).
Binongo, José Nilo G., ‘Who Wrote the 15th Book of Oz? An Application of Multivariate
Analysis to Authorship Attribution’, in Chance 16:2 (2003), pp. 9-17.
Bouwman, André and Besamusca, Bart (eds) Of Reynaert the Fox (Amsterdam: Amsterdam
University Press, 2009).
Burrows, John, ‘‘Delta’: A Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Author-
ship’, in Literary and linguistic computing 17:3 (2002), pp. 267-87.
Burgers, Jan W.J., De rijmkroniek van Holland en zijn auteurs. Historiografie in Holland door de
Anonymus (1280-1282) en de grafelijke klerk Melis Stoke (begin veertiende eeuw) (Hilversum:
Historische Vereniging Holland, 1999).
Cd-rom Middelnederlands. Woordenboek en teksten (The Hague etc.: Sdu, 1998).
Claassens, Geert H.M., ‘Bible Translator of 1360 (fl. mid-14th c.)’, in Medieval Germany: An
Encyclopaedia, ed. by John M. Jeep (New York: Garland, 2001), pp. 405-07.
Croenen, Godfried, ‘Het dubbele auteurschap van de Grimbergsche oorlog’, in Maar er is meer:
avontuurlijk lezen in de epiek van de Lage Landen. Studies voor Jozef D. Janssens, ed. by Remco
Sleiderink, Veerle Uyttersprot and Bart Besamusca (Leuven: Davidsfonds, 2005), pp.
131-51.
van Dalen-Oskam, Karina and Van Zundert, Joris, ‘Delta for Middle Dutch – Author and
Copyist Distinction in Walewein’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 22:3 (2007), pp. 345-
62.
van Dalen-Oskam, Karina, ‘Digital Resources and Computational Methods’, in Zeitschrift für
deutsche Philologie, 130: Sonderheft (2011), pp. 375-390.
60 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
Dimpel, Friedrich M., ‘Der Verlust der ‘Eneas’-Handschrift als Fiktion. Eine computerges-
tützte, textstatistische Untersuchung’, in Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 61:1
(2006), pp. 87-102.
van Driel, Joost, Prikkeling der zinnen. De stilistische diversiteit van de Middelnederlandse epische
poëzie (Zutphen: Walburg Pers, 2009).
García, Antonio M. and Martín, Javier C., ‘Function Words in Authorship Attribution Stud-
ies’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 22:1 (2007), pp. 49-66.
Hinskens, Frans and Van Dalen-Oskam, Karina, ‘Kwantitatieve benaderingen in het taal-
en letterkundig onderzoek. Een ruwe schets’, in Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letter-
kunde 123:1 (2007), pp. 1-21.
Hogenbirk, Marjolein, ‘Is hij het? Lodewijk van Velthem en de compilator’, in De boeken van
Velthem. Auteur, oeuvre en overlevering, ed. by Bart Besamusca, Remco Sleiderink and Geert
Warnart (Hilversum: Verloren, 2009), pp. 47-72.
Holmes, David I., ‘The Evolution of Stylometry in Humanities scholarship’, in Literary and
Linguistic Computing 13:3 (1998), pp. 111-17.
Johnson, David and Claassens, Geert (eds and trans.), Dutch Romances. 1: Roman van Wale-
wein (Cambridge: Brewer, 2000).
Kestemont, Mike, ‘De meesters van de Spiegel. Auteursonderscheiding op basis van het
frequente rijmwoord in het aandeel van Utenbroeke en Maerlant in de Spiegel histor-
iael’, in Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde 127:2 (2011), pp. 97-120. Kestemont,
Mike, Daelemans, Walter and De Pauw, Guy, ‘Weigh Your Words – Memory-Based
Lemmatization for Middle Dutch’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 25:3 (2010), pp.
287-301.
Kestemont, Mike and Van Dalen-Oskam, Karina, ‘Predicting the Past: Memory-Based
Copyist and Author Discrimination in Medieval Epics’, in Proceedings of the Twenty-First
Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2009), ed. by Toon Calders, Karl Tuyls
and Mykola Pechenizkyi (Eindhoven: Benelux Association for Artificial Intelligence,
2009), pp. 121-28. Kestemont, Mike, ‘Velthem et al. A Stylometric Analysis of the Rhyme
Words in the Account of the Battle of the Golden Spurs in the Fifth Part of the Spiegel
historiael’, in Queeste 17:1 (2010), pp. 1-34.
Kestemont, Mike, Daelemans, Walter and Sandra, Dominiek, ‘Robust Rhymes? The Stabi-
lity of Authorial Style in Medieval Narratives’, in Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 19:1
(2012), pp. 1-23.
Kuiper, Willem (ed.), Die riddere metten witten scilde. Oorsprong, overlevering en auteurschap van de
Middelnederlandse Ferguut, gevolgd door een diplomatische editie en een diplomatisch glossarium
(Amsterdam: Schipbouwer & Brinkman, 1989).
Kwakkel, Erik, ‘Die dietsche boeke die ons toebehoeren’: de kartuizers van Herne en de produktie van
Middelnederlandse handschriften in de regio Brussel (1350-1400) (Leuven: Peeters, 2002).
Love, Harold, Attributing Authorship: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2002).
Mosteller, Frederick and Wallace, David L., Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1964).
Murk Jansen, Saskia, ‘Hadewijch’s Mengeldichten: an experiment in statistical method’, in
Dutch Crossing 35 (1988), pp. 26-39.
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 61
what can stylometry learn
Nichols, Stephen, ‘Why Material Philology? Some Thoughts’, in Zeitschrift für deutsche Philolo-
gie 116 (1997), Beiheft [= special issue: Philologie als Textwissenschaft. Alte und neue Horizonte,
ed. by Helmut Tervooren and Horst Wenzel], pp. 10-30.
Rem, Margit, ‘Middelnederlands met de computer’, in Madoc 19:1 (2005), pp. 24-32.
Reynaert, Joris, ‘De 10e Brief van Hadewijch en het 41ste der Limburgse Sermoenen’, in
Leuvense bijdragen 63:2 (1974), pp. 137-49.
Reynaert, Joris, ‘Boendale of ‘Antwerpse school’? Over het auteurschap van ‘Melibeus’ en
‘Dietsche doctrinale’’, in Al t’Antwerpen in die stad. Jan van Boendale en de literaire cultuur van
zijn tijd, ed. by Wim Van Anrooij and others (Amsterdam: Prometheus, 2002), pp. 127-
57 and pp. 177-82.
Schreibman, Susan, Siemens, Ray and Unsworth, John (eds), A Companion to Digital Huma-
nities (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004).
Stamatatos, Efstathios, Fakotakis, Nikos and Kokkinakis, George, ‘Automatic text categor-
ization in terms of genre and author’, in Computational Linguistics 26:4 (2000), pp. 471-
95.
Stamatatos, Efstathios, ‘A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods’, in Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60:3 (2009), pp. 538-56.
Stein, Benno, Lipka, Nedim and Prettenhoffer, Peter, ‘Intrinsic plagiarism analysis’, in Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation 45:1 (2011), pp. 63-82.
Westgeest, Hans, ‘De Leidse lapidariumfragmenten: delen van Maerlants ‘cortten lapyd-
arys’?’, in Queeste 8:1 (2001), pp. 1-26.
Notes
1. The author gratefully acknowledges the support of the Research Foundation of Flan-
ders (FWO) at the University of Antwerp. He also would like to thank Frank Willaert
and Walter Daelemans as well as the anonymous reviewers of this journal for their
valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.
2. Saskia Murk Jansen, ‘Hadewijch’s Mengeldichten: an experiment in statistical method’,
Dutch Crossing 35 (1988), pp. 26-39.
3. Usually, only writing style is considered in stylometry. For an excellent overview see
David I. Holmes, ‘The Evolution of Stylometry in Humanities scholarship’, in Literary
and Linguistic Computing 13:3 (1998), pp. 111-17.
4. For an accessible introduction see A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. by Susan
Schreibman, Ray Siemens and John Unsworth (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004).
5. A recent overview can be found in: Efstathios Stamatatos, ‘A Survey of Modern
Authorship Attribution Methods’, in Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 60:3 (2009), pp. 538-56.
6. See for instance: Benno Stein, Nedim Lipka and Peter Prettenhoffer, ‘Intrinsic Plagiar-
ism Analysis’, in Language Resources and Evaluation 45:1 (2011), pp. 63-82.
7. Disparate yet interesting examples concerning medieval authorship include: Antonio
M. García and Javier C. Martín, ‘Function Words in Authorship Attribution Studies’, in
Literary and Linguistic Computing 22:1 (2007), pp. 49-66 for Old English; Friedrich M.
Dimpel, ‘Der Verlust der ‘Eneas’-Handschrift als Fiktion. Eine computergestützte,
textstatistische Untersuchung’, in Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 61:1
62 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
(2006), pp. 87-102 for German; John R. Allen, ‘On the Authenticity of the Baligant
Episode in the Chanson de Roland’, in Computers in the Humanities, ed. by John L. Mitchel
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1974), pp. 65-72 for French.
8. An English discussion of the Lancelot compilation in Bart Besamusca, The Book of Lancelot.
The Middle Dutch Lancelot Compilation and the Medieval Tradition of Narrative Cycles (Cam-
bridge: D.S. Brewer, 2003). For Petrus Naghel, consult Geert H.M. Claassens, ‘Bible
translator of 1360 (fl. mid-14th c.)’, inMedieval Germany: An Encyclopaedia, ed. by John M.
Jeep (New York: Garland, 2001).
9. A very interesting recent Dutch-language overview of the matter (partially overlapping
with the present one) is presented in Frans Hinskens and Karina van Dalen-Oskam,
‘Kwantitatieve benaderingen in het taal- en letterkundig onderzoek. Een ruwe schets’,
in Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde 123:1 (2007), pp. 1-21. Another recent
state-of-the-art article on quantitative studies is Karina van Dalen-Oskam, ‘Digital Re-
sources and Computational Methods’, Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie, 130: Sonderheft
(2011), pp. 375-390.
10. Frederick Mosteller and David L. Wallace, Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1964).
11. A general discussion of (non-)traditional authorship attribution in Harold Love, Attri-
buting Authorship: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
12. A more detailed discussion and critique of the traditional method can be found in in
Mike Kestemont, ‘De meesters van de Spiegel. Auteursonderscheiding op basis van het
frequente rijmwoord in het aandeel van Utenbroeke en Maerlant in de “Spiegel histor-
iael”’, in Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde 127:2 (2011), pp. 97-120.
13. An introduction to the use of function words in authorship attribution in José Nilo G.
Binongo, ‘Who Wrote the 15th Book of Oz? An Application of Multivariate Analysis to
Authorship Attribution’, in Chance 16:2 (2003), pp. 26-39.
14. Note, however, that not all function words are necessarily highly frequent (cf. notwith-
standing).
15. Murk Jansen, Mengeldichten. A similar early quantitative study is offered by Joris Rey-
naert, ‘De 10e Brief van Hadewijch en het 41ste der Limburgse Sermoenen’, in Leuvense
bijdragen 63:2 (1974), pp. 137-49.
16. Murk Jansen, Mengeldichten, p. 32.
17. Evert van den Berg, Middelnederlandse versbouw en syntaxis. Ontwikkelingen in de versifikatie
van verhalende poëzie ca. 1200 – ca. 1400 (Utrecht: H&S, 1983). Note that Van den Berg’s
method has been continued in the first chapters of Joost van Driel, Prikkeling der zinnen.
De stilistische diversiteit van de Middelnederlandse epische poëzie (Zutphen: Walburg Pers,
2009).
18. Willem Kuiper (ed.), Die riddere metten witten scilde. Oorsprong, overlevering en auteurschap
van de Middelnederlandse ‘Ferguut’, gevolgd door een diplomatische editie en een diplomatisch
glossarium (Amsterdam: Schiphouwer & Brinkman, 1989).
19. Lanceloet. De Middelnederlandse vertaling van de Lancelot en prose overgeleverd in de Lancelotcom-
pilatie. Pars 2 (vs. 5531-10740). Met een inleidende studie over de vertaaltechniek, ed. by Bart
Besamusca (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1991).
20. Cd-rom Middelnederlands. Woordenboek en teksten (The Hague: Sdu, 1998).
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 63
what can stylometry learn
21. Hans Westgeest, ‘De Leidse lapidariumfragmenten: delen van Maerlants ‘cortten la-
pydarys’?’, in Queeste 8:1 (2001), pp. 1-26.
22. Joris Reynaert, ‘Boendale of ‘Antwerpse school’? Over het auteurschap van ‘Melibeus’
en ‘Dietsche doctrinale’’, in Al t’Antwerpen in die stad. Jan van Boendale en de literaire cultuur
van zijn tijd, ed. by Wim van Anrooij and others (Amsterdam: Prometheus, 2002).
23. Marjolein Hogenbirk, ‘Is hij het? Lodewijk van Velthem en de compilator’, in De boeken
van Velthem. Auteur, oeuvre en overlevering, eds Bart Besamusca, Remco Sleiderink and
Geert Warnar (Hilversum: Verloren, 2009).
24. Compare Jan W.J. Burgers, De rijmkroniek van Holland en zijn auteurs. Historiografie in Hol-
land door de Anonymus (1280-1282) en de grafelijke klerk Melis Stoke (begin veertiende eeuw)
(Hilversum: Historische Vereniging Holland, 1999), p. 82 (especially note 83).
25. Godfried Croenen, ‘Het dubbele auteurschap van de Grimbergsche oorlog’, in Maar er is
meer: avontuurlijk lezen in de epiek van de Lage Landen. Studies voor Jozef D. Janssens, ed. by
Remco Sleiderink, Veerle Uyttersprot and Bart Besamusca (Leuven: Davidsfonds,
2005).
26. Karina van Dalen-Oskam and Joris van Zundert, ‘Delta for Middle Dutch – Author and
Copyist Distinction in Walewein’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 22:3 (2007), pp.
345-62.
27. Dutch Romances. 1: Roman van Walewein, ed. and trans by David Johnson and Geert
Claassens (Cambridge: Brewer, 2000).
28. John Burrows, ‘‘Delta’: a Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Author-
ship’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 17:3 (2002), 267-87. Important theoretical in-
terpretation in Shlomo Argamon, ‘Interpreting Burrows’s Delta: Geometric and Prob-
abilistic Foundations’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 23:2 (2008), pp. 131-47.
29. Cf. Mike Kestemont, Walter Daelemans and Guy de Pauw, ‘Weigh Your Words –
Memory-Based Lemmatization for Middle Dutch’, in Literary and Linguistic Computing
25:3 (2010), pp. 287-301.
30. Consult Stephen Nichols, ‘Why Material Philology? Some Thoughts’, in Zeitschrift für
deutsche Philologie 116 (1997), pp. 10-30.
31. This issue is discussed in Erik Kwakkel, ‘Die dietsche boeke die ons toebehoeren’: de kartuizers
van Herne en de produktie van Middelnederlandse handschriften in de regio Brussel (1350-1400)
(Leuven: Peeters, 2002), p. 7.
32. Mike Kestemont and Karina van Dalen-Oskam, ‘Predicting the past: Memory-based
copyist and author discrimination in medieval epics’, in Proceedings of the Twenty-First
Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2009), ed. by Toon Calders, Karl Tuyls
and Mykola Pechenizkyi (Eindhoven: Benelux Association for Artificial Intelligence,
2009).
33. I would like to thank Herman Brinkman for proofreading my translation.
34. Both of these important texts have recently been translated to English: Of Reynaert the
Fox, ed. by André Bouwman and Bart Besamusca (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press, 2009). The translation of Karel ende Elegast is to appear in Olifant.
35. Mike Kestemont, Walter Daelemans and Dominiek Sandra, ‘Robust Rhymes? The Sta-
bility of Authorial Style in Medieval Narratives’, in Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 19:1
(2012), pp. 1-23.
36. Kestemont, ‘De meesters’, passim.
64 journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65
mike kestemont
37. Mike Kestemont, ‘Velthem et al. A Stylometric Analysis of the Rhyme Words in the
Account of the Battle of the Golden Spurs in the Fifth Part of the Spiegel historiael’, in
Queeste 17:1 (2010), pp. 1-34.
38. Kestemont, Daelemans and Sandra, ‘Robust rhymes?’.
39. Stamatatos, ‘A Survey’, pp. 553-54.
40. Stamatatos, ‘A Survey’, p. 553.
41. Hans van Halteren and Margit Rem (Radboud University Nijmegen) are currently in-
vestigating a number of fascinating case studies in scribe recognition and authorship
attribution. A number of highly recommendable publications are forthcoming. Earlier
work by Margit Rem has focused on computational linguistics, although the author-
ship of Ferguut is discussed in Margit Rem, ‘Middelnederlands met de computer’, in
Madoc 19:1 (2005), pp. 24-32.
42. Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos Fakotakis and George Kokkinakis, ‘Automatic text cate-
gorization in terms of genre and author’, in Computational linguistics 26:4 (2000), p.
485.
journal of dutch literature (2012) volume 2/2, pp. 46-65 65
what can stylometry learn
