Examining Variations of Prominent Features in Genre Classification  
 
 
Yunhyong Kim and Seamus Ross 
Digital Curation Centre (DCC) 
Humanities Advanced Technology and Information Institute (HATII) 
University of Glasgow, UK 
{y.kim,s.ross}@hatii.arts.gla.ac.uk 
 
  
Abstract     
 This paper investigates the correlation between 
features of three types (visual, stylistic and topical types) 
and genre classes.  The majority of previous studies in 
automated genre classification have created models based 
on an amalgamated representation of a document using a 
combination of features. In these models, the inseparable 
roles of different features make it difficult to determine a 
means of improving the classifier when it exhibits poor 
performance in detecting selected genres.  In this paper 
we use classifiers independently modeled on three groups 
of features to examine six genre classes to show that the  
strongest features for making one classification is not 
necessarily the best features for carrying out another 
classification. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
 The research described in this paper examines 
genre classes  of text documents and the role of different 
types of features in distinguishing these classes 
automatically. Automated genre classification (e.g.  
classification into scientific research articles, news report, 
or email), which identifies the function and structure of the 
document, supports metadata extraction ([12]) which is 
essential for efficient and effective information 
management in repositories. It also helps information 
seekers focus their search on specific genres, thereby 
enabling the retrieval of documents exhibiting different 
levels of detail, and, aids knowledge mining by 
performing a first-level classification of documents into 
documents of similar physical and conceptual structure.    
 The features which characterise a text often fall 
into well-defined groups. For example, some features 
capture the position of text blocks (visual layout), some 
describe indicative vocabulary (significant terms), and 
others attempt to identify the pragmatics or functional 
category of  selected terms (style).  In previous studies of 
automated genre classification (e.g. [4], [5], [11], [12], 
[13], [19], [21]) these features have been combined to 
produce a single set of features to represent the documents 
which are to be classified. This approach optimises the 
overall performance of the classifier on  the detection of 
the pre-defined classes, but makes it difficult to devise a 
means of improving the classifier when it  displays poor 
performance in detecting selected genres. It also takes for 
granted that the predefined classes describe a comparable 
schema of a single classification task. 
  In this paper we give evidence that genre 
classification, as described in previous studies, may 
actually be a combination of several independent tasks. 
For example, the  distinction  between a Thesis and  
Scientific Paper is largely structural, while Meeting 
Minutes and Business Reports are mostly distinguished by 
topic and style. On the other hand, the distinction between 
a Table of Financial Statistics and a Financial Report lies 
mainly in the visual representation and style. Using the 
same features to model concurrently these different types 
of classification would be equivalent to estimating a single 
distribution for items which belong to distinct populations. 
If you examine previous literature (e.g. Table 5 in [12],  
Table 3 in [13]), classification errors range anywhere from 
seventeen percent to seventy-six percent ([12]), and six 
percent to eighty percent ([13]). Observing such big 
differences in error rate might indicate that a re-evaluation 
of the task,  to determine if the task is actually a 
combination of many tasks disguised by the single term 
genre classification, would be productive. 
 Another prevailing notion in earlier analyses is 
that genre classification is orthogonal to topic or subject 
classification. This  notion defines genre classification as 
a task independent from subject classification. While there 
may be a conceptual level at which this is true, within the 
probabilistic framework on which language processing is 
highly reliant, there is reason to believe that this is not 
generally the case. For example, consider the topic of 
cohomology, a well-known subject area in higher 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
1530-1605/08 $25.00 © 2008 Crown Copyright 1
mathematics; this topic would not be expected to appear 
as frequently in the genre class Reportage as it would in 
the genre class Research Article. This suggests that, at 
least on a practical probabilistic level, genre sometimes 
moves in close proximity to subject.  
 The present paper reports tests on two corpora of 
genre-labelled PDF documents conducted to examine the 
correlation between genre classes and three feature types, 
to demonstrate that the best feature types for detecting any 
one genre class are not necessarily the best for detecting 
other genre classes.  The feature types we will examine 
are visual layout features, language modeling features and 
stylistic word frequency. Initially our corpus has been 
confined to one document format to narrow down the 
problem space. We have chosen PDF as this format 
because a tool for this format is likely to have immediate 
wide spread application given its popularity across library, 
archival, commercial and private sectors. The methods 
described here, however,  do not use features dependent 
on elements available only in PDF documents. The 
process is dependent on the PDF  only in so far as it 
depends on PDF tools to convert the documents into 
image and text.  
 It is not the intention of  this paper to introduce a 
classifier optimised to perform genre classification (in 
contrast to [14]). Here we put forward evidence that 
establishing a correlation between feature types and genre 
classes may be a reasonable step forward in constructing a 
robust genre classification system.   
 
2. Defining genre 
 
 Genre is a highly mutable context-dependent 
concept. Its mutability is apparent in its usage across the 
literature: Biber ([4]) characterised document genres  
using five dimensions (information, narration, elaboration, 
persuasion, abstraction), while others ([12], [5]) examined 
the categorisation of documents into common classes such 
as FAQ, Job Description, Editorial or Reportage. Genre 
classification have sometimes been defined as the analysis 
of particular aspects (narratives, fact versus opinion, 
intended level of audience, and, positivity or negativity of 
opinion) of text ([13], [11]), and even used to describe the 
detection of  selected journals and brochures from one 
another using visual layout ([1]). Others ([19], [2]) have 
clustered documents into similar feature groups without 
delving into genre facets or classes, and some have 
championed a multi-genre schema for web page 
classification ([21]). Santini has reviewed different 
approaches to genre classification ([20]).  
 While the definition of genre may not be easily 
pinned down, there  is general agreement that genre is a 
concept used to categorise documents by structure and 
function. In fact, the structure of documents in the genre  
evolve to meet the functional requirements for its survival 
in the environment  for which it was created, much the 
same as the structure of an organism evolves to optimise 
its survival function in the natural environment (cf. [15]).  
The accepted layout, language, components and style of 
the document change dynamically to maximise its chances 
of  fulfilling its role as  
  
 a piece of communication reflecting the intention 
of the creator, 
 a source of information for distribution to a user 
community, 
 a part of a process such as publication, 
recruitment, or event, 
 a type of data structure for representing 
information.       
In this context, it seems intuitively clear that selected 
features will be dependent on one of five aspects: visual 
layout, style, topic, semantic patterns, and  contextual 
elements which reflect the process for which the document 
was created and used (cf. [14]) .  
 The proposed objective in this paper is to study 
these feature types in relation to genre classes to  
determine its effectiveness in the detection of visual 
genres (e.g. data structure type), stylistic genres (e.g. 
prescribed procedural style) and topical genres (e.g. 
business versus legal briefing paper) independently. To 
this end, we first examine white space analysis, stylistic 
term frequency and significant term analysis in relation to 
genre classification. Subsequently we will enrich this 
basic set to examine more sophisticated features. It seems  
important to keep a check on the number of parameters  in 
the first analysis. 
 
3. Data 
 
 A common problem in the study of automated 
genre classification is the lack of established experimental 
data. A limited classification of documents into genre is 
available in previously constructed datasets, but none of 
them span a large number of genres, nor do they employ a 
consistent schema. To alleviate the paucity of data, we 
have created two corpora which we describe in this 
section.   
 
3.1. Corpora 
 
 There are two independent corpora which have 
been constructed in our research: 
 
RAGGED (RAndomly Generated GEnre Data)  
This dataset consists of 570 PDF documents gathered 
from the Internet using random search words.  For the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
2
retrieval of each item, the algorithm selects a random 
word from SCOWL (Spell Checker Oriented Word List - 
available from sourceforge.net), retrieves a list of PDFs 
containing the search word, and then saves a random 
document from the first hundred documents returned. The 
data gathered by this method was labelled by one of the 
authors of this paper. 
 
KRYS I   
This corpus consists of documents belonging to one of the 
seventy genres described in Table 1 of [16] . The corpus 
was constructed through a document retrieval exercise 
where university students were assigned genres from 
Table 1 of [14], and, for each genre, asked to retrieve 
from the Internet one hundred examples of that genre 
represented in PDF and written in English. They were not 
given any descriptions of the genres  apart from the genre 
label. Instead, they were asked to describe their reasons 
for including the particular example in the set. For some 
genres, the students were unable to identify and acquire 
one hundred examples. The resulting corpus now includes 
6478 items. 
 
3.2 Experimental data 
 
 The experiments analysed in Section 6 have been 
conducted on two datasets, a subset of RAGGED (Dataset 
I) and a subset of KRYS I (Dataset II), consisting of all 
the documents in the corpora initially labelled as one of 
six genres comprising Academic Monograph (AM), 
Business Report (BR), Book of Fiction (BF), Minutes 
(M), Periodicals (P), and Thesis (T). The  experimental 
Dataset I comprises  16 examples of AM, 16 examples of 
BR, 15 examples of BF, 19 examples of M, 19 examples 
of P, and 18 examples of T, while Dataset II comprises  99 
examples of AM, 29 examples of BF, 100 examples of 
BR, 99 examples of M, 67 examples of P, 100 examples 
of T.  Using two datasets which have been labelled  by 
different class of labellers helps to gauge the consistency 
of the classifiers in modeling distinct  classification 
standards. 
 The low proportion of Book of Fiction and 
Periodicals in Dataset II is due to the difficulty in finding 
publicly available examples of that genre. The number of 
documents in each genre are quite small in general; the 
sparsity of genre labelled data makes it difficult to collect 
large quantities of experimental data distributed across a 
variety of sources. Although we could have increased the 
data horizontally to include all the  genre classes in KRYS 
I, this would only introduce more parameters and 
confusion without adding credibility to the analysis of the 
relationship between feature types and individual classes 
(which would still contain a small amount of data).   
 
4. Classifiers 
 
 Eight classifiers are examined in this paper. They 
are each trained on one of three feature types and one of 
three statistical methods.  
 The three statistical methods employed are Naïve 
Bayes (NB) [16], Support Vector Machine (SVM) [26] 
and Random Forest (RF) [6]. These methods were 
chosen to represent a variety of approaches to 
classification which have proven to be successful in the 
past. Naïve Bayes is based on simple maximisation of 
likelihood of class occurrence given context. Support 
Vector Machine is based on constructing hyperplanes 
which separate the data into clusters of data in the same 
class. Random Forest is a decision tree method which is 
based on the construction of a committee of classification 
trees based on a random selection of features for each 
tree. There are other methods (e.g. Maximum Entropy) 
which we would have liked to examine as well, however, 
the lack of time and space has led us to  postpone it to 
future research.  
 We have called the three feature types  image, 
style and Rainbow. The features. image and style, have 
been modeled for comparison using all three statistical 
methods using the Weka machine learning toolkit ([21]). 
The features represented by Rainbow, on the other hand, 
have been modeled on Naïve Bayes and Support Vector 
Machine. The features of Rainbow are native to the 
Rainbow module of the BOW toolkit ([15]) and Random 
Forest (which was developed at a later date) was 
unfortunately not built into the module. We will refer to 
the eight classifiers by naming them with the feature type 
followed by the abbreviated name for the statistical 
method (e.g. image NB for image feature Naïve Bayes 
classifier). The parameters for feature selection and 
statistical methods have been optimised over a finite set of 
combinations tested for best overall accuracy on several 
samples taken from RAGGED. The final feature selection 
method is described below.  
 Image features: The first page of the document 
was converted into a low resolution grey-scale image and 
sectioned into a N x N grid. Each region on the grid was 
examined for non-white pixels. All regions with non-white 
pixels were assigned a value of 1 and all the other regions 
were assigned a value of 0 to create a low resolution bit 
map. Several grid sizes were tested on samples taken from 
RAGGED, but we found N=62 to produce the best results. 
This was also the coarsest level of granularity at which 
human subjects were able to distinguish particular 
documents as members of specific genre classes.  
 Style features: From an independent dataset 
consisting of documents retrieved from the Internet, the 
union of all words found to be prolific within each genre 
class was compiled into a list. A word is said to be prolific 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
3
in genre G if it is found in many of the documents 
belonging to G. The dataset used in this process consists 
of 190 complete documents belonging to nineteen genres 
inclusive of the six genres being examined in this paper. 
The thirteen complementary genre classes include 
Abstract,  Magazine Article, Scientific Research Article, 
Forms, Technical Manual, Technical Report, Email, 
Memo, Advertisement, Exam Worksheet, Slides, Speech 
Transcript, Poster. The test documents were represented 
by a vector constructed using the frequency of each word 
in the compiled list.  
 Rainbow features: This is a text classifier 
included in the BOW toolkit developed by McCallum 
([15]). This toolkit indexes the alpha-numeric content of 
the text for an analysis of significant terms, to estimate the 
probability of each word against each class. We have 
adopted the default setting of using a stop-word list to 
capture significant topical words of documents. The 
rainbow classifier is popular with subject classification. 
 
Figure 1.Example of document image representation: 
Scientific Article. 
 Our interest in image features reflects the 
recognition that documents of certain genres have more  
white space on the first page (e.g. title page of the book), 
are ruled by formatting conventions (e.g. first slide for a 
conference presentation), and are made visually elaborate 
to attract readership (e.g. the reversal of black and white 
on a magazine cover). Another benefit of examining 
documents using image processing methods is that the 
process does not depend on extracting text, can be 
language independent, and supports document analysis 
even when the content of the document is only accessible 
as an image. Examples of the image representation are 
given in Figure 1 and 2. These images should be 
interpreted as  negatives of the original image: darker 
pixels which have been labelled 1 appear lighter than the 
white pixels which have been labelled 0. 
 
Figure 2.Example of document image representation: 
Periodicals (magazine cover). 
 The image representation here is not the shape 
which is mentioned in Dillon and Vaughan ([10]). The 
notion of shape they introduce relates more to the 
visualisation of conceptual elements such as breadth of 
argument. The notion of form discussed by Toms and 
Campbell ([23]) is closer to the layout that we are trying 
to capture. However, while they concentrate on structural  
properties such as title, sections and bibliography, we are 
interested in the topology of the entire page. At the 
moment, only the first page of the document is used, later 
further pages can be incorporated.   
 The features in style are intended to capture 
frequency of words popular to all genres as well as words 
which are only prolific within some genres. A typical 
example of the weight of this feature is illustrated in the 
fact that forms or slides are likely to contain a fewer 
number of definite or indefinite articles than flowing text. 
Sample average frequencies of words commonly found in  
three of the genres discussed in the current study are 
presented in Table 1 (the average is taken over ten 
documents).  
 In the reported experiment we have taken words 
which were found in 75% of the files in each genre. We 
have also tried with a few other percentages but found this 
to show the best results. To compile the common words, 
we also tried a focused method of compiling words from 
the six genres under consideration only, and even words 
from a range of genres which exclude the genres of 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
4
interest. The combined list was adopted in the end 
because higher accuracies were consistently observed in 
all three style-based classifiers when using this list in 
comparison to the other two lists. 
 The prolific words list that we have constructed 
is distinct from the word list of common English words 
constructed by Samatatos, Fakotakis and Kokkinakis 
([22]). They collected words frequently used in the 
English language. We are collecting a list of words which 
have high document count in at least one of a range of 
genres, the words are expected to appear in many of the 
documents in one or more genres but may not necessarily 
have a high absolute frequency within the corpus nor any 
one document. 
Table 1. Average frequency of words per document across 
three genres. 
Genre 
Word 
Business 
Report 
Thesis  Minutes 
have 47 109 0 
with 71 210 13 
do 11 0 0 
case 0 10 0 
meeting 0 0 8 
information 12 0 0 
 Only using word frequency, when other more 
sophisticated analyses of linguistic structure has produced  
promising results  (e.g. Santini 2007) may seem absurd, 
but, there are advantages to further examining the 
frequency analysis before incorporating linguistic 
analysis. For example, the word frequency method can be 
applied immediately to a wider range of languages than 
can be a method reliant on heavy linguistic engineering. 
 The frequency model is basic to further semantic 
modeling. Here, we use a one-dimensional representation 
of each word dependent on its relative frequency in 
comparison to all the words in the word list. However, this 
can be refined so that relative frequency of each word is 
calculated within several different semantic groups of 
words taken from the list. 
 
5. Experiments 
 
5.1. Method 
 
 Eight classifiers (image NB, image SVM, image 
RF, style NB, style NB, style SVM, style RF, Rainbow 
NB, Rainbow SVM) have been tested on Dataset I and II 
for their performance in recognising six genre classes  
including Academic Monograph, Book of Fiction, 
Business Report, Minutes, Periodicals, and Thesis. The 
performance is examined using 10-fold cross validation 
results.  The performances  of the eight classifiers are first 
evaluated to identify, for each feature type, the statistical 
methods that generate the best overall performances on 
Dataset I and II (Section 6.1). Then, on each dataset, the 
best classifiers, one for each feature type, are compared in 
detail across the six genres (Section 6.2 and 6.3). 
 
5.2. Evaluation  
 
 The results, apart from those reported in Section 
6.3,  have been evaluated with three conventional metrics 
for classification: accuracy, precision and recall. To make 
precise what we mean by these terms, let N be the total 
number of documents in the test data, Nc the number of 
documents in the class C, TP(C) the number of documents 
correctly predicted to be a member of class C, and FP(C) 
the number of documents incorrectly predicted as 
belonging to class C. Accuracy A is defined to be A = {Σc 
TP(C)}/N, precision P(C) of class C to be P(C) = 
TP(C)/{TP(C)+FP(C)}, and, recall, R(C), of class C to be 
R(C) = TP(C)/Nc. Although some debate surrounds the 
suitability of accuracy, precision and recall as a 
measurement of information retrieval tasks, for 
classification tasks, they are still deemed to be a 
reasonable indicator of classifier performance. 
 
6. Results 
 
6.1. Overall accuracy 
 
 The overall accuracies of classifiers built on each 
feature type across statistical methods is reported in Table 
2 (best performances are indicated in bold-face).  
 The tests on the two datasets, consistently indicate Naïve 
Bayes as the best statistical method for image features. 
Although the overall accuracies of Naïve Bayes and 
Random Forest are comparable on the larger dataset, 
averaging (with a heavier weight on the larger set) the 
performances on the two datasets, suggested Naïve Bayes 
as a better performer for image. On both datasets, Support 
Vector Machine and Random Forest are both better than 
Naïve Bayes for style features. Although Support Vector 
Machine and Random Forest  performs comparably on the 
smaller Dataset I, we have chosen Random Forest as the 
better choice for style, because the difference was shown 
to be prominent on Dataset II. We have chosen Naïve 
Bayes for Rainbow for comparison on Dataset I,  and 
Support Vector Machine for Rainbow on Dataset II: in 
both cases the difference in performance was too large to 
indicate an overall better method for Rainbow.    
  In passing, we observe that, based on the overall 
accuracies of the classifiers on the two datasets, the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
5
classifiers based on image features are the least affected 
by training dataset size (average difference in accuracy 
0.036) and the classifiers based on  Rainbow are the most 
affected by dataset size (average difference in accuracy 
0.328). Also the results indicate that Support Vector 
machine and Random Forest seem more affected by 
dataset size than Naïve Bayes. 
Table 2. Overall accuracy of feature types across statistical 
methods 
Data & method Dataset I (103 items) 
 NB SVM RF 
image feature 0.524 0.35 0.417 
style feature 0.505 0.573 0.641 
Rainbow feature 0.428 0.25 N/A 
Data & method Dataset II (494 items) 
 NB SVM RF 
image feature 0.48 0.395 0.48 
style feature 0.63 0.724 0.828 
Rainbow feature 0.618 0.715 N/A 
 
6.2. Precision and recall 
 
 In this section we compare the precision and 
recall  across genres of the classifiers for each feature type 
which have been shown to have the best overall accuracies 
in the previous section (on Dataset I, image NB, style RF 
and Rainbow NB; on Dataset II, image NB, style RF, 
Rainbow SVM).  
 The figures in Tables 3 and 4 show the precision 
and recall across the six genres of each classifier tested on 
Dataset I and II. The genres are indicated in the left most 
column of the tables, with the numbers of documents in 
each class noted in parenthesis. The   statistical method 
being tested is indicated in the next column. 
 The results in Table 3 indicate that, on Dataset I, 
both precision and recall of image NB with respect to 
Periodicals are much higher than the other two classifiers. 
On the other hand,  the results indicate that academic 
monographs and business reports are best recognised by 
style RF. Books  of fiction seem to be best distinguished 
by style RF and Rainbow NB, but we also observe that 
the two classifiers seem to work in complementary 
positions (that is, where one has better recall the other has 
better precision). With the genre class Thesis, the 
complementary situation seems to be formed between 
image NB and style RF.   
 The performance on the genre class Minutes 
introduces some controversy: on the basis of precision, 
Rainbow NB shows a higher rate than the other two 
classifiers, but, on the basis of recall, style RF out 
performs Rainbow NB. The comparison is further 
complicated by the observation that the average of 
precision and recall (given equal weight) suggests  image 
NB as the best performer.   
Table 3. Genre classification across six classes on Dataset I, 
10-fold cross validation. 
Genre  
(no. of items) Method Precision  Recall 
Academic 
Monograph image NB 0.462 0.375 
(16) style RF 0.643 0.563 
 Rainbow NB 0.241 0.217 
Book of 
Fiction image NB 0.4 0.125 
(16) style RF 0.813 0.813 
 Rainbow NB 0.763 0.971 
Business 
Report image NB 0.273 0.2 
(15) style RF 0.667 0.4 
 Rainbow NB 0.453 0.173 
Minutes image NB 0.667 0.526 
(19) style RF 0.56 0.737 
 Rainbow NB 0.767 0.272 
Periodicals image NB 0.773 0.895 
(19) style RF 0.565 0.684 
 Rainbow NB 0.232 0.570 
Thesis image NB 0.432 0.889 
(19) style RF 0.688 0.611 
 Rainbow NB 0.541 0.377 
 On the basis of average performance taken over 
precision and recall, the results in Table 4 presents style 
RF as the best overall performer. The precision of style 
RF is better than  that of both of the other classifiers with 
respect to all genres except academic monographs and 
books of fiction, and recall is better with respect to  all 
classes except Periodicals and Thesis.  
 The classifier image NB shows the best recall 
rate for detecting theses and displays a comparable recall 
rate for detecting periodicals.  
 Although the results of the experiments suggest 
style RF as the overall best performer on the two datasets, 
they  do not identify genre classes for each classifier on 
which the classifier consistently outshines the other two 
classifiers. However, upon closer examination, the results 
do show that the binary partition of the genre classes, into 
classes with the three best performance  and  three worst 
performance, is preserved across the experiments on the 
two datasets: these partitions are (Minutes, Periodicals, 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
6
Thesis) and (Academic Monograph, Book of Fiction, 
Business Report) for image NB, and (Book of Fiction, 
Minutes, Thesis) and (Academic Monograph, Business 
Report, Periodicals) for style RF and Rainbow SVM. 
Table 4. Genre classification across six genres on Dataset II, 
10-fold cross validation. 
Genre 
(no. of items) Method Precision Recall 
Academic 
Monograph 
image NB 0.25 0.101 
(99) style RF 0.718 0.747 
 Rainbow NB 0.74 0.411 
Book  of 
Fiction 
image NB 0.111 0.069 
(29) style RF 0.923 0.828 
 Rainbow NB 0.931 0.807 
Business 
Report 
image NB 0.385 0.05 
(100) style RF 0.825 0.825 
 Rainbow NB 0.797 0.609 
Minutes image NB 0.604 0.818 
(99) style RF 0.913 0.949 
 Rainbow NB 0.91 0.874 
Periodicals image NB 0.425 0.716 
(67) style RF 0.774 0.716 
 Rainbow NB 0.457 0.794 
Thesis image NB 0.517 0.91 
(100) style RF 0.866 0.84 
 Rainbow NB 0.696 0.893 
 The general low level performance of the image 
features is partly due to the crude image representation. In 
the current model, the image features only capture the first 
page of the document, and each pixel value is strongly 
anchored to its position. This representation could be 
improved to combine representations of several pages of 
the document and to soften the positional information to 
embody the general shape or topology of the image. 
Likewise, for style, the size of the dataset and the variety 
of the documents in the  datasets used for training and 
compiling word lists  should be further examined for 
refinement.   
 
6.3. Error analysis  
 
 In Section 6.2 we observed the style features as 
the best overall indicator for detecting genre, however, the 
situation may be more complicated than such a conclusion 
might portend. To understand fully the results  in Section 
6.2, a thorough error analysis is necessary.  
Table 5. Confusion matrix: Image NB on Dataset II.  
classified   
as ----> 
AM BF BR M P T 
AM  10 4 4 20 25 36 
BF 1 2 0 4 7 15 
BR 17 9 5 16 32 21 
M 6 0 1 81 0 11 
P 5 1 3 8 48 2 
T  1 2 0 5 1 91 
Table 6. Confusion matrix: Style RF on Dataset II.  
 classified  
as ---> 
AM BF BR M P T 
AM  74 1 8 3 4 9 
BF 0 24 0 0 2 0 
BR 7 0 85 3 4 1 
M 4 0 1 94 0 0 
P 6 0 7 3 48 3 
T  9 1 2 0 4 84 
 In Tables 5, 6, and 7, we have displayed the 
errors as six-by-six confusion matrices. The true genre 
labels of the documents are shown in the left most column 
and the genre labels assigned by the classifier is shown 
along the top row of the table. The genre class names have 
been denoted by their abbreviated names to save space. 
As reminder, AM stands for Academic Monograph, BF 
stands for  Book of Fiction, BR stands for  Business 
Report, M stands for Minutes, P stands for  Periodicals, 
and T stands for Thesis.  
Table 7. Confusion matrix: Rainbow SVM on Dataset II.  
 classified  
as ---> 
AM BF BR M P T 
AM  41 1 8 3 18 28 
BF 0 23 1 0 4 1 
BR 6 0 61 3 28 2 
M 3 1 2 87 4 3 
P 3 0 5 3 53 3 
T  2 0 1 0 8 89 
 We have used two different measures of the 
confusion level displayed by the classifier: one based on 
belief ([8]) and another based on error impact. The belief 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
7
BC(C1:C2) of a classifier C that class C1 is class C2 is the 
number of documents in class C1 labelled as being in C2 
divided by the number of documents in class C1. The  
error impact EC(C1:C2) of the class C1 in the documents 
labelled by the classifier C as C2 measures the percentage 
of errors arising from the predicted labels of documents  
in class C1 within the errors arising from the classifier's 
decision to label documents as belonging to C2.  More 
precisely, if C1 = C2, EC(C1:C2) is defined to be 0,  and 
if C1 ? C2, EC(C1:C2) is defined to be the number of 
documents of class C1 which have been labelled as 
belonging to C2 divided by the total number of documents 
incorrectly labelled as belonging to class C2. To compare 
values across classes, we have compensated for different 
numbers of document in each class by dividing BC(C1:C2) 
and EC(C1:C2) with the sum of  BC(C1:C2) over all C1, 
and EC(C1:C2) over all C2, respectively. If the sum is 
zero then we simply define the belief and error impact to 
be zero. The same notation for belief and error impact has 
been retained to denote the normalised quantity.  
 We have introduced error impact in contrast to 
belief because belief is heavily influenced by the overall 
performance of the classifier itself. That is, having a high 
level of correct beliefs greatly reduces the incorrect 
beliefs of the classifier. In contrast, the greater or smaller 
number of academic monographs being labelled correctly 
as Academic Monograph does not have as predominant an 
influence over the relative distribution of different classes 
amongst the documents which have been incorrectly 
labelled Academic Monograph. We deemed error impact 
to be a better metric for accentuating the differences in 
confusion levels between classes within the performance  
of a single  classifier.  
 Between two different classes C1 and C2, the 
confusion level on the basis of belief, CB(C1:C2), is 
defined to be CB(C1:C2) = BC(C1:C2) + BC(C2:C1), and 
the confusion level on the basis of error impact, 
CE(C1:C2), is defined to be CE(C1:C2) = EC(C1:C2) + 
EC(C2:C1).  
 The contents of Table 8 indicate the feature type  
of the classifier exhibiting the lowest confusion level, 
between the pair of genre classes indicated on the two left 
most columns, based on the confusion metric noted on the 
top most row.  Two feature types have been noted where 
the confusion levels were equal.  
 Both metrics agree that style displays the lowest 
level of confusion in differentiating the pairs Book of 
Fiction and Minutes, Academic Monograph and 
Periodicals, Book of Fiction and Minutes, Business 
Report and Periodicals and Minutes and Thesis, and 
image  displays the lowest level for  Periodicals and 
Thesis (see Table 8). However, we would ideally like to 
minimise both error impact and out-of-class belief. For 
each pair of classes in Table 8, if we combine the features 
which have been calculated to have the lowest level of 
confusion on the basis of belief and error impact, the 
results seem to support our intuition. For example, style 
and image would be estimated as the best features to 
distinguish most pairs which include Periodicals which 
conforms to instinct, since periodicals deal with a wide 
range of topics, and we do not expect Rainbow features 
which emphasise topical distinction to fare well.  In 
particular, visually elaborate periodicals and structurally 
formal theses are unsurprisingly best distinguished by 
image features.  
Table 8. Feature types with lowest pairwise confusion level 
on two confusion metrics. 
Genre pair Metric CB CE
    
AM BF style, 
Rainbow 
Rainbow 
AM BR style style 
AM M style Rainbow 
AM P style style 
AM T style image 
BF BR style, 
Rainbow 
style 
BF M style style 
BF P style image 
BF T style, 
Rainbow 
Rainbow 
BR M style, 
Rainbow 
Rainbow 
BR P style style 
BR T style, 
Rainbow 
style 
M P style image 
M T style style 
P T image image 
  The same consideration of confusion levels  
indicates that topical features do little to distinguish genre 
classes likely to have similar topic areas such as Academic 
Monograph and Thesis. And it supports the expectation 
that distinctions between Academic Monographs and 
Book of Fiction, and Book of Fiction and Thesis would be 
highly topical. 
 Although the features indicated in Table 8 are the 
features exhibiting the lowest confusion levels with 
respect to belief and error impact, in some cases, the 
difference is very slight (e.g. CE for Academic 
Monographs and  Book of Fiction). In interpreting the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
8
information in Table 8, it seems reasonable to take the 
confusion level differences into consideration. We have 
merged the contents of Table 8 with these differences and 
presented the result in Table 9 for a convenient overview. 
For example, the pair of classes Book of Fiction and 
Periodicals has been examined to be best distinguished by 
style and image, but the figures in Table 9 seem to suggest 
that the weight is more prominently on image.  
Table 9. The difference between  maximum and minimum 
belief and error impact confusion. 
Genre pair Metric CB CE
    
AM BF 0.25 style, Rainbow 
0.01 
Rainbow 
AM BR 0.5 style 
0.06 
style 
AM M 0.2 style 
0.51 
Rainbow 
AM P 0.2 style 
0.08 
style 
AM T 0.08 style 
0.42 
image 
BF BR 0.39 style, Rainbow 
0.22 
style 
BF M 0.08 style 
0.54 
style 
BF P 0.13 style 
0.66 
image 
BF T 0.32 style, Rainbow 
0.73 
Rainbow 
BR M 0.14 style, Rainbow 
0.18 
Rainbow 
BR P 0.37 style 
0.09 
style 
BR T 0.07 style, Rainbow 
0.28 
style 
M P 0.68 style 
0.24 
image 
M T 0.08 style 
0.64 
style 
P T 0.07 image 
0.39 
image 
  
 Likewise, Academic Monographs and Minutes 
seem best distinguished by style and Rainbow with a 
higher weight placed on Rainbow. 
  
 
7. Conclusions 
 
 The results in this paper provide evidence that 
genre classification is a task composed of several 
classification tasks, where each task is defined by the set 
of classes which are distinguished by features of similar 
types. 
 As a method optimised to be effective over a 
wide range of classes, automated genre classification 
relies most heavily on linguistic style. However, the 
method fails to be at its best when dealing with classes 
such as Periodicals which encompass many different 
styles and topics. These classes are often more  readily 
distinguished by visual style (e.g binary classifications of 
Peridodicals and Thesis,  using the image features show 
an overall accuracy range of 0.91-0.94, depending on the 
statistical machine, with precision and recall above 0.9 in 
all cases, while classifications using the style features 
show an accuracy range of 0.85-0.916).  
 The conventional approach to handling visually 
distinctive and stylistically distinctive classes together is 
to combine the visual features with the style features 
(either equally weighted or by estimating optimal weights) 
to get the best of both worlds, but this often degrades the 
recall or precision of the classifier modeled on one of the 
feature groups which may have been high with respect to 
selected classes (e.g. the recall of image NB with respect 
to Thesis is degraded from 0.91 to a recall range of 0.72-
0.82 when a classifier modeled on combined features is 
used). We propose to tackle this problem by approaching 
it from two directions: first, we would like to build a 
domain-dependent classifier built on feature strengths by 
 
1. Taking a small slice of the data in the domain to 
estimate distinguishing features of each pair of 
classes via analyses similar to that presented in 
this document. 
2. Constructing several classifiers by taking, for 
each classifier, a different weighted combination 
of labellers, based on the feature analysis of class 
pairs.  
3. Augmenting the set of classifiers by adding 
randomly weighted classifiers to prevent the 
classifier from over-fitting the initial slice of 
data. 
4. Taking a poll of votes cast by all the classifiers to 
obtain the final label.  
 
and, second, in parallel, we would like to build rigorous 
definitions of genre classes in terms of low level visual,  
stylistic, semantic, and contextual metrics (rather than 
high level functional concepts), which can be established 
by further studies of the type presented in this paper. 
 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
9
 We have only discussed the genre classification 
of document genres. However, the same methods can be 
applied to web page genres. Web page genre classification 
has immediate application. by enabling genre based 
searches, such as the retrieval of scientific articles and 
product or book reviews. Further, the minimal reliance of 
the approach on syntactic structure inspires a possible 
application in the classification of selected non-document 
objects such as databases.  
 
8. Acknowledgments 
  
DELOS: Network of Excellence on Digital 
Libraries (G038-507618)1 funded under the European 
Commission’s IST 6th Framework Programme provides 
key framework and support for this research, as does the 
UK's Digital Curation Centre (DCC). The DCC2 is 
supported by a grant from the Joint Information Systems 
Committee (JISC)3 and the e-Science Core Programme of 
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC)4 (GR/T07374/01). We would like to thank 
colleagues, Adam Rusbridge and Andrew McHugh, at 
HATII, University of Glasgow5 who facilitated document 
retrieval and classification of the KRYS I corpus with web 
support, and, Lea and Vera Beringer, who helped to 
validate the data used in the automated experiments of the 
research.  
 
10. References  
 
[1] Bagdanov, A. and Worring, M. (2001) Fine-grained 
document genre classification using first order random graphs. 
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR2001) , 79-90. 
[2] Barbu, E., Heroux, P., Adam, S., and Turpin, E. (2005) 
Clustering document images using a bag of symbols 
representation. In Proceedings International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, 1216–1220. 
[3] Bekkerman, R., McCallum, A., and Huang, G.  (2004) 
Automatic categorization of email into folders: benchmark 
experiments on enron and sri corpora. Technical Report IR-418, 
Centre for Intelligent Information Retrieval, UMASS. 
http://www.cs.umass.edu/~mccallum/papers/foldering-tr05.pdf 
[4] Biber, D. (1995) Dimensions of Register Variation:a Cross-
Linguistic Comparison. Cambridge University Press. 
[5] Boese, E. S. (2005) Stereotyping the web: genre 
classification of web documents. Master’s thesis, Colorado State 
University. 
[6] Breiman, L. (2001) Random forests. Machine Learning, 
45:5–32. 
                                                 
1 http://www.delos.info 
2 http://www.dcc.ac.uk 
3 http://www.jisc.ac.uk 
4 http://www.epsrc.ac.uk 
5 http://www.hatii.arts.gla.ac.uk 
[7] Burges, C. J. C. (1998) A Tutorial on support vector 
machines for pattern recognition. Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, Vol  2, 121-167.   
[9] Chen, L., and Tang, H. L. (2004) Improved computation of 
beliefs based on confusion matrix for combining multiple 
classifiers. Electronic Letters, Vol 4, No 4, 238- 239. 
[10] Dillon, A. and Vaughan, M. (1997) It's the journey and the 
destination:Shape and the emergent property of genre in 
evaluating digital documents. New Review of Multimedia and 
Hypermedia. Vol. 3, pp. 91-106. 
[11] Finn, A., and Kushmerick, N. (2006) Learning to classify 
documents according to genre. Journal of American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 57(11), 1506–1518. 
[12] Karlgren, J., and Cutting, D. (1994) Recognizing text 
genres with simple metric using discriminant analysis. In 
Proceedings 15th Conf. Comp. Ling., Vol 2,  1071–1075. 
[13] Kessler, G., Nunberg, B., and Schuetze, H. (1997) 
Automatic detection of text genre. In Proceedings 35th Ann. 
Meeting ACL, 32–38. 
[14] Kim, Y., and Ross, S. (2006) Genre classification in 
automated ingest and appraisal metadata. In J. Gonzalo, editor, 
Proceedings European Conference on advanced technology and 
research in Digital Libraries (ECDL) , Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Springer Verlag, Vol 4172, 63–74. 
[15] Kim, Y., and Ross, S. (2007) Detecting family 
resemblance: Automated genre classification. Data Science 
Journal, ISSN:1683-1470, Vol 6, , S172-S183. 
[16] Kim, Y. and Ross, S. (2007) Feature Type Analysis in 
Automated Genre Classification.  
http://eprints.erpanet.org/128. 
[17] McCallum, A. (1996) Bow: A toolkit for statistical 
language modeling, text retrieval, classification and clustering. 
 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~mccallum/bow 
[18] Minsky, M. (1961). "Steps toward Artificial Intelligence." 
Proceedings of the IRE 49(1), 8-30. 
[19] Rauber, A. and Müller-Kögler, A. (2001) Integrating 
automatic genre analysis into digital libraries. In Proceedings 
ACM/IEEE Joint Conf. Digital Libraries, Roanoke, VA, 1–10, 
 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/379437.379439  
[20] Santini, M. (2004) State-of-the-art on Automatic Genre 
Identification, Technical Report ITRI-04-03, ITRI, University of 
Brighton, UK. 
[21] Santini, M. (2007) Automatic Identification of Genre in 
Web Pages, PhD Thesis, University of Brighton, UK.  
[22] Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N. and Kokkinakis, G. (2000), 
Text genre detection using common word frequencies. In 
Proceedings of 18th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 2000). Saarbrücken, Germany, 808-814. 
[23] Toms, E. and Campbell, D. (1999) Genre as interface 
metaphor: Exploiting form and function in gdigital 
environments. In Proceedings 32nd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-32), ISBN:0-7695-
0001-3, 2008-2015. 
[24] Witten, H. I., and E. Frank. (2005) Data mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques. 2nd Edition, Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco. 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
10
