UniNE at CLEF 2015: Author Profiling 
Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2015 
Mirco Kocher 
University of Neuchâtel 
rue Emile Argand 11 
2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland 
Mirco.Kocher@unine.ch 
Abstract. This paper describes and evaluates an effective author profiling model 
called SPATIUM-L1.  The suggested strategy can be adapted without any problem 
to different languages (such as Dutch, English, Italian, and Spanish) in Twitter 
tweets.  As features, we suggest using the 200 most frequent terms of the query 
text (isolated words and punctuation symbols).  Applying a simple distance 
measure and looking at the three nearest neighbors, we can determine the gender 
(with the nominal values male and female), the age group (with the ordinal 
measurement 18-24|25-34|35-49|>50), and the Big Five personality traits 
(extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and openness on an 
interval scale containing eleven items).  Evaluations are based on four test 
collections (PAN AUTHOR PROFILING task at CLEF 2015). 
1   Introduction 
Do men write like women, or are there significant differences in their writing style? 
What are the features that best discriminate different writings by different age groups?  
Is it possible to detect reliably somebody’s personality traits based on a text excerpt?  
With the Internet, the number of anonymous or pseudonymous texts is increasing and 
in many cases we face a single author.  There are some interesting problems emerging 
from blogs and social networks such as detecting plagiarism, recognizing stolen 
identities or rectifying wrong information about the writer.  Therefore, proposing an 
effective algorithm to the profiling problem presents an indisputable interest.   
These author profiling questions can be transformed to authorship attribution 
questions with a closed set of possible answers.  Determining the gender of an author 
can be seen as attributing the text in question to either the male authors or female 
authors.  Similarly the age group detection takes one of four groups to attribute the 
unknown text.  Uncovering the Big Five personality traits takes this approach even 
further by selecting for each factor one of eleven groups (from -0.5 to +0.5 with a step 
size of 0.1).   
This paper is organized as follows.  The next section presents the test collections and 
the evaluation methodology used in the experiments.  The third section explains our 
proposed algorithm called SPATIUM-L1.  In the last section, we evaluate the proposed 
scheme and compare it to the best performing schemes using four different test 
collections.  A conclusion draws the main findings of this study.   
2   Test Collections and Evaluation Methodology 
The experiments supporting previous studies were usually limited to custom 
corpora.  To evaluate the effectiveness of different profiling algorithms, the number of 
tests must be large and run on a common test set.  To create such benchmarks, and to 
promote studies in this domain, the PAN CLEF evaluation campaign was 
launched [6].  Multiple research groups with different backgrounds from around the 
world have participated in the PAN CLEF 2015 campaign.  Each team has proposed a 
profiling strategy that has been evaluated using the same methodology.  The 
evaluation was performed using the TIRA platform, which is an automated tool 
for deployment and evaluation of the software [2].  The data access is restricted 
such that during a software run the system is encapsulated and thus ensuring that 
there is no data leakage back to the task participants [4].   
During the PAN CLEF 2015 evaluation campaign, four test collections were built.  
In this context, a problem is defined as: 
Predict an author’s demographics from her Twitter tweets. 
In each collection, all the texts matched the same language.  These four benchmarks 
are composed of a Dutch and Italian collection with the task to predict the gender and 
personality traits and an English and Spanish corpus with the additional goal to 
determine the age group.  The data was collected from Twitter by means of advertising 
campaign.  The gender and age group is therefore user specified while the 
personality trait labels are gold standard self-assessed with the BFI-10 test [5] and 
then normalized between -0.5 and +0.5.  We will assume that this will reveal 
accurately the personality traits.   
Training Test 
Language Type 
No of 
Samples 
Mean 
words 
No of 
Problems 
Dutch 
Gender & 
Personality 
34 593 ~32 
English 
Gender, Age & 
Personality 
152 527 ~142 
Italian 
Gender & 
Personality 
38 638 ~36 
Spanish 
Gender, Age & 
Personality 
100 665 ~88 
Table 1.  PAN CLEF 2015 corpora statistics 
An overview of these collections is depicted in Table 1.  The training set will be used 
to evaluate our approach and the test set will be used in order to be able to compare our 
results with those of the PAN CLEF 2015 campaign.  The number of samples from the 
training set is given under the label “No of Samples” and the mean number of words 
per sample is indicated under the label “Mean words”.  For the test set we estimated the 
number of problems from the accuracy scores of all participants (subject to integer 
number of correct answers and same number of problems).  The datasets remained 
undisclosed due to the TIRA system so we don’t have certain information about its size.  
When inspecting the Dutch training collection, the number of samples available is 
rather small.  Similarly the Italian collection only provides 38 samples.  To predict the 
value of a personality trait we have in mean only three examples.  Therefore, we can 
expect the performance for these languages to be lower than that for the other 
languages.  For the Spanish corpus, Table 1 indicates that we have the longest samples 
to learn the profile from the stylistic features of the author.  A relatively higher 
performance can be assumed in this benchmark.  A similar conclusion can be expected 
with the English collection consisting of the most samples.   
When considering the four benchmarks as a whole, we have 298 problems to solve 
and 324 to train our system.  When inspecting the distribution of the answers, we can 
find the same number (149 in test and 162 in training) as male or female profiles.  In 
each of the individual test collections, we can also find a balanced number of male and 
female profiles.  This is not the case for the age group or the personality traits.  The 
highest of the four age groups represents only 8% of the English corpus and 10% of the 
Spanish collection while there are 39% and 46% of the 24-34 year olds respectively.  
The positive skew of this distribution is reasonable because only few people (16% as 
of October 20141) of age 50 or older are using Twitter.  The sampling also suffers from 
under-coverage of the author’s personality traits.  For instance for the openness factor 
in the rather large English and Spanish corpora we cannot find any value of -0.2 or 
lower and therefore missing the four lowest items on the interval scale.  The small 
Dutch collection even misses samples from the first six items for this trait.  Furthermore 
none of the traits in any of the corpora contained the value -0.4 or -0.5.   
During the PAN CLEF 2015 campaign, a system must provide the answer for each 
problem in an XML structure.  The response for the gender is a fixed binary choice and 
for the age group one of four fixed entries is expected.  The Big Five personality traits 
are each answered with a value between -0.5 and +0.5.   
As performance measure, two evaluation measures were used during the PAN CLEF 
campaign.  The first performance measure is the joint accuracy of the gender and age. 
This is the number of problems where both the gender and age are correctly predicted 
for the same problem divided by the number of problems in this corpus.  In case no age 
prediction is requested the joint accuracy is the same as the accuracy of the gender 
prediction alone.   
As a measure for the personality traits, the PAN CLEF campaign adopts the Root 
Mean Square Error (RMSE).  This evaluation measure takes into account how far off 
the predicted value is compared to the values actually observed independent of the 
direction.  The exact formulation is given in Equation 1 with a minimal value of 1.0 
and 0.0 as an optimum value. 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 = √
∑ (?̂?𝑖−𝑓)
2𝑛
𝑖=1
𝑛
(1) 
in which n is the number of problems, f the actual correct trait factor value, and 𝑓𝑖 the
predicted value for problem i of this trait factor.  This measure differentiates between a 
value close to the actual value and an answer far away from the truth.  The overall 
RMSE is the arithmetic mean of the RMSE of the five factors in the Big Five 
personality trait model.   
1 http://jetscram.com/blog/industry-news/social-media-user-statistics-and-age-demographics-
2014/ 
3   Simple Profiling Algorithm 
To solve the profiling problem, we suggest a supervised approach based on a simple 
feature extraction and distance metric called SPATIUM-L1 (Latin word meaning 
distance).  The selected stylistic features correspond to the top k most frequent terms 
(isolated words without stemming but with the punctuation symbols).  For determining 
the value of k, previous studies have shown that a value between 200 and 300 tends to 
provide the best performance [1, 7].  Some profiles were rather short and we further 
excluded the words only appearing once in the text.  This filtering decision was taken 
to prevent overfitting to single occurrences.  The Twitter tweets contained a lot of 
different hashtags (keyword preceded by a number sign) und numerous unique 
hyperlinks.  To minimize the number of terms with a single occurrence we 
conflated all hashtags to a single features and combined the morphological 
variants of Twitter links to another feature.  The effective number of terms k was 
set to at most 200 terms but was in most cases well below.  With this reduced 
number the justification of the decision will be simpler to understand because it will 
be based on words instead of letters, bigrams of letters or combinations of several 
representation schemes or distance measures.   
In the current study, a profiling problem is defined as a query text, denoted Q, 
containing multiple Twitter tweets.  We then have multiple authors A with a known 
profile.  To measure the distance between Q and A, SPATIUM-L1 uses the L1-norm as 
follows: 
∆(𝑄, 𝐴) = ∑ |𝑃𝑄[𝑡𝑖] − 𝑃𝐴[𝑡𝑖]|
𝑘
𝑖=1  (2) 
where k indicates the number of terms (words or punctuation symbols), and PQ[ti] and 
PA[ti] represent the estimated occurrence probability of the term ti in the query text Q 
or in the author profile A respectively.  To estimate these probabilities, we divide the 
term occurrence frequency (denoted tfi) by the length in tokens of the corresponding 
text (n), Prob[ti] = tfi / n.   
To determine the gender and age of Q we take the three nearest neighbors according 
to SPATIUM-L1 in the k-dimensional vector space and use majority voting.  In case three 
different age groups are returned we selected the nearest.  For each of the five 
personality traits we use the arithmetic mean of the corresponding traits of those same 
three candidates.  Since the vector space is spanned by the terms in Q the number of 
dimensions as well as the bases themselves are likely different from any query text to 
another.  Nevertheless because of the reduced number of features there won’t be a 
performance problem.   
4   Evaluation 
Our system is based on a supervised approach and we were able to evaluate it using 
a modified leave-one-out method on the training set.  Instead of retrieving the three 
nearest neighbors we returned four candidates, but ignored the closest profile.  The 
nearest sample was in fact the query text with a L1-disance of zero and thus could also 
serve as a check of correctness.  In Table 2, we have reported the same performance 
measure applied during the PAN CLEF campaign, namely the global score, which is 
the mean of the joint accuracy and the overall RMSE subtracted to 1. 
Language Global joint RMSE Runtime (h:m:s) 
Dutch 0.8116 0.7353 0.1121 00:00:03 
English 0.7415 0.6382 0.1551 00:00:04 
Italian 0.7854 0.7105 0.1397 00:00:01 
Spanish 0.7530 0.6500 0.1441 00:00:02 
Table 2.  Evaluation for the four training collections 
The algorithm returns the best results for the Dutch collection with a global score of 
0.8116 closely followed by the Italian corpus.  One has to consider that those two 
datasets did not require a prediction for the age.  Therefore the joint accuracy of the 
English and Spanish corpora is heavily influenced by an additional category in 
question.  This makes a direct comparison between the languages difficult.  
Furthermore the former two only contained few problems while the latter two 
predictions are based on a bigger collection and thus we expect it to be more stable in 
the second case.   
The test set is then used to rank the performance of all 22 participants in the 
competition.  Based on the same evaluation methodology, we achieve the results 
depicted in Table 3 corresponding to the 298 problems present in the four test 
collections.  As we can see the global scores on the test corpus is only slightly higher 
than the results from the training set.  The system seems to perform stable independent 
of the underlying text collection.   
Language Global joint RMSE Runtime (h:m:s) Rank 
Dutch 0.8469 0.8125 0.1186 00:00:01 6 
English 0.7037 0.5563 0.1489 00:00:04 8 
Italian 0.8260 0.7778 0.1259 00:00:01 4 
Spanish 0.7735 0.6705 0.1235 00:00:02 4 
Table 3.  Evaluation for the four testing collections 
To put those values in perspective we can see in Table 4 our results in comparison 
with the other 21 participants using macro-averaging.  We have also added a baseline 
from the training collections corresponding to a system that always produces the same 
answer.  The gender is fixed as female, the age is set to 25-34 which is the mode of the 
age groups, and 0.2 is chosen for all personality traits according to the median (and 
mode) of the training data.   
Rank Run Global joint RMSE Runtime (h:m:s) 
1 alvarezcarmona15 0.8404 0.7895 0.1087 00:02:32 
2 gonzalesgallardo15 0.8346 0.8001 0.1308 00:13:45 
3 grivas15 0.8078 0.7882 0.1727 00:04:07 
4 kocher15 0.7875 0.7043 0.1292 00:00:08 
… … … … … … 
20 
Baseline 
(female, 25-34, 0.2) 
0.5934 0.3569 0.1702 00:00:00 
… … … … … … 
Table 4.  Evaluation over all four test collections using macro-averaging for the 
effectiveness measures and the sum for the runtimes. 
From all the evaluation results2 we noticed that gender detection in the Spanish 
corpus was very high with a median accuracy of almost 85%.  In this language the 
grammatical gender of a noun affects the form of determiners, adjectives, and pronouns 
related to it.  Since Twitter tweets are often about the author him/herself the 
classification of the gender can be simplified.  On the other hand the gender recognition 
in the Dutch collection has a median accuracy of just 65%.  Gender in Dutch is more 
complicated.  The formal and written tradition mostly distinguishes masculine and 
feminine nouns, but in informal speech (and therefore for tweets too) the distinction 
disappeared and a common gender with the same inflections and pronouns is used.   
We also noted that determining the value of the neuroticism factor seems to be the 
most complicated in all four languages.  In mean the other four personality traits are 
determined with an RMSE of about 0.15, but in this case the RMSE was around 0.2.  It 
could be possible that the tendency to experience negative emotions (such as anger, 
anxiety, or depression) is more complicated to determine from written text or that 
people tend to give less reliable answers on self-assessment tests.   
Another pertinent observation is the fast runtime of our system in comparison with 
other solutions.  The median execution time of the other systems is over ten minutes.  
The practical applicability of such systems could be questioned.  The runtime only 
shows the actual time spent to classify the test set.  On TIRA there was the possibility 
to first train the system using the training set which had no influence on the final 
runtime.  Since our system did not need to train any parameters this is negligible for 
our approach, but it might have been used by other participants.   
5   Conclusion 
This paper proposes a simple supervised technique to solve the author profiling 
problem.  Assuming that a person’s writing style may reveal his/her personality traits 
we propose to characterize the style by considering the k  most frequent terms (isolated 
words and punctuation symbols).  This choice was found effective for other 
related tasks such as authorship attribution [1].  Moreover, compared to various 
feature selection strategies used in text categorization [8], the most frequent terms 
tend to select the most discriminative features when applied to stylistic studies [7].  
In order to take the profiling decision, we propose using the three nearest neighbors 
according to a simple distance metric called SPATIUM-L1 based on the L1 norm.   
The proposed approach tends to perform very well in four different 
languages (Dutch, English, Italian, and Spanish) for Twitter tweets.  Such a classifier 
strategy can be described as having a high bias but a low variance [3].  Even if the 
proposed system cannot capture all possible stylistic features (bias), changing 
the available data does not modify significantly the overall performance (variance).   
Moreover, the proposed profiling could be clearly explained because it is based on 
a reduced set of features on the one hand and, on the other, those features are words 
or punctuation symbols.  Thus the interpretation for the final user is clearer than 
when 
2 http://www.tira.io/task/author-profiling/ 
working with a huge number of features, when dealing with n-grams of letters or 
when combing several similarity measures.  The SPATIUM-L1 decision can be 
explained by large differences in relative frequencies (or probabilities) of frequent 
words, usually corresponding to functional terms.   
To improve the current classifier, we will investigate the effect of other 
distance measures as well as other feature selection strategies.  In this latter case, 
we want to maintain a reduced number of terms.  In a better feature selection scheme, 
we can take account of the underlying text genre, as for example, the most frequent 
use of personal pronouns in narrative texts.  As another possible improvement, we 
can ignore specific topical terms or character names appearing frequently in an author 
profile, terms that can be selected in the feature set without being useful in 
discriminating between authors.  As a further alternative we could consider the 
distance between the k nearest neighbors and the query text when determining the 
personality traits for a weighted mean instead of the arithmetic mean.  We might 
also try to exploit PAN specific properties such as the requirement for equally 
distributed male/female problems or the probability to find a right skewed distribution 
of the age groups.   
Acknowledgments 
The author wants to thank the task coordinators for their valuable effort to promote 
test collections in authorship attribution.  This research was supported, in part, by the 
NSF under Grant #200021_149665/1. 
6   References
1. Burrows, J.F.  2002.  Delta:  A Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide
to Likely Author-ship.  Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267-287.
2. Gollub, T., Stein, B., & Burrows, T.  2012.  Ousting Ivory Tower Research:
Towards a Web Framework for Providing Experiments as a Service. In: Hersh, B.,
Callan, J., Maarek, Y., & Sanderson, M. (eds.) SIGIR. The 35th International ACM,
1125–1126.
3. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J.  2009.  The Elements of Statistical
Learning.  Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction.  Springer-Verlag: New York
(NY).
4. Potthast, M., Gollub, T., Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Stamatatos, E., & Stein, B.
2014. Improving the Reproducibility of PAN's Shared Tasks: - Plagiarism Detection,
Author Identification, and Author Profiling. In: Kanoulas, E., Lupu, M., Clough, P.,
Sanderson, M., Hall, M., Handbury, A., & Toms, E. (eds.) CLEF. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 8685, 268–299. Springer: Heidelberg.
5. Rammstedt, B., & John, O.P.  2007.  Measuring personality in one minute or
less: A 10 item short version of the Big Five Inventory in English and German.
Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 203-212.
6. Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Potthast, M., Stein, B., & Daelemans, W.  2015.
Overview of the 3rd Author Profiling Task at PAN 2015. In Capellato, L., Ferro, N.,
Gareth, J., & San Juan, E. (Eds.) CLEF-2015 Labs and Workshops, Notebook Papers.
CEUR-WS.org.
7. Savoy, J.  2015.  Comparative Evaluation of Term Selection Functions for
Authorship Attribution.  Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, to appear
(dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqt047).
8. Sebastiani, F.  2002.  Machine Learning in Automatic Text Categorization.
ACM Computing Survey, 34(1), 1-27.
  
 
