 1
TEXT MINING THE BIOMEDICAL LITERATURE 
 
By 
 
Dr. Ronald N. Kostoff 
Office of Naval Research 
875 N. Randolph St. 
Arlington, VA  22217 
Phone: 703-696-4198 
Internet: kostofr@onr.navy.mil 
 
(The views in this report are solely those of the author, and do not 
represent the views of the Department of the Navy or any of its 
components) 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Text Mining; Information Retrieval; Metrics; Bibliometrics; Computational 
Linguistics; Biomedical; Information Technology; Asymmetry Detection; 
Citation Analysis; Literature-Based Discovery; Literature-Assisted 
Discovery. 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Text mining of the biomedical literature provides patterns of relationships 
among concepts, people, and institutions, offering enhanced medical/ 
technical intelligence unobtainable by other means.  This report describes 
myriad text mining capabilities.  It starts with a description of the larger 
context of knowledge management, then, addresses components of text 
mining in particular.   
 
Section 1 covers biomedical knowledge management, the role of text mining 
in knowledge management, and describes the cultural changes and global 
agreements required to allow the full power and capabilities of text mining 
to be utilized.  The next two sections address information retrieval issues.  
Section 2 describes the extraction of useful information from the published 
biomedical literature.  Section 3 describes the information content in 
different record fields, in a major medical database.   
 
Report Documentation Page Form ApprovedOMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information,
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 
1. REPORT DATE 
05 NOV 2007 2. REPORT TYPE 
3. DATES COVERED 
  00-00-2007 to 00-00-2007  
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Text Mining the Biomedical Literature 
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 
5b. GRANT NUMBER 
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 
6. AUTHOR(S) 5d. PROJECT NUMBER 
5e. TASK NUMBER 
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Office of Naval Research,Dr. Ronald N. Kostoff,875 N. Randolph 
St.,Arlington,VA,22217 
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER 
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 
14. ABSTRACT 
Text mining of the biomedical literature provides patterns of relationships among concepts, people, and
institutions, offering enhanced medical/ technical intelligence unobtainable by other means. This report
describes myriad text mining capabilities. It starts with a description of the larger context of knowledge
management, then, addresses components of text mining in particular. Section 1 covers biomedical
knowledge management, the role of text mining in knowledge management, and describes the cultural
changes and global agreements required to allow the full power and capabilities of text mining to be
utilized. The next two sections address information retrieval issues. Section 2 describes the extraction of
useful information from the published biomedical literature. Section 3 describes the information content in
different record fields, in a major medical database. 
15. SUBJECT TERMS 
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 
Same as
Report (SAR) 
18. NUMBER
OF PAGES 
380 
19a. NAME OF
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
a. REPORT 
unclassified 
b. ABSTRACT 
unclassified 
c. THIS PAGE 
unclassified 
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 
 2
The next four sections address computational linguistics issues, especially 
related to identifying patterns and relationships in text.  Section 4 outlines a 
family of methods for generating radical biomedical discovery from the 
literature.  An ongoing application of literature-based discovery to 
treatments for Raynaud’s Disease shows that one to two orders of magnitude 
more discovery than competing literature-based techniques are possible.  
Section 5 shows how increasing specialization within the biomedical 
community creates roadblocks for the acceleration of radical discovery 
described in Section 4, and recommends ways to eliminate these roadblocks.  
Section 6 describes the detection of unexpected asymmetries from the 
biomedical literature, with a specific example on bilateral organ cancer 
incidence asymmetry detection.  Section 7 describes a unique approach for 
removing words/ phrases of low technical content, and improving the quality 
of the resulting technical taxonomies.   
 
The final six sections address the use of citation analysis in biomedical text 
mining.  Section 8 describes the use and misuse of citation analysis in 
biomedical text mining.  Section 9 describes Citation Mining, a technique 
that allows the myriad impacts of research to be identified and assessed.  
Section 10 describes the use of citation analysis to evaluate the quality of 
research performers.  Section 11 shows a systematic approach for defining 
the seminal literature of any biomedical topic, critical for literature reviews 
or background sections of papers.  Sections 12 and 13 describe the 
differences between highly and poorly cited biomedical articles, with  
specific case studies from leading medical journals.  Finally, a 
comprehensive bibliography on text mining, along with associated 
infrastructure bibliometrics, is included. 
 
 3
Section 1.  Biomedical Knowledge Management 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “Science and Technology Knowledge 
Management”.  in New Frontiers of Knowledge Management.  (Ed.) Kevin 
DeSouza.  Palgrave Macmillan, United Kingdom.  11-35.  2005.) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
This section focuses on knowledge management in the biomedical science 
and technology (S&T) development cycle. It has three major components: 
textual data documentation and dissemination; the conversion of textual data 
into knowledge; and the impact of literature-based knowledge on the 
biomedical S&T development cycle. For each component, the author’s 
version of ideal operation is outlined, a contrast is drawn to present-day 
operation, and recommendations for closing the gaps are presented. The 
operational details are based on the author’s experiences with text 
processing and mining.  The constraints imposed by core textual data 
deficiencies on the processing results and value are emphasized, and 
methods for reducing data deficiencies are presented. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Modern economies and militaries depend on continual advances in science 
and technology (S&T) for competitive advantage. Optimal S&T progress 
depends on adequate resources, strategic planning, an environment 
conducive to discovery and innovation, a technically literate workforce, and 
an awareness of the total range of S&T being conducted globally. This 
awareness accelerates S&T progress when the knowledge available from 
global S&T research is integrated into the strategic and tactical decision-
making involved in initiating, managing, and applying S&T. Any reluctance 
to share information by an individual, organization, or country not only 
impacts the global S&T community, but impacts the reluctant unit 
negatively as well. Performance and credibility are required to get a ‘seat at 
the S&T table’, which translates to people must ‘share information to 
receive an information share’. This need for information sharing must be 
balanced with information security requirements. At the level of the firm, 
competitive advantage maintenance dictates security considerations. At the 
national level, national security must be maintained. 
 
At the core of this knowledge to accelerate research is the assemblage of 
documents known collectively as the technical literature. This literature is 
 4
the foundation of S&T; it is the ‘glue’ that binds S&T vertically and 
horizontally, across disciplines, cultures, and time. The building blocks of 
this literature, the technical documents themselves, constitute a strategic 
resource of the Information Age. The manipulations of these blocks, 
especially their analysis and synthesis, become a critical activity of the 
Knowledge Age. The short-term products of these manipulations, the 
immediate decisions and actions resulting from the analysis and synthesis, 
become tactical outputs of the Knowledge Age, while the longer-term 
impacts of the decisions and actions become strategic outcomes from the 
Knowledge Age. 
 
The impact of knowledge on decision-making for biomedical S&T 
development will be no better than the adequacy and quality of the 
foundational technical documents, the conversion to knowledge of the 
textual data embodied in these documents, and the integration of this 
knowledge into the management of the biomedical S&T development cycle. 
This section will address these three critical components: textual data 
documentation and dissemination; conversion of textual data to knowledge; 
integration of technical knowledge into the biomedical S&T development 
cycle.  For each component, the section will: 1) present a vision of ideal 
operating conditions; 2) contrast this with the operating conditions present 
today; and 3) provide recommendations for closing the gap between the 
actual and the ideal.  First, some definitions are required. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Data are the transduced outputs of sensors.  For published technical text, 
data are the text representations of inputs to the human mind from 
experiments, theoretical studies, computer studies, and internally-generated 
ideas.  The human mind becomes the transducer, deciding what data to 
represent as text, and how the data will be represented. Information is the 
fusion of data (the creation of the network that ‘connects the dots’ that data 
represent), and incorporates both the data and the relationships among data.  
For textual data, information incorporates the patterns and quantitative 
relationships among words, phrases, and grammatical structures. Knowledge 
is the placement of information in its larger context.  It is the necessary 
condition for understanding; without context, there is little understanding.  
For technical text, knowledge allows the text patterns and quantitative 
relationships to be interpreted within the context of the over-arching 
technical issues. 
 5
 
Data mining is the extraction of useful information and knowledge from raw 
data.  Unlike physical mining, data mining does not deplete the ore, but 
rather enriches it with new derived data to mine.  Presently, the information 
extraction is performed by a combination of machines and humans.  Text 
mining is the text analog of data mining, the extraction of useful information 
and knowledge from the literature.  Many documents are typically used in 
text mining, and are subjected to rigorous analytical processes.  Therefore, 
the results are typically more objective than the limited experiences and 
biases of a few people analyzing a few documents, characteristic of pre/non-
text mining approaches.  S&T text mining is the extraction of useful 
technical information and knowledge from the technical literature, and is the 
key component of the conversion of technical data to technical knowledge.  
S&T knowledge management is the use of global S&T data to accelerate 
progress in S&T development and enhance decision-making relative to 
S&T. 
 
As an example of these concepts, consider the technical discipline of 
nanotechnology, the study and exploitation of phenomena at the nanometer 
scale (atomic level). Suppose a researcher wants to understand the structure 
of a material surface at the atomic scale level. The researcher might use an 
Atomic Force Microscope to measure surface topography. The signals from 
the photo-diode detector represent raw data related to atomic surface 
topography, and when quantified and recorded, represent raw numerical 
data.  When fused with calibration data and analyzed, information on surface 
topography is generated. The information results from observing patterns in, 
and relationships among, the separate data elements.  When limited to a 
small region of the surface, this information is rudimentary. As the region of 
measurement increases, the information becomes more comprehensive. 
When this comprehensive information is analyzed in the context of theories 
and experiments using other techniques and other materials, knowledge is 
generated. 
 
When this research is documented, S&T text mining can be applied.  The 
individual words and phrases are the raw textual data, the relationships 
among these textual data elements represent information, and the placing of 
this information in context of other technical studies becomes knowledge.  
While text mining can be performed on single documents, especially large 
documents, in the modern day context it is usually performed on aggregates 
of documents.  If individual nanotechnology documents are assembled into a 
 6
large database, then text mining of the total nanotechnology database 
operates on a much larger amount of textual data.  It can produce 
substantially more information because of the larger number, and greater 
diversity, of textual data points and the resultant larger number of patterns 
generated.  Greater knowledge can then be produced because of the wider 
scope of data analyzed, greater complexity of relationships, more data points 
supporting statistical analyses, and increased predictive validity due to 
improved statistics. 
 
CRITICAL COMPONENTS OF BIOMEDICAL S&T KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT 
 
The biomedical S&T knowledge management cycle can be viewed as 
consisting of three major steps, and sub-steps within some of the steps: 
 
1. Technical Textual Data Documentation and Dissemination 
a. Textual Data Documentation 
b. Textual Data Publication 
c. Textual Data Dissemination 
2. Conversion of Technical Textual Data to Technical Knowledge 
a. Data Retrieval 
b. Data Processing-Information Generation 
c. Information Integration-Knowledge Generation 
3. Integration of Technical Knowledge into the S&T Development 
Cycle 
 
 
For each sub-step, the format used will be similar. Initially, the author’s 
version of the ideal sub-step process is presented (e.g., the first sub-step 
would start with ideal textual data documentation), followed by the actual 
sub-step process (e.g., actual textual data documentation, for the first sub-
step), and ending with recommendations for closing the gap between the 
ideal and the actual. 
Technical Textual Data Documentation and Dissemination 
This step spans the gamut from documenting the initial text describing 
the S&T actually performed to distributing this textual data to 
processors and analysts.  It represents the critical path to knowledge 
generation.  The most sophisticated text analysis algorithms cannot 
 7
compensate for raw data deficiencies, whether due to non-existence of 
this data, or non-availability. 
 
Textual Data Documentation 
 
The foundational step of the technical literature is the creation of its 
component documents. Ideally, all S&T performed globally would be 
documented, including detailed descriptions of technical successes, failures, 
and promising research terminated prematurely. Having all these data 
available would allow strategic and tactical S&T development decisions to 
be made with knowledge of all past and present S&T (and future plans as 
well), thereby profiting from other researchers’ successes, as well as from 
their failures. 
 
While a reasonable fraction of S&T performed is probably documented in 
some form (notes, memos, records), only a small fraction is documented in a 
form targeted for wide distribution (Kostoff, 2003a). There are many 
disincentives to publish in widely accessible literatures (classification, 
proprietary, time tradeoff between publishing and doing actual research, 
etc), and few incentives to publish. The majority of S&T researchers who 
publish, especially in basic science, tend to represent segments of academia 
that reward publications. Thus, much of the S&T actually performed is 
unavailable to the majority of global researchers, providing an intrinsic 
constraint on the efficiency and quality of S&T development. 
 
A fundamental assumption of the corrective recommendations to follow is 
that those who pay the bills for S&T have the responsibility to insure its 
quality. The first step to insuring S&T quality is becoming aware of the S&T 
produced with the funds provided. In part, S&T awareness requires 
documentation of S&T by its producers, and gaining access to this 
documented S&T by its sponsors. 
 
There are two major sponsors of S&T globally: government, and industry. 
Government is almost the exclusive sponsor of higher-risk science today, 
especially basic science, while industry plays a large role in sponsoring 
lower-risk technology development. While there are relatively few 
incentives and motivations available to increase open literature publication 
from industry (other than patents), there are many available to government.   
 
 8
The first, and main, recommendation of this chapter is that the sovereign 
governments of the world should take steps to come to agreement that 
publication of all publicly-sponsored research (with exceptions for classified 
and highly sensitive research) in a form conducive for wide-scale 
dissemination has value for all participants. Then, through a series of 
mandates and incentives, the governments should take steps to insure that 
documentation of publicly-funded research occurs in readily accessible 
media. The challenge here is to have governments accept the concept that 
the documentation and wide-scale dissemination of research have 
comparable importance to the research itself for the advancement and 
utilization of S&T, and are in fact integral components of the conduct of 
research. As a starting point, consensus needs to be gained among the 
agencies of the U. S. Federal government that ‘publication of all publicly-
sponsored research (with exceptions for classified and highly sensitive 
research) in a form conducive for wide-scale dissemination has value for all 
participants’. 
 
Textual Data Publication 
 
In an ideal publication environment, the initial documentation of research in 
all forms (notes, memos, records, e-mail, etc) should be required to enter the 
more formal technical literature.  This is the starting point for making the 
documentation accessible to a wider audience.  Because of the peer review 
process, this step maintains a threshold of quality for the research 
documentation.  Second, in this ideal publication environment, all journals 
would have the same formatting requirements.  Time would not have to be 
expended re-writing text and references to match unique journal 
requirements.  Third, the review process and period would be uniform across 
journals.   
 
Fourth, reviewers would be compensated by the journals.  Funds to 
underwrite the review process would come from the Federal agencies, with 
some fraction going to the journal, and the remainder going to the reviewers.  
A necessary condition for journals to receive these Federal funds is that they 
adhere to the uniform formatting and review process standards.  Because of 
compensation, the reviewers would be expected to devote more time to the 
review, thereby generating a more extensive and credible review.  In turn, a 
ceiling would be placed on the review period, and the reviewers would get 
paid proportionally less as the time ceiling is exceeded.   
 
 9
Fifth, there would be uniform review criteria for all articles of a similar type, 
and authors would understand what issues to address before manuscript 
submission.  Sixth, all components of the technical paper would be 
structured, in the sense that canonical criteria for each technical paper 
component would have to be addressed.  Structured Abstracts have been 
used by many medical journals for over a decade (Haynes, 1990; Kostoff 
and Hartley, 2002a), and a body of knowledge exists to provide guidance for 
future structuring.  Similar structuring should be required for Titles, 
Keywords (Hartley and Kostoff, 2003), and References (Kostoff and 
Hartley, 2003c).   
 
Finally, for researchers who submit a manuscript and are employed by an 
organization, the results of the manuscript review would be sent to both the 
employing organization and the research sponsor.  This latter scenario is a 
double-edged sword.  From the positive perspective, it would serve as a high 
quality project review, as well as to minimize authors’ shopping around for 
journals in which to publish mediocre papers.  From the negative 
perspective, it could increase reluctance of researchers to publish, if they 
know their management will see the reviewers’ comments. 
 
Would any of these ideal publication requirements, especially those relating 
to uniformity of formatting, structure, and evaluation criteria, stifle 
innovation and creativity in the manuscript?  Uniformity in formatting 
would certainly not, and would in fact leave more time for creativity by 
requiring less time to be spent on re-formatting documents, especially 
references.  Uniform structuring would be a double-edged sword.  For some 
authors, more time would be required, to incorporate canonical issues that 
would not have been addressed by the author without the requirement.  On 
the other hand, having to address these additional structural criteria would 
(at a minimum) make a paper more complete, and could stimulate additional 
creativity by having the author address difficult issues that would otherwise 
have been finessed and avoided.  In summary, having uniformity of 
formatting and canonical submission/ review requirements should have little, 
if any, impact on creativity, but much impact on availability of substantially 
more technical information to the larger technical community.  
 
Contrast this ideal publication process with technical publication today.  
First, there are no requirements to publish research results in the more 
formal technical literature, and few incentives and motivations to do so for 
much of the S&T community.  Second, most journals have different 
 10
formatting requirements, and substantial time is expended to re-write text, 
especially the references.  Third, the review process and review period can 
be vastly different across journals, and the review period can vary widely 
within the same journal, depending on the review managing editor and the 
reviewers selected.  The present author has had papers accepted after 
reviews ranging from a week after manuscript submission to over eighteen 
months beyond manuscript submission.  There is no excuse for a lengthy 
drawn-out review process, and at the pace of change of some of today’s 
research, the results could be obsolete by the time the research is published. 
 
Fourth, reviewers serve gratis today, as part of professional responsibility.  
This usually translates to a lower priority for the review, relative to more 
lucrative tasks.  As a result, many reviewers devote small amounts of time to 
manuscripts that embody hundreds or thousands of hours of work.  The 
lowered priority limits the accuracy, timeliness, and benefits of the review.  
Fifth, most journals don’t supply detailed review criteria to the authors, and 
the author has a relatively vague understanding of what is expected before 
manuscript submission.  Additionally, the criteria supplied to the reviewers 
are different for most journals, sometimes vastly different. 
 
Sixth, most journals don’t require any structuring of the research paper, 
other than section formatting.  As a result, the levels of information provided 
in a research paper, and especially in the most widely-read component, the 
Abstract, are very different.  Many medical journals now require Structured 
Abstracts (i.e., authors should address background, objectives, approach, 
results, conclusions, etc), but not structuring of any other fields.  For 
electronic retrieval, different search engines access different fields, and it is 
now important that different fields contain similar information at different 
levels of resolution (Kostoff and Hartley, 2003c).   
 
Finally, manuscript reviews today are sent to the author(s) only.  This has 
two negative consequences.  Authors can shop around for journals, go 
through the submission and review process until they find a favorable 
journal, and the failed reviews that highlight a paper’s deficiencies will 
remain unknown.  Also, a major opportunity for program review is missed.  
Many research programs do not get anywhere near the level of detailed 
review that exists in the journal manuscript review process, if in fact these 
programs get reviewed at all.  Having the journal manuscript reviewers serve 
as the proxy program reviewers would insert a much higher level of quality 
control (at least for the purely technical component of the program) than 
 11
exists in many programs today.  Obtaining this higher level of program 
quality control, as well as making the research documentation available to a 
much wider technical community, are the two main reasons for having 
Federal funding of the research reviews. 
 
Improvement in publication practices to approach the ideal vision above 
requires the agreement of individual journal editors and their publishers, 
agreement of the professional societies to which many of the journals 
belong, and especially agreement among the sovereign nations of the world 
to contribute funding for support of the journal manuscript review process.  
These changes could be implemented through top-down dictums from the 
sovereign governments.  However, a more realistic first step is to gain 
consensus from the technical journal editors that the ideal publication vision 
presented above will benefit S&T, the nations, and especially the journals 
themselves.  How can this consensus be obtained? 
 
An important goal of most journals is to make money, in addition to 
providing a forum for research progress in particular disciplines.  A key 
feature of the ideal publication scenario above is government subsidies of 
the journals through compensating the journals and manuscript reviewers for 
each manuscript submitted.  To prevent ‘flooding’ of the journals with 
frivolous submissions, some modest contribution from the authors toward 
the review process may be required as well.   
 
Under this scenario, two ways for a journal to increase revenues are 
increasing the volume of submissions, and increasing the throughput of 
reviews by more efficient processes.  If the journal editors could be 
convinced that standardizing and simplifying many aspects of the 
manuscript submission and review process would encourage more 
researchers to submit their manuscripts for publication, and would increase 
the throughput of manuscripts, they would welcome these changes as 
sources of increased revenue.  Once a critical mass of journals, especially 
the influential journals (those with high Impact Factors, high circulation, and 
high absolute number of citations), is convinced these changes are 
beneficial, it would only be a matter of time before the remainder of journals 
agrees as well. 
 
Textual Data Dissemination 
 
 12
Ideal dissemination is a function of technical literature type.  In its broader 
aspects, the technical literature encompasses at least the following types of 
documentation: peer-reviewed journal articles; magazine articles; conference 
proceedings; organizational technical reports; books; patents; research 
proposals; program/ project narrative descriptions.  With the exception of 
books, most of the other types of technical literature are becoming available 
electronically.  Since the electronic forms are most amenable to large-scale 
text mining, their dissemination electronically is the focal point of this 
section. 
 
First, the existence of these large electronic databases would be advertised 
widely in the technical community, to make potential users aware of their 
contents, uses, and benefits.  Second, the scope and content of these 
databases would be heavily influenced by two major communities: the 
performer-user community (the researchers who use these databases to 
improve the quality and conduct of their research), and the sponsor-user 
community (those sponsors and evaluators who use these databases to 1) 
track the productivity and impact characteristics of the sponsored research to 
insure the research funds are being spent effectively and efficiently, and 2) 
input the research results into the planning and selecting of future research).  
For journal article and conference proceedings databases especially, these 
user communities would determine the journals to be covered and the record 
fields to be included. 
 
Third, the interfaces with these databases would be standardized, so the 
users would not be required to learn a new query language whenever they 
used a different database.  Fourth, the capabilities of these database search 
engines would incorporate the latest technology available, and would be 
standardized across databases.  These multi-database search capabilities are 
starting to appear in very limited cases (for example, the NSF, NIH, and 
DOE awards databases accessible through one search engine at 
www.osti.gov/fedrnd).  Fifth, many of the costs for accessing these 
databases would be subsidized by the Federal government S&T sponsors, to 
encourage more widespread use.   
 
Sixth, those agency-specific technical databases, such as research proposals 
or research program/ project narrative descriptions, would be shared with 
other government agencies, at a minimum.  For those agency databases that 
do not contain agency-sensitive information, the contents would be shared 
with the public.  Finally, strict quality control would exist.  This includes 
 13
completeness (records would not be accepted by the large databases unless 
they contained all fields); currency (database contents updated periodically, 
obsolete records eliminated); and accountability (contents of each record 
approved by responsible individual). 
 
There are serious deficiencies in the dissemination of all of the above types 
of technical literature, and they severely restrict the information available to 
the decision-makers on S&T development.  First, there is very little 
awareness of the existence of these large electronic databases within the 
technical community.  Relatively few technical people outside the text 
mining community use these databases on a regular basis.  Second, the scope 
and content of the major electronic databases, especially the commercial 
databases, are determined by the database developers, not the users.  The 
organizations that mainly sponsor the S&T (upon which these databases 
draw) have little impact on their contents. 
 
Third, the search engine interfaces are different among the databases, and 
users effectively have to learn a new search engine query language when 
they encounter a new database.  This is particularly difficult for people who 
use the databases sporadically, since they may not be willing to invest the 
time to learn these new languages for every database use.  The breadth of 
interfaces is unnecessary, and serves as a barrier to wider-scale use. 
 
Fourth, the technology capabilities vary strongly across databases.  For 
example, the Medline search engine PubMed allows 10,000 records to be 
downloaded at once from the Web version, whereas the Science Citation 
Index search engine allows only 500 records total to be downloaded from 
any Web-based search.  As another example, some databases contain 
sponsor information, others do not.  Fifth, the costs for accessing many of 
these databases are prohibitive.  High costs effectively filter out competent 
analysts who do not have large grants that include database access costs, or 
do not work for organizations that have contractual access to these 
databases.  Since many of these databases are one-of-a-kind, the developers 
effectively control monopolies, and impose monopoly pricing.  
Paradoxically, data, a strategic resource of the Information Age, has become 
monopolized!   
 
At the same time, use of these large technical databases is becoming more 
critical in the technological component of the war against terrorism.  These 
databases provide linkages among people, institutions, and technologies.  
 14
Disappearance of names or technologies from the technical literature over 
time might have significance for evolution of technologies into negative 
applications.  Integrating individual narrowly-focused S&T thrusts over an 
institution or country could provide insights into total systems capabilities 
being developed, not evident at the single project level.  Tracking the 
evolution of co-authors, or secondary or tertiary links to co-authors, and 
developing a network of associations, could provide a larger picture of 
unhealthy relationships not evident at the individual scientist level.  For 
these, and many other reasons, allowing the technical database strategic 
resource to become monopolized is unacceptable. 
 
Sixth, there is a real problem in the sharing of agency technical databases, 
such as research proposals or program/ project descriptive narratives.  Lack 
of detailed awareness of other agency programs (or proposals) translates 
directly into lack of coordination and effective use of resources.  This could 
result in 1) multiple agencies pursuing similar work, or 2) agencies not being 
aware of prior research activities, and repeating past mistakes, or 3) agencies 
not participating in joint efforts that would fully exploit each agency’s 
strengths. 
 
Finally, quality control of many of these databases leaves much to be 
desired.  Not all records in the journal article/ conference proceedings 
databases, for example, contain Abstracts.  Not all records contain 
Keywords.  Some database providers function as warehouses.  In those 
cases, whatever the database distributor receives from the source is entered 
into the database.  
 
The main dissemination problems identified above stem from the 
multiplicity of database owners/ developers, and a lack of a unified set of 
standards the databases must meet.  It is difficult to envision how a uniform 
set of standards could be implemented and enforced across the myriad 
technical databases that exist today, with the present form of database 
ownership.  The National Institutes of Health (NIH)/ National Library of 
Medicine (NLM) sponsorship of PubMed/ Medline should be the model for 
database ownership, although certainly some of the deficiencies mentioned 
above apply in part to PubMed/ Medline as well. 
 
Due to the strategic resource nature of the technical databases, especially in 
their potential relationship to the war on terrorism in particular and national 
defense in general, they should be transferred to specific Federal agencies 
 15
for development and maintenance.  Funds would be added to these agencies’ 
budgets for this purpose.  For example, NIH/ NLM manage PubMed/ 
Medline, which is appropriate considering their mission.  The National 
Science Foundation (NSF) could manage the basic/ early applied research 
database, and National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) could 
manage the late applied/ technology development/ engineering database.  
The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) could manage the 
Patent database, as is presently the case, but it would have to be upgraded 
substantially to support large volume patent analyses. 
 
While these databases are presently separated, and proposed as separated 
above, there are many cases where linkages among databases would be 
valuable.  If all the databases were to contain references, this would be one 
source of valuable linkages, especially for studying the problem of 
conversion of science to technology.  Although separate, these databases do 
have some overlap.  For example, the two databases SCI and Medline share 
common medical journals, and SCI and EC share common engineering 
science journals.  When quantitative studies of technical categories are being 
performed for specific literatures, duplication of journals and associated 
double-counting can lead to significant errors.  Perhaps search engines that 
link to multiple databases, and have the capability to eliminate duplicate 
records, would be desirable. 
 
To eliminate the agency ‘stove-piping’ problem (where database sharing is 
less than ideal), a centralized capability that stores, or at least accesses, these 
multiple agency databases would be required.  As an example of one of the 
benefits of this arrangement, all S&T proposals would be accessible by at 
least Federal agency personnel through this centralized process.  There 
would have to be oversight for quality control, perhaps by Office of Science 
and Technology Policy (OSTP), independent of whether the databases are 
supplied to some central facility or whether they are retained by the 
sponsoring agency, with the capability for remote access.  Many 
implementation issues would need to be addressed, to insure protection of 
privacy, proprietary information, classified information, currency of 
material, and cost-sharing. 
 16
 
Conversion of Technical Textual Data to Technical Knowledge 
This step constitutes what is usually perceived as text mining.  It ranges 
from data retrieval to the generating of information by processing, and 
finally to knowledge generation by the integration of information.  
While there is wide-scale belief that this step is almost completely 
automated due to the prevalence of sophisticated text analysis software, 
in reality high quality knowledge generation requires high quality 
human analysts working with high quality analytic processes. 
 
Data Retrieval 
 
The objectives of textual data retrieval, usually known by the misnomer 
‘information retrieval’, are twofold: retrieve all documents of interest in the 
technical literature examined (known as ‘recall’), and retrieve as few non-
relevant documents as possible (precision).  The common wisdom is that a 
tradeoff exists between precision and recall.  However, use of relevance 
feedback approaches, where linguistic patterns are identified in relevant and 
non-relevant documents, and used in an iterative query development process, 
can provide both high precision and high recall.  Ideal textual data retrieval 
consists of high recall with high precision, with minimal human reading of 
documents to judge relevance, minimal human intervention to identify 
patterns, relatively few iterations, and relatively short retrieval times. 
 
The need for Internet search engines that are simple, efficient, and precise 
has spurred much research in textual data retrieval.  As a result, fairly 
sophisticated algorithms exist to provide high quality textual data retrieval.  
Many of these methods have been reported in the proceedings of the annual 
TREC conference (e.g., TREC, 2003), hosted by NIST, and in the major 
journals Information Processing and Management,  Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, and Journal of Information 
Science. 
 
Unfortunately, few people do serious textual data retrieval at all.  
Additionally, the number of people in the technical community who do 
retrieval and use these advanced algorithms, especially within the context of 
advanced retrieval processes, is miniscule.  The author did a review of 
biomedical literature search techniques (actually used and reported by 
researchers in the literature) a few years ago, as part of a large study on 
 17
biomedical information retrieval (Kostoff, 2001b).  Most of the research 
articles examined, even those in which state-of-the-art literature reviews 
were conducted, reported very simplistic queries, consisting of very few 
terms, and not imbedded within any type of sophisticated retrieval process.  
There is a major gap between what retrieval technology has to offer, and 
what is used by the technical community in practice. 
 
Two major steps are needed to improve retrieval: encourage researchers and 
other S&T users to do electronic textual data retrieval more often, and train 
them in the latest software and retrieval processes.  Some government 
agencies mandate the former as a required step before initiation of research, 
but these mandates are rarely enforced.  The mandates need to be extended 
across all agencies, and seriously enforced.  The latter retrieval training 
should be provided to all S&T personnel, both performers and sponsors, 
with training updated and refreshed periodically. 
 
Data Processing – Information Generation 
 
The core of textual data processing consists of bibliometrics and 
computational linguistics.  Bibliometrics is applicable to databases with 
large numbers of records, each of which has attributes such as author, 
address, source, references, etc.  Evaluative bibliometrics (Narin, 1976; 
Garfield, 1985; Schubert et al, 1987) uses counts of patents, publications, 
citations, and other potentially informative items to develop science and 
technology performance indicators.  Its validity is based on the following 
premises: counts of patents and papers are a valid indicator of R&D activity 
in the subject area of those patents or papers; the number of times those 
patents or papers are cited in subsequent patents or papers is a valid indicator 
of the importance or impact of the cited patent or paper; and, the citations 
from papers to papers, from patents to patents, from papers to patents, and 
from patents to papers are an indicator of the intellectual linkages between 
the organizations that are producing the patents and papers, and knowledge 
linkages between the subject areas (Narin et al, 1994). 
 
Ideally, all databases containing these types of records would include 
populated fields for all these attributes.  The attribute entries would be 
standardized, such that attribute values that are identical in reality would be 
represented as identical in the database.  In particular, there would be a 
unique representation for each unique author, even multiple authors with the 
same name.  Different references for the same journal would be converted to 
 18
one standardized representation.  Different representations of the same 
organizational address would be converted to one standardized 
representation.  For databases of science and technology articles, references 
would be represented with the same level of detail as the articles themselves. 
 
Citation-Assisted Background (CAB) is a bibliometrics-based systematic 
approach to identifying the seminal papers in a technical discipline (Kostoff 
and Shlesinger, 2004c).  After the modern literature in a technical discipline 
has been retrieved, all the references are extracted, and the most highly-cited 
references in different time periods are identified.  The thrusts of, and links 
among, these references are described, to generate either the Background 
section of a research paper or a literature review/ survey.  The identification 
of seminal papers reflects the collective viewpoint of the larger technical 
community, not the experiences or biases of a few individuals. 
 
Ideally, CAB would be sufficient to identify all the seminal documents in a 
discipline.  To insure adequate representation from the major sub-
disciplines, the retrieved literature would be clustered, and CAB would be 
applied to each cluster as well as to the total literature.  Additionally, the 
highly-cited documents would themselves be clustered, to help structure/ 
categorize the Background section/ literature review document. 
 
S&T computational linguistics (Mitkov, 2002) is a statistical process for 
quantifying text patterns that underlies the extraction of useful information 
from large volumes of technical text.  It identifies pervasive technical 
themes in large databases from technical phrases that occur frequently.  It 
also identifies relationships among these themes by grouping (clustering) 
these phrases (or their parent documents) on the basis of similarity.  Further, 
it uncovers theme relationships by correlating phrase occurrences and 
subsequently identifying pervasive factors in the database through factor 
analysis.  Ideally, all non-technical clutter would be removed from the 
extracted textual data before the pattern analysis is initiated.  All the 
technical phrases would be selected automatically.   
 
Clustering (Rasmussen, 1992) is a sub-set of computational linguistics, and 
groups similar objects.  It has two major types: concept and document.  
Concept clustering (Kostoff et al, 2002b) groups words/ phrases to form 
thematic categories and taxonomies.  Document clustering (Steinbach et al, 
2000; Willet, 1988) groups the documents that contain these words/ phrases 
to form categories and taxonomies as well.  The main advantage of 
 19
document clustering is that the number of documents in each category is 
identified, providing some indication of the levels of effort/ emphasis in 
each technical category.  If the analyst is interested in assessing adequacy or 
deficiency of effort in each category, then the allocation of documents across 
categories (from which other attributes, such as funding, can be derived) 
provides an excellent starting point for such computations. 
 
Ideal clustering removes trivial words and phrases automatically, such that 
grouping can occur based on technical text similarities, rather than on non-
technical concepts.  It assigns single items to multiple clusters where 
appropriate, such that a multi-theme text is represented in all relevant 
technical clusters.  Ideal clustering does not require exact word matching for 
grouping, but allows similar concepts to be combined.  It provides 
hierarchical taxonomies as well as flat taxonomies, since homogeneous 
databases (e.g., single technologies with complementary sub-technologies) 
are amenable to hierarchical taxonomies whereas heterogeneous databases 
(e.g., multiple disparate technologies) are more amenable to flat taxonomies.  
Finally, ideal clustering provides category attributes (e.g., funding, 
organizations, etc) at all hierarchical levels.   
 
Factor analysis (Jackson, 1991) aims to reduce the number of variables in a 
system, and to detect structure in the relationships among variables.  Inter-
variable correlations are computed, and highly correlated groups (factors) 
are identified.  The relationships of these variables to the resultant factors are 
displayed clearly in the factor matrix, whose rows are variables and columns 
are factors. 
 
Ideally, the number of factors would be selected automatically.  The phrases 
input to the factor analysis would be conflated automatically, and different 
phrases reflecting the same concept would be conflated automatically as 
well.  An algorithm would generate a hierarchical tree reflecting a 
hierarchical taxonomy whose categories are the aggregated factors. 
 
Citation Mining (Kostoff et al, 2001a) and Reference Mining are two 
specific examples of the more generic trans-citation mining, where analysis 
done on one side of the citation boundary can yield information about the 
other side.  In Citation Mining, it is desired to identify characteristics about 
the users of research, or more specifically, the sub-set of users who cite the 
research of interest.  The documents output by a research unit (e.g., a person, 
research group, organization, nation, discipline) are examined, and the 
 20
documents that cite them are retrieved.  These retrieved citing documents are 
text mined, and the characteristics of the citing documents are related to 
those of the cited documents.  For Reference Mining, substitute ‘reference’ 
for ‘citation’. 
 
Since Citation Mining is text mining applied to citations, the ideal conditions 
for Citation Mining correlate with those for text mining listed in the previous 
sections.  In addition, multiple generations of citations (i.e., Citation Mining 
of citations) would be desired for research impact studies, and these multiple 
generations would be easily retrievable in the ideal situation. 
 
Literature-Based Discovery (LBD) is a method of generating new 
knowledge and discovery based on literature analysis alone (Swanson, 1986; 
Hearst, 1999; Kostoff, 2003b).  The end result is hypotheses, to be tested by 
further experiment.  From one perspective, LBD is the fourth branch of 
research, following theory, experiment, and computer data modeling. 
 
The leading demonstrated LBD approach (Swanson and Smalheiser, 1997) 
is based on the premise that specialization of today’s researchers prevents 
the interdisciplinary knowledge that many problems require for solution.  
This LBD approach links these disjoint literatures (through intermediate 
literatures directly linked to each) to identify concepts in one discipline that 
could be of value to solving problems in other disciplines.  As an example of 
how this specific LBD approach works, consider its first published example, 
the treatment of Raynaud’s Disease (Swanson, 1986).  Papers addressing 
Raynaud’s Disease, otherwise called the Raynaud’s Disease (RD) literature, 
were retrieved from a medical database.  Major themes from the RD 
literature, such as blood viscosity (BV), were extracted by text mining, and 
examined further.  The BV literature was then retrieved, and its major 
themes were examined.  Those themes in the BV literature present in the RD 
literature were eliminated, and the remaining themes were considered as 
candidates for discovery.  Fish Oil and Eicosapentanoic Acid were viewed 
as the most promising, and published in the literature.  Subsequent lab 
experiments and clinical tests verified the hypothesis. 
 
Ideally, the major LBD themes would be extracted automatically.  An 
algorithm would be available to identify the most promising of these themes.  
In the subsequent retrieved literatures, the important concepts would be 
identified, and those concepts (not only words or phrases) that are disjoint 
from the originating literature, and are thus candidates for discovery, would 
 21
be identified.  An algorithm would be available for prioritizing the potential 
candidates in terms of importance.   
 
Asymmetry detection identifies asymmetries that are unexpected, by  
extracting patterns from text, and evaluating them for symmetry (Goldman 
et al, 1999).  For example, a recent paper detected bilateral asymmetries of 
cancer incidence in human organs from text mining statistics of large 
numbers of published narratives in the Medline database (Kostoff, 2003e).  
These asymmetries would not ordinarily be expected.  In the above paper, 
asymmetries were detected in such terms as left lung carcinoma vs. right 
lung carcinoma, or left kidney carcinoma vs. right kidney carcinoma, and 
were validated against actual patient incidence data. 
 
Ideally, an algorithm would be available to identify such asymmetries.  
Additionally, asymmetries could be detected for different levels of detail 
(e.g., left vs. right lung cancer, left lower lobe vs. right lower lobe lung 
cancer, etc). 
 
In actual practice, many of the problems that impact bibliometrics stem from 
the existence of multiple databases developed by multiple organizations with 
no standardizing requirements.  In any database, only selected attributes are 
represented, and the attributes differ for different databases.  For any 
attribute, not all records will be populated, and the attribute formats will 
differ across databases.   
 
A serious problem is the lack of ability of any databases to distinguish 
among different authors with the same name.  For bibliometrics studies of 
large databases, this can lead to substantial occurrence frequency 
inaccuracies with respect to common names.  Even in the same database, the 
same organization and organizational unit are referenced differently by 
different authors, reducing the actual occurrence frequencies of the 
organization. 
 
In actual computational linguistics, perhaps the two major problems are the 
large amount of clutter (context-dependent trivial phrases, and the difficulty 
in removing them without removing important technical phrases) and the 
different textual representations of the same concept.  Clustering in 
particular is seriously impacted by large clutter, and clusters can be driven 
by the clutter rather than the high technical content phrases.   
 
 22
In most clustering algorithms, one record or one phrase is assigned to one 
cluster.  For multi-theme records, the other themes are then effectively 
disregarded.  Finally, the different textual representations of the same 
concept (mentioned above) lead to fragmented clusters, except in some 
isolated cases where a thesaurus can be used to standardize representations.  
 
In actual factor analysis, selection of the number of factors to analyze is not 
straight-forward.  Multiple approaches exist (e.g., Scree Plots (Cattell, 
1966), eigenvalue thresholds (Kaiser, 1960)), and each can give radically 
different values for numbers of clusters.  Phrase conflation (combining 
words/ phrases with same stems), a context-dependent phenomenon 
(Kostoff, 2003d), is usually performed with context-independent stemming 
algorithms (Porter, 1980), and usually requires manual supplementation for 
conflating acronyms and synonyms.  Finally, mapping from factors to a 
hierarchical taxonomy is usually a manual process (Kostoff, 2002b). 
 
Citation-Assisted Background is a recently-developed process (Kostoff and 
Shlesinger, 2004c), and so far has identified seminal papers based on 
citations from the total retrieved database as a unit.  In theory, it is possible 
that some sub-themes could be under-represented in seminal documents 
unless citations from each cluster were assessed.  Actual Citation Mining has 
the same limitations as those listed for text mining above.  Additionally, 
selecting generations of citations (e.g., citations of cited papers, citations of 
citations of cited papers, etc) with the available databases and search engines 
is a manually intensive process, and can very rapidly lead to selection of 
overwhelming and infeasible numbers of documents. 
 
The main limitations with Literature-Based Discovery are the large numbers 
of potentially-related themes, and the much larger number of candidate 
discovery concepts possible from each theme.  For all practical purposes, 
these candidate discovery concepts must be sifted and prioritized manually.  
Finally, while Asymmetry Detection may have reasonable accuracy at high-
level relatively standard representations (e.g., left vs. right, high vs. low), 
accuracy drops sharply at more detailed levels of representation because of 
the different ways in which concepts are represented in text (e.g., left lower 
lung, lower left lung, left lower lobe, etc).  
 
The first and foremost recommendation for improving information 
generation is that the data deficiencies identified in the previous sections 
must be addressed.  Second, improved techniques for removing clutter in a 
 23
context-dependent manner must be developed.  Third, clustering algorithms 
need to be improved to allow objects to be placed in multiple clusters, and to 
allow different textual representations of the same concept to be clustered 
together. 
 
Information-Integration-Knowledge Generation 
 
Evaluative bibliometrics can be used: (i) to identify the infrastructure 
(authors, journals, institutions) of a technical domain (Kostoff et al, 2000a, 
2004b); (ii) to identify experts for innovation-enhancing technical 
workshops and review panels; (iii) to develop site visitation strategies for 
assessment of prolific organizations globally; (iv) to identify impacts 
(literature citations) of individuals, research units, organizations, and 
countries (Kostoff et al, 2000b, 2004a), and; (v) to identify the seminal 
documents underlying a technical discipline (Kostoff and Shlesinger, 
2004c), based on the larger community’s perception of the importance of 
these documents. 
 
Computational linguistics (including its sub-categories described above) can 
be used for: (i) enhancing information retrieval and increasing awareness of 
the global technical literature (Kostoff et al, 1997; Greengrass, 1997; TREC, 
2003); (ii) discovery and innovation based on merging common linkages 
among very disparate literatures (Swanson, 1986; Swanson, 1997; Kostoff, 
2003b; Gordon, 1998); (iii) uncovering unexpected asymmetries in the 
technical literature (Goldman et al, 1999; Kostoff, 2003e); (iv) estimating 
global levels of effort in S&T sub-disciplines (Kostoff et al, 2000b;  2004b; 
Viator, 2001); (v) helping authors to increase their citation statistics by 
improving access to their published papers, which may help journals 
increase their Impact Factors (Kostoff et al, 2004a, 2004b); and (vi) tracking 
research impacts across time and applications areas (Davidse, 1997; Kostoff 
et al, 2001a). 
 
Applications of evaluative bibliometrics are limited by the data quality 
deficiencies described previously, especially the absence of attribute quality 
standards and the absence of citation data in most large databases.  To 
expand the bibliometrics applications, the underlying data deficiencies must 
be eliminated. 
 
Applications of the computational linguistics results (including those of all 
the computational linguistics sub-categories described above) are limited by 
 24
data deficiencies described previously, and the lack of processes for 
interpreting and exploiting clustering results.  Most of the research effort in 
this area has been on algorithm development, as opposed to process 
development.  As a result, excellent clustering tools have been developed, 
without the parallel understanding of how they should be integrated into the 
larger evaluation context. 
 
The most challenging of the computational linguistics applications, as well 
as the application with the highest potential payoff, is Literature-Based 
Discovery.  Unfortunately, it has received almost negligible support, and has 
effectively fallen between the cracks.  It is extremely difficult to do, since 
systematic processes have not yet been validated.  It is one of the few truly 
inter-disciplinary research areas, and suffers from the dis-incentives 
common to inter-disciplinary research (difficult to obtain funding, difficult 
to publish results, difficult to gain external awards).  Its need for complex 
process development runs counter to the present day mainline information 
technology community trend of developing algorithms for licensing and 
sale. 
 
Three major steps are required to improve integration.  First, address the 
data deficiencies, as described previously.  In parallel, expand the access to 
databases, especially other government databases, to expand the breadth of 
applications.  Second, expend more resources to support clustering analytical 
process development, to bring tool development and process development 
into balance.  Third, initiate a serious national program on Literature-Based 
Discovery. 
Integration of Technical Knowledge into the S&T Development Cycle 
S&T development can be divided into a number of phases, including S&T 
planning, identification and selection of new S&T, execution and review of 
S&T, and technology transition/ transfer.  Each of these phases requires 
knowledge of global S&T activity to maximally accelerate the development 
of S&T.  Some uses of this knowledge in each of the development phases 
are discussed here. 
 
Planning is the cornerstone of S&T development, and is perhaps the phase 
that makes/ could make optimal use of global S&T knowledge.  Many 
organizations include visitation of S&T institutions globally (global site 
visitations) as part of their technology assessment function.  Bibliometrics is 
useful for planning a global site visitation strategy, in order to insure that the 
 25
critical producers and institutions are examined.  Bibliometrics identifies the 
prolific producers and centers of excellence, and many other infrastructure 
attributes of interest.  Bibliometrics is also helpful for identifying expert 
participants for advisory planning panels, and experts for planning 
workshops as well. 
 
Clustering and taxonomy generation are useful for categorizing outputs of a 
technical discipline globally, and then assessing the adequacy and 
deficiencies of S&T investments in each category (Kostoff et al, 2000b).  
Clustering and taxonomy generation have also been used by the author to 
categorize a technical discipline’s literature into thematic groups, and 
provide the categorized literature as background material for panels and 
workshops. 
 
Citation-Assisted Background (CAB) is ideal for structuring a 
comprehensive literature review before initiation of a project, in the planning 
stage.  Because it shows the many roots that feed a discipline, it has the 
potential for providing insights to new research directions. 
 
Additionally, CAB has the potential for Literature-Based Discovery.  The 
leading LBD approach today (Swanson and Smalheiser, 1997) uses 
literatures that are indirectly related to a primary literature through 
intermediate directly-related literatures to search for discovery.  In the 
previous Raynaud’s Disease example shown for LBD, the Blood Viscosity 
literature was directly related to both the Raynaud’s Disease literature and 
the Fish Oil literature, and was used to link the indirectly related Fish Oil 
and Raynaud’s Disease literatures.  These can be viewed as spatially related 
concepts, since the linkage is through co-occurrence of text elements in the 
retrieved literatures.   
 
If the CAB process were applied to the clusters of the retrieved literature, 
then the cited literatures would become analogous to the indirectly related 
literatures above.  Thus, if one of the clusters of the Raynaud’s Disease 
literature focused on Blood Viscosity, its citations would constitute a 
literature (or literatures) indirectly related to the Raynaud’s Disease 
literature.  If Fish Oil were a sub-set of the cited literature, then the 
discovery would be through the citation route rather than the co-occurrence 
route.  The CAB LBD approach is based on temporally-related concepts  
(citations reflect previous time), as opposed to the present mainline 
approach’s being based on spatially-related concepts.  Eventual integration 
 26
of the two approaches could search for discovery across space and time, and 
expand the discovery space substantially. 
 
Literature-Based Discovery can identify the multiple disciplines required to 
solve complex problems, as well as identifying the experts in those 
disciplines.  It has the potential for identifying new research directions and 
promising opportunities (Swanson, 1986; Swanson and Smalheiser, 1997), 
as well as for structuring the agenda for innovation workshops and 
identifying workshop participants (Kostoff, 2003b).   
 
Identifying and selecting the S&T to be funded, especially for  basic 
research, is a most critical activity.  Most agencies use independent panels or 
mail reviewers, and bibliometrics is extremely useful for identifying experts 
to fill these roles.  Literature-Based Discovery can be used, in some cases, to 
solve specific problems, and to propose hypotheses that specific research 
programs will address. 
 
In the execution, and particularly the review, phases (See Appendix for an 
illustration of text mining support of S&T review processes), placing 
periodic progress review results in the context of global S&T development is 
a key to insuring cutting-edge research.  Bibliometrics aids in selecting the 
review experts, and in providing metrics to gauge the productivity and 
impact of the research.  Information retrieval and clustering provide the 
global literature context and levels of effort. 
 
Transition/transfer is perhaps the most difficult phase of the process, since it 
involves bridging the gap between two communities, research and advanced 
development.  There are two major components of the technology transition/ 
transfer process.  The first is the potential user becoming aware of the S&T, 
and the second is the potential user taking specific steps to develop further/ 
implement the S&T.  While knowledge management is limited in its 
contribution to the second component, it has the potential for major 
contributions to the first component.  Ideally, transition planning is initiated 
at the start of the research process, potential users/ customers are identified, 
and these users/ customers are made active participants of advisory panels 
for the research project.  Information retrieval, and especially Citation 
Mining, plays important roles in identifying potential customers for the 
research. 
 
 27
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 1 
 
Cattell, R.B.  (1966). The Scree Test for the number of factors.  
Multivariate Behavioral Research.  1.  245 –276. 
Davidse RJ, Van Raan AFJ.  (1997).  Out of particles: impact of CERN, 
DESY, and SLAC research to fields other than physics. Scientometrics.    
40:2 . 171-193. 
Garfield E.  (1985).  History of citation indexes for chemistry - a brief 
review.  JCICS.  25(3).  170-174. 
Goldman JA, Chu, WW, Parker, DS, Goldman, RM.  (1999).  Term 
domain distribution analysis: a data mining tool for text databases.  
Methods of Information in Medicine.  38.  96-101. 
Gordon MD, Dumais S.  (1998).  Using latent semantic indexing for 
literature based discovery.  Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science.  49 (8): 674-685. 
Greengrass E.  (1997).  Information retrieval: An overview.  National 
Security Agency. TR-R52-02-96. 
Hartley, J. and Kostoff, R. N.  (2003).  How useful are ‘key words’ in 
scientific journals?”  Journal of Information Science.  29:5.  433-438.  
October. 
Haynes, R.B., Mulrow, C. D., Huth, E. J., et al, (1990).  More informative 
abstracts revisited. Ann. Intern. Med. 113: 69-76 
Hearst MA.  (1999).  Untangling text data mining.  Proceedings of ACL 
99, the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, University of Maryland, June 20-26. 
Jackson, J. E.  (1991).  A users guide to principal components.  Wiley, New 
York, p. 569.   
Kaiser, H.F.  (1960).  The application of electronic computers to factor 
analysis.  Educational and psychological measurement.  20: 141-151. 
Kostoff RN, Eberhart HJ, Toothman DR.  (1997).  Database Tomography 
for information retrieval.  Journal of Information Science.  23:4. 
Kostoff RN, Braun T, Schubert A, Toothman DR, and Humenik JA.  
(2000a).   Fullerene roadmaps using bibliometrics and Database 
Tomography.  Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science.  
40(1): 19-39. 
Kostoff, R. N., Green, K. A., Toothman, D. R., and Humenik, J.  (2000b).  
Database tomography applied to an aircraft science and technology 
investment strategy".  Journal of Aircraft, 37:4.  727-730.  July-August. 
Kostoff RN, Del Rio JA, García EO, Ramírez AM, Humenik JA. (2001a).  
Citation mining: integrating text mining and bibliometrics for research 
 28
user profiling. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
and Technology.  52:13.  1148-1156. 
Kostoff, R. N.  (2001b).  The extraction of useful information from the 
biomedical literature”. Academic Medicine.  76:12.  December. 
Kostoff, R. N., and Schaller, R. R.   (2001c).  Science and technology 
roadmaps.  IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.  48:2.  132-
143.  May. 
Kostoff, R. N., and Hartley J.  (2002a).  Structured abstracts for technical 
journals.  Journal of Information Science.  28:3.  257-261. 
Kostoff, R. N., Tshiteya, R., Pfeil, K. M., and Humenik, J. A.  (2002b).    
Electrochemical power source roadmaps using bibliometrics and database 
tomography.   Journal of Power Sources.  110:1.  163-176. 
Kostoff, R. N.  (2003a).  Text mining for global technology watch.  In 
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science,  Second Edition.  
Drake, M., Ed.  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  New York, NY.  Vol. 4.  2789-2799. 
Kostoff RN.   (2003b).  Stimulating innovation.  International Handbook 
of Innovation. Larisa V. Shavinina (ed.).  Elsevier Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, Oxford, UK. 
Kostoff, R. N., and Hartley, J.  (2003c).  “Science and technology text 
mining: structured papers”. DTIC Technical Report Number 
ADA417220. 
Kostoff, R. N.  (2003d).  The practice and malpractice of stemming.  
JASIST.  54:10.  984-985.  August. 
Kostoff, RN.  (2003e).  Bilateral asymmetry prediction.  Medical 
Hypotheses.  61:2.  265-266. 
Kostoff RN, Shlesinger M, Malpohl G.  (2004a).  Fractals roadmaps using 
bibliometrics and database tomography.   Fractals.   12:1.  March. 
Kostoff RN, Shlesinger M, Tshiteya R.  (2004b).  Nonlinear dynamics 
roadmaps using bibliometrics and Database Tomography.  International 
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos.  14:1.  61-92. 
Kostoff, RN. and Shlesinger, MF(2004c).  CAB – Citation-assisted 
background.  Scientometrics.  In Press. 
Kostoff, RN., Karpouzian, G., and Malpohl, G.  (2004d).  Abrupt wing 
stall roadmaps using database tomography and bibliometrics".  Journal of 
Aircraft.  In Press. 
Mitkov, R.  (2002).  The Oxford handbook of computational linguistics.  
Mitkov, R. (ed).  Oxford University Press.  UK. 
Narin F,  Olivastro D,  Stevens KA.  (1994).  Bibliometrics theory, 
practice and problems.  Evaluation Review.  18(1).  65-76. 
 29
Narin F.  (1976).  Evaluative bibliometrics: the use of publication and 
citation analysis in the evaluation of scientific activity (monograph).  NSF 
C-637.  National Science Foundation.  Contract NSF C-627.  NTIS 
Accession No. PB252339/AS.   
Porter, M.F.  (1980).  An algorithm for suffix stripping.  Program, 14(3). 
130-137. 
Rasmussen E.  (1992).  Clustering algorithms.  In W. B. Frakes and R. 
Baeza-Yates (eds.).   Information Retrieval Data Structures and 
Algorithms.  Prentice Hall, N. J. 
Schubert A, Glanzel W, Braun T.  (1987).  Subject field characteristic 
citation scores and scales for assessing research performance.  
Scientometrics.  12 (5-6): 267-291. 
Steinbach M, Karypis G, Kumar V.  (2000).  A comparison of document 
clustering techniques.  Technical Report #00--034. 2000.  Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering.  University of Minnesota. 
Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR.  (1997).  An interactive system for finding 
complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery. Artificial 
Intelligence, 91:2. 183-203. 
Swanson DR.  (1986).  Fish oil, Raynauds Syndrome, and undiscovered 
public knowledge.  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.  .30: (1).  7-18. 
TREC  (2003).  (Text Retrieval Conference), Home Page, 
http://trec.nist.gov/. 
Viator JA, Pestorius FM.  (2001).  Investigating trends in acoustics research 
from 1970-1999.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.  109 (5): 
1779-1783 Part 1. 
Willet P.  (1988).  Recent trends in hierarchical document clustering: A 
critical review. Information Processing and Management.   24:577-597.   
 
APPENDIX: ILLUSTRATION OF TEXT MINING TO SUPPORT 
S&T PROGRAM REVIEW 
 
In an S&T program review, three main questions are asked: Is the S&T 
program doing the right job? Is the S&T program doing the job right? Is the 
S&T program performing? 
 
How can text mining help generate answers to each of these questions? 
Is the S&T program doing the right job? 
In order of precedence, this is the first issue to address.  It focuses on the 
adequacy of the existing S&T investment strategy and associated roadmaps.  
 30
It starts with a vision, or description of the operational scenario.  This is 
followed by an elucidation of the capabilities required in order for the vision 
to be implemented.  The capabilities are quantified to provide the 
development targets.  A roadmap of the S&T required to achieve the targets 
is generated, in parallel with the associated (ideal) investment strategy.  This 
strategy consists of the investment allocation, and the rationale that supports 
the allocation. 
 
The investment strategy can also be viewed as consisting of investment 
principles, investment allocations, and the investment rationale.  Again, the 
actual can be compared against the ideal.  What are some of these 
investment principles?  Following are some of the investment principles 
used by the author in S&T investment strategy assessments: 
 
• Is the balance among technical thrust areas appropriate? 
• Is the balance among mission areas appropriate? 
• Is the balance among funding categories (basic research, applied 
research, technology development) appropriate? 
• Is the balance between discretionary and non-discretionary funding 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance between 'technology push' and 'requirements pull' 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance between revolutionary and evolutionary research 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance between technology advancement and demonstration 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance between high risk and low risk research appropriate? 
• Is the balance among short term, intermediate term, and long term 
research appropriate? 
• Is the balance between new projects and continuing projects appropriate? 
• Is the balance among performers (university/ government/ industry) 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance between individual research and joint projects (multi-
department, multi-agency, multi-national, and government-industry) 
appropriate? 
• Is the balance among single discipline, multiple discipline, and 
interdisciplinary research appropriate? 
• Is the balance between large and small projects appropriate? 
 31
• Is the balance among research products (hardware, software, patents, 
presentations, reports, peer-reviewed journal papers) appropriate? 
 
Obviously, additional investment principles are possible, depending on the 
specific review objectives, and review management interests.  Once the 
desired S&T direction has been established, then the existing S&T program 
investment strategy is compared against the ideal investment strategy.  
Deviations of the existing from the ideal are noted, discussed, and corrective 
actions are taken, including personnel and budgetary. 
 
Text mining could be used to support identification of the capabilities 
needed to implement the vision, development of the roadmap components, 
assessment of how well the investment principles are being followed, and 
evaluation of how the actual investment allocations compare with the 
desired investment allocations. 
 
Support Identification of Capabilities 
 
This would use the techniques employed, for example, in an Aircraft 
Investment Strategy study (Kostoff et al, 2000b).  The evaluators would 
gather a number of different requirements documents, perform phrase 
frequency and proximity analyses, and identify technical capabilities to be 
pursued.  The evaluators would then add planning documents, perform 
similar analyses, and identify enabling technologies for those capabilities.   
 
Develop Roadmap Components 
 
A roadmap is a network of technologies linked over space and time, aimed 
at achieving specific goals (Kostoff and Schaller, 2001c).  A prospective 
roadmap is a network of science and technology areas to be developed in 
order to achieve the goals.  Key issues in roadmap development center about 
whether all the blocks have been identified, all the linkages have been 
identified, and how accurate are the linkage strength quantifications. 
 
Block identification comprehensiveness is a measure of how well the 
roadmap developers understand the mixture of technologies required to 
produce the higher level capabilities, and are aware of global S&T 
development.  Advanced information retrieval, and associated clustering, 
can provide the mixture of technologies required to achieve the desired 
 32
capabilities.  Advanced information retrieval can certainly identify relevant 
S&T being developed globally. 
 
Linkage identification is a measure of how well the roadmap developers 
understand the relationships among the roadmap technologies.  Proximity 
and co-occurrence analyses, performed on a database of technology 
narratives, should be able to provide the connections. 
 
Linkage strength quantifications measure how well the roadmap developers 
understand the strength of the relationships.  Again, phrase proximity 
analyses, which provide the co-occurrence frequencies of specific phrases 
(number of times phrase pairs co-occur in the same linguistic domain- e.g., 
paper Abstract), should be able to estimate these relationship strengths. 
 
Assess Adherence to Investment Principles 
 
The combination of clustering and bibliometrics would address the 
relationship between the actual investment allocations, and the ideal.  
Clustering groups documents (or words/ phrases) into categories, and if the 
core documents have associated attributes (funding, performers, 
institutions), then the weighted attributes in each category can be 
determined.  Bibliometrics tend to count semi-structured data (authors, 
institutions, journals, countries) in each category. 
 
Compare Actual Investment Allocations with Desired Investment 
Allocations 
 
This is similar to what was done in the Aircraft investment strategy paper, 
although the far more powerful document clustering techniques developed 
recently (Kostoff et al, 2004d) could be used. 
Is the S&T program doing the job right? 
In order of precedence, this is the second issue to address.  It focuses on the 
accuracy and efficiency of achieving the specified technical target.  It 
evaluates the mechanics of the S&T development approach, and 
incorporates the cost, performance, schedule, and risk aspects of the 
mechanics.  Most reviews concentrate on this component.  Text mining  
could examine all the high frequency phrases, and all the cluster categories/ 
themes.  Then, judgments would be made as to balance (e.g., too much 
theory relative to experiment, insufficient North American contributions, 
 33
etc).  Examination of cluster themes and technical phrases has been done in 
almost every one of the author’s technology text mining studies, has been 
validated with world-class experts in those disciplines, and has been shown 
to be a remarkably accurate indicator of deficiencies in specific 
technologies.   
Is the S&T program performing? 
There are three components of performance: productivity, impact, and 
progress.  Here, text mining can be very helpful, depending on the metrics 
selected.  Bibliometrics can provide information relative to publications, 
patents, and citations, where the publications and patents are productivity 
metrics, and the citations are impact metrics.  Citation Mining, a 
combination of text mining and citation analysis, can provide impacts and 
audience accessed for a research unit.  Progress, in the present context, 
addresses how well a program is meeting its technology readiness levels, or 
milestone targets.  The relation of text mining to progress assessment is 
untested and not clear at this point. 
 34
Section 2.  The Extraction of Useful Information from the BioMedical 
Literature. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “The Extraction of Useful Information from the 
BioMedical Literature”. Academic Medicine.  76:12.  December 2001.)      
 
OVERVIEW 
 
Modern information technology provides the biomedical professional with 
powerful tools and processes for extracting useful information from large 
volumes of text.  Presently, very little use is made of the full capabilities of 
these information technology tools to supplement research and teaching.  
The purpose of this section is to overview these tools and processes, and 
show the diversity of ways they can be applied to enhance the capabilities of 
biomedical professionals.  The information technology terms are defined, 
requirements for high quality information extraction are presented, some 
available techniques for high quality information extraction are described/ 
referenced, and myriad information extraction applications are summarized.  
While substantial benefits from high quality information extraction 
techniques are possible, substantial time and effort, and technical expertise, 
are required to generate a credible high quality product. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Data mining, the extraction of useful information from large volumes of 
data, has become a useful approach for identifying important patterns buried 
in massive data sets.  An important evolving sub-set of data mining is text 
mining, the extraction of useful information from large volumes of text.  
This section will focus on the use of text mining to extract relevant 
information from the biomedical and related literatures.  After the 
components and importance of text mining are described, the section will 
present requirements for high quality information extraction from text, will 
overview/ reference some leading techniques used to extract this 
information, and will then conclude by summarizing diverse applications of 
text mining. 
 
There are three major components of S&T text mining. 
 
1) Information Retrieval 
2) Information Processing 
3) Information Integration   
 35
 
Information retrieval is the selection of documents or text segments from 
source text databases for further processing.  Information processing is the 
application of bibliometric and computational linguistics and clustering 
techniques to the retrieved text to typically provide ordering, classification, 
and quantification to the formerly unstructured material.  Information 
integration combines the computer output with the human cognitive 
processes to produce a greater understanding of the technical areas of 
interest. 
 
High quality text mining applied to the global science and technology (S&T) 
literature can:  
 
1) Enhance the retrieval of information from global S&T databases;  
2) Identify the technology infrastructure (authors, journals, organizations) of 
a technical area;  
3) Discover new technical concepts or new technical relationships from 
related or disparate technical literatures;  
4) Identify and categorize the main technical themes and sub-themes in a 
large body of technical literature;  
5) Identify the relationships between technical themes and infrastructure 
components; 
6) Estimate global levels of emphasis in technical areas or sub-areas; use 
these results as the basis for S&T adequacy or deficiency judgements;  
7) Provide roadmaps of myriad research impacts.  
 
High quality S&T text mining can be a valuable adjunct for the biomedical 
researcher or clinician, in accessing and understanding increasingly larger 
amounts of available biomedical information and supporting S&T from 
other physical and engineering science branches.  However, high quality text 
mining is not an automatic process.  It requires time, effort, and above all, 
the combined use of technical experts in the focal area of interest, in related 
technical areas, and in information technology for maximum effectiveness.  
 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION? 
 
This section shows how the use of modern information technology, 
specifically text mining, can assist the biomedical researcher and clinician in 
accessing and understanding the relevant global S&T literature.  Since 
present-day biomedical research and clinical practice have very high 
 36
technology components, the relevant global S&T literature encompasses not 
only biomedicine, but topics from the physical and engineering sciences as 
well.   
 
For example, advances in biomedical instrumentation require underlying 
advances in materials, electronics, signal processing, mathematical analysis, 
physics, chemistry, energy conversion, radiation sciences, solid and fluid 
mechanics, robotics and micro-technology, and other technologies 
depending on specific applications.  Maximum advances in non-invasive 
medical diagnostics require access to the latest science and engineering 
literature in remote sensing, non-destructive evaluation, signal and image 
processing, pattern recognition, multi-source data fusion, fluid dynamics, 
acoustics, robotics, materials, electronics, and many other disciplines. 
 
This section is aimed primarily at the biomedical researcher and clinician.  
However, it should be of substantial value to anyone involved with 
biomedical S&T, including research managers, evaluators, administrators, 
and sponsors, as well as corporate and national security intelligence analysts 
and biomedical system investors. 
 
WHY IS ACCESSING AND UNDERSTANDING THE GLOBAL 
RELEVANT S&T LITERATURE IMPORTANT? 
 
Science and technology form the core of modern economies and militaries.  
Global S&T expenditures are in the neighborhood of $500-800B annually, 
depending on one’s definition of S&T.  No single organization, or even 
nation, can begin to cover the full spectrum of S&T development required 
for a modern competitive economy or military, due to resource limitations.  
Maximum efficiency in S&T resource expenditures begins with maximum 
exploitation of external S&T resources.  This requires leveraging through 
cooperative S&T planning and development efforts, based on maximal 
awareness of external S&T efforts from overt and covert intelligence efforts. 
 
For the biomedical researcher and clinician, maintaining awareness of the 
most recent research and technology development for practical purposes 
requires knowing what information is available and where it is stored, how 
to access it, and how to process and interpret it for maximal information 
content.  Any lack of global S&T awareness can waste time, people, 
funding, and other resources due to: 
 
 37
1) Pursuing approaches demonstrated to be non-productive 
2) Duplicating previously performed S&T 
3) Not using the latest techniques and instrumentation 
4) Pursuing research in the absence of guidance available from the literature 
5) Making research decisions based on incomplete information 
 
WHY ARE PRESENT INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND 
ANALYSIS APPROACHES INSUFFICIENT? 
 
An ongoing study illuminates the limitations of existing information 
retrieval practices.  As part of a recent assessment of information retrieval 
techniques, I examined many biomedical studies that included literature 
searches.  The Science Citation Index (SCI) Abstracts of these studies 
contained the queries used for the literature surveys.  These queries had the 
following characteristics: 
 
1) The source data came almost exclusively from Medline alone, except for 
those studies whose objective was to survey the Web resources available for 
the target medical issue; 
2) Most of the studies focused on narrowly defined medical problems, with 
little indication offered that supporting or related medical/ technical areas 
were of any interest; 
3) The reported queries contained 3-6 phrases on average; 
4) The phrases were either searcher-generated, or were the indexed terms 
from the Medline Mesh taxonomy.  No evidence was presented that an 
exhaustive search of author-generated terms was performed. 
 
In my experience, queries with the above characteristics result in a deficient 
retrieved information base.  These deficiencies translate into limitations on 
the credibility and quality of study results and subsequent research and 
development (R&D), for the following reasons. 
 
1) Searches that do not access the myriad databases available, and queries 
that do not result in comprehensive retrievals of the information available in 
the databases actually searched, result in only a fraction of the existing 
knowledge being available for study and R&D exploitation. 
2) Searches and queries not designed to a) access literatures directly 
supportive of the target literature and b) access literatures related to the 
target literature by some common or intermediary thread, will not provide 
 38
the insights and discoveries from these other disciplines that often result in 
innovations in the target discipline of primary interest (1).   
3) Queries that are severely restricted in length, that rely in large measure on 
generic indexer-supplied terms, and have not been extensively iterated with 
the author-supplied language in the source database, will be inadequate in 
capturing the myriad ways in which different authors describe the same 
concept.  They will also yield many records that are non-relevant to the main 
technical themes of the study.  
 
In summary, these types of simple limited queries can result in two serious 
problems: a substantial amount of relevant literature is not retrieved, and a 
substantial amount of non-relevant literature is retrieved. As a result, the 
potential user is either overwhelmed with extraneous data, or is uninformed 
about existing valuable information, leading to potential duplication of effort 
and/ or R&D based on incomplete use of existing data.  All the subsequent 
data processing, both human and computerized, cannot compensate for these 
deficiencies in the base data quality.  
 
WHAT IS REQUIRED TO OBTAIN HIGH QUALITY 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND ANALYSIS USING MODERN 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY? 
 
The quality of a text mining study cannot exceed the quality of each of its 
components.  For comprehensive access to the global S&T literature, and 
maximum extraction of useful information from this literature, four primary 
conditions are required. 
 
1) A large fraction of the S&T conducted globally must be documented 
(INFORMATION COMPREHENSIVENESS). 
2) The documentation describing each S&T project must have sufficient 
information content to satisfy the analysis requirements 
(INFORMATION QUALITY). 
3) A large fraction of these documents must be retrieved for analysis 
(INFORMATION RETRIEVAL). 
4) Techniques and protocols must exist for extracting useful information 
from the retrieved documents (INFORMATION EXTRACTION).  
 
WHAT ARE THE ROADBLOCKS TO ACHIEVING HIGH 
QUALITY TEXT MINING/ INFORMATION RETRIEVAL OF THE 
GLOBAL S&T LITERATURE? 
 39
 
The approaches presently used by the majority of the technical community 
to address all four of these requirements have serious deficiencies.   
 
1) Information Comprehensiveness is limited because there are many more 
disincentives than incentives for publishing S&T results (2), and therefore 
only a very modest fraction of S&T performed ever gets documented.  Of 
the performed S&T that is documented, only a very modest fraction is 
included in the major databases.  The contents of these knowledge 
repositories are determined by the database developers, not the S&T 
sponsors or the potential database users.   Of the documented S&T in the 
major databases, only a very modest fraction is realistically accessible by the 
users.  The databases are expensive to access, not very many people know of 
their existence, the interface formats are not standardized, and many of the 
search engines are not user-friendly.  
 
2) Information Quality is limited because uniform guidelines do not exist for 
contents of the major text fields in database records (Abstracts, Titles, 
Keywords, Descriptors), and because of logic, clarity, and stylistic writing 
differences.  The biomedical community has some advantage over the non-
medical technical community in this area, since many medical journals 
require the use of Structured Abstracts (3).  Compatibility among the 
contents of all record fields is not yet a requirement, and as our studies have 
shown (4), can lead to different perspectives of a technical topic depending 
on which record field is analyzed. 
 
3) Information Retrieval is limited because time, cost, technical expertise, 
and substantial detailed technical analyses are required to retrieve the full 
scope of related records in a comprehensive and high relevance fraction 
process.  Because much of the information technology community's focus is 
on selling search engine software, and automating the information retrieval 
process, they bypass the 'elbow grease' component required to get 
comprehensive and high signal-to-noise retrieval.  
 
Our group has been developing information retrieval techniques using an 
iterative relevance feedback approach.  The source database queries result in 
retrieval of very comprehensive source database records that encompass 
direct and supporting literatures with very high ratios of desired/ undesired 
records.  Some of the queries consist of hundreds of terms (4), in stark 
contrast to the handful of phrases used in typical information retrieval.  In 
 40
many cases, large queries are necessary to achieve the retrieval 
comprehensiveness and ‘signal-to-noise’ ratio required.  Queries of a 
specific size are not a query development target of our group; rather, the 
query development process produces a query of sufficient magnitude to 
achieve the target objectives of comprehensiveness and high relevance ratio.  
 
In each iterative step of our information retrieval process (5), a sample group 
of records retrieved with a previously modified query is classified into two 
categories: relevant to the central theme of interest, and non-relevant. 
Bibliometric and linguistic patterns of each category of the sampled records 
are examined, to generate terms that can be used to modify the query in 
order to increase relevant records (addition terms) and decrease non-relevant 
records (negation terms). The underlying assumption is that records in the 
source database that have the same linguistic patterns as the relevant records 
from the sample will have a high probability of being relevant, and records 
in the source database having the same linguistic patterns as the non-relevant 
records from the sample will also be non-relevant.  Selection of such terms 
from the many thousands of candidate terms is a daunting task, and is 
extremely complex and time consuming. 
 
To expand the relevant records retrieved, a phrase from the sample records 
should be added to the query if it: 
 
1) appears predominately in the relevant record category; 
2) has a high marginal utility (will retrieve a large ratio of relevant to non-
relevant records) based on the sample; 
3) has reasons for its appearance in the relevant records that are understood 
well; and 
4) IS PROJECTED TO RETRIEVE ADDITIONAL RECORDS FROM 
THE SOURCE DATABASE (E.G., SCI) MAINLY RELEVANT TO THE 
SCOPE OF THE STUDY. 
 
For multi-discipline source databases, application of these conditions can be 
complex.  A recent example from the query development in a text mining 
study on the discipline of text mining illustrates this point.  The phrase IR 
(an abbreviation for ‘information retrieval’ used in many SCI Abstracts) was 
characteristic of predominantly relevant sample records, had a very high 
absolute frequency of occurrence in the sample, and had a high marginal 
utility based on the sample. However, it was not 'projected to retrieve 
additional records from the source database mainly relevant to the scope of 
 41
the study'.  A test query of IR in the SCI source database showed that it 
occurred in 65740 records dating back to 1973.  Examination of only the 
first thirty of these records showed that IR is used in science and technology 
as an abbreviation for InfraRed (physics), Immuno-Reactivity (biology), 
Ischemia-Reperfusion (medicine), current(I) x resistance(R) (electronics), 
and Isovolume Relaxation (medical imaging).  IR occurs as an abbreviation 
for information retrieval in probably one percent of the total records 
retrieved containing IR, or less.  As a result, the phrase IR was not selected 
as a stand-alone query modification candidate. 
 
Consider the implications of this real-world example.  Assume a query 
consists of 200 terms.  Assume 199 of these terms are selected correctly, 
according to the guidelines above.  If the 200th term were like IR above, then 
the query developer would have been swamped with an overwhelming 
deluge of unrelated records.  ONE MISTAKE IN QUERY SELECTION 
JUDGEMENT can be fatal for a high signal-to-noise product. 
 
Thus, the relation of the candidate query term to the objectives of the study, 
and to the contents and scope of the total records in the full source database 
(i.e., all the records in the SCI, not just those retrieved by the test query), 
must be considered in query term selection. The quality of this selection 
procedure will depend upon the expert(s)' understanding of both the scope of 
the study and the different possible meanings of the candidate query term 
across many different areas of R&D.  This strong dependence of the query 
term selection process on the overall study context and scope makes the 
'automatic' query term selection processes reported in the published 
literature very suspect. 
 
A fully credible analysis requires expert domain knowledge on the part of 
the analyst(s).  In addition, because any modern comprehensive information 
retrieval technique extracts information from many diverse literatures 
relative to a central problem of interest, experts having domain knowledge 
representing a diversity of backgrounds are required to exploit and interpret 
this multi-discipline information most efficiently.    
 
4)  Information Extraction is limited because the automated phrase 
extraction algorithms, required to convert the free text to phrases and 
frequencies of occurrence as a necessary first step in the text mining process, 
leave much to be desired.  This is especially true for S&T free text, which 
the computer views as essentially a foreign language due to the extensive 
 42
use of technical jargon.  Both a lexicon and technical experts from many 
diverse disciplines are required for credible information extraction. There is 
a widespread belief in the technical, and perhaps in the intelligence, 
communities that the combination of high speed computers with large 
memories, supported by intelligent agents and other artificial intelligence 
spin-offs, can produce automated/ semi-automated information extraction 
from large technical databases.   This is not supported by experience, and 
continual combing of the technical literature shows no basis for this belief. 
 
While the text mining processes and software structure the text information 
to aid the quality of the analysis, they do not bypass the requirement for in-
depth rigor and thought characteristic of all serious technical investigations. 
As in the information retrieval step, detailed analysis of tens of thousands of 
phrases from many diverse technical literatures are required to integrate the 
data extracted into useful information.   Again, in parallel with the 
information retrieval step, because the information technology community's 
focus is on selling information extraction software, and automating this 
information extraction process, they bypass the 'elbow grease' component 
required to get credible and useful results. 
 
WHAT ARE SOME OF THE APPROACHES AVAILABLE TO 
OVERCOME THESE ROADBLOCKS? 
 
1) Information Retrieval 
S&T text mining can be used to enhance the retrieval of information from 
global S&T databases (4-7).  Our group used all the S&T text mining 
components listed above to extract very comprehensive and highly relevant 
S&T information from global/ national semi-structured (free and structured 
text) S&T databases such as: 
 
1a-Science Citation Index (compendium of 5600 journals addressing basic 
research) 
1b-Engineering Compendex (compendium of over 5000 journals addressing 
applied research and technology development) 
1c-MEDLINE (journal medical literature covering basic and applied 
research) 
1d-National Technical Information Service (reports from U. S. government-
sponsored basic research to advanced development) 
1e-INSPEC (journal and conference proceedings covering basic research to 
technology development in physics, electronics, computing) 
 43
1f-RADIUS (narratives of U. S. government agency R&D programs) 
1g-IBM and USPTO Patents (patent database) 
 
2) Infrastructure Identification 
S&T text mining can be used to identify the technology infrastructure 
(authors, journals, organizations) of a technical area (4-7).  This 
infrastructure includes the authors (if known), journals, performing 
organizations, and countries.  Such information is valuable for identifying 
experts for technical workshops and review panels, and for planning site 
evaluation visits.  This information becomes critical for intelligence studies, 
where tracking of people and institutions, and analyzing time trends, is a 
central component of the analysis.  
 
3) Literature-Based Discovery 
S&T text mining can be used to discover new concepts or new relationships 
from literature, especially extrapolated from disparate literatures (1).  Such 
information can be used to identify promising research or technology 
opportunities, and promising new directions for research.  For intelligence 
applications, this approach can forecast the emergence of new unforeseen 
capabilities, based entirely on cutting-edge findings from global research 
laboratories.   
 
This is an area of investigation that has completely fallen through the cracks.  
There is essentially one group that has published completed studies on 
different topics using this general technique (8-13), and these published 
studies have focused solely on the medical literature.  A few other groups 
have published or presented concept papers (1, 14-18), using their own 
literature-based discovery techniques.  Many more efforts are needed to test 
the applicability of competing techniques and the utility of different 
databases.  Section 4 addresses the issue of literature-related discovery in far 
more detail. 
 
4) Theme Identification 
S&T text mining can be used for identifying the main technical themes or 
sub-themes in a large body of technical literature.  Visual categorization of 
phrases allows technical taxonomies (classification schemes) to be generated 
(4-7).  By categorizing phrases and counting frequencies, S&T text mining 
can also be used to estimate global levels of emphasis in technical areas or 
sub-areas.  These results can be used as the basis for S&T adequacy or 
deficiency judgements (4). 
 44
 
5) Theme Relationship Identification 
S&T text mining can be used to identify the relationships between technical 
themes, and between technical themes and infrastructure components (4-7).  
Much of the our present effort is focused on understanding and developing 
clustering approaches that will sharpen the groupings of common themes, 
and identify theme linkages from a variety of perspectives.  We are presently 
using the more sophisticated clustering software in parallel with clustering 
technique development to link major technical themes, major technical 
themes with supporting technical themes, and technical themes with 
infrastructure components.  Such linkages are important not only in the 
development of science and technology, but have important corporate and 
defense intelligence applications, and can provide direction for program and 
organizational restructuring based on technical content.  Further, S&T text 
mining can generate taxonomies from the bottom-up, removing human 
subjectivity from the process to some extent.   
 
6) Impact Roadmaps 
S&T text mining can provide roadmaps of myriad research impacts (19, 20, 
21).  Such information is useful for impact tracking and subsequent S&T 
sponsor presentations.  It provides performer organizations the ability to 
determine if the audience reached is the target audience.  The Citation 
Mining approach we developed for these applications includes both 
bibliometric profiling and text mining.  It is a sub-set of the more general 
trans-citation analysis, and has important consequences for Web-based 
corporate and national security intelligence information extraction.   
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The global S&T literature contains substantial technical data.  For maximum 
benefit in conducting research and development, including the avoidance of 
duplication and the identification of promising opportunities, this data must 
be identified, retrieved, processed, and integrated.  Much effort is being 
applied to information identification and retrieval, and sophisticated 
processes and tools exist presently.  Little use is being made of these 
capabilities presently for the global S&T literature.  This is especially 
serious for the medical community, since intense specialization in recent 
history has made many disparate but information-rich literatures 
unaccessible as new knowledge sources. 
 
 45
Far less effort is being devoted to the information processing and integration 
problems, especially the cutting-edge area of literature-based discovery and 
innovation.  The technical community needs to be made aware of the 
potential of information technology for improving the conduct of S&T, the 
capabilities that exist presently, and the research required to deliver the full 
potential of information technology for this application. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 2. 
 
1. Kostoff, R. N. "Science and Technology Innovation". Technovation.  19, 
October 1999. 
2. Kostoff, R. N.,  “The Underpublishing of Science and Technology 
Results”, The Scientist, 1 May 2000. 
3. Haynes, R.B., Mulrow, C. D., Huth, E. J., et al,  “More informative 
abstracts revisited”. Ann. Intern. Med. 1990; 113: 69-76 
4. Kostoff, R. N., Green, K. A., Toothman, D. R., and Humenik, J.  
"Database Tomography Applied to an Aircraft Science and Technology 
Investment Strategy". Journal of Aircraft, 37:4, July-August 2000. 
5. Kostoff, R. N., Braun, T., Schubert, A., Toothman, D. R., and Humenik, J.   
"Fullerene Roadmaps Using Bibliometrics and Database Tomography".  
Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science.  Jan-Feb 2000. 
6. Kostoff, R. N., Eberhart, H. J., and Toothman, D. R.  "Hypersonic and 
Supersonic Flow Roadmaps Using Bibliometrics and Database 
Tomography".  Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 15 
April 1999. 
7. Kostoff, R. N., Eberhart, H. J., and Toothman, D. R.,  "Database 
Tomography for Technical Intelligence: A Roadmap of the Near-Earth 
Space Science and Technology Literature", Information Processing and 
Management, 
8. Smalheiser, N.R., Swanson, D.R.,  “Assessing a Gap in the Biomedical 
Literature – Magnesium – Deficiency and Neurologic Disease”, Neurosci 
Res Commun 15: (1), 1994. 
9. Smalheiser, N.R., Swanson, D.R.,  “Calcium-Independent Phospholipase 
A (2) and Schizophrenia”.  Arch Gen Psychiat 55 (8),         1998 
10. Smalheiser, N.R., Swanson, D.R.,  “Using ARROWSMITH: A 
Computer Assisted Approach to Formulating and Assessing Scientific 
Hypotheses” Comput Meth Prog Bio 57: (3), 1998. 
11. Swanson, D.R.,  “Fish Oil, Raynauds Syndrome, and Undiscovered 
Public Knowledge”, Perspect Biol Med .30: (1), 1986. 
 46
12. Swanson, D.R., Smalheiser, N.R.,  “An Interactive System for Finding 
Complementary Literatures: A Stimulus to Scientific Discovery”.  Artif 
Intell 91 (2), 1997. 
13. Swanson, D.R.,  “Computer – Assisted Search for Novel Implicit 
Connections in Text Databases”.  Abstr Pap Am Chem S 217, 1999. 
14. Gordon MD, Lindsay RK.  Toward discovery support systems: A 
replication, re-examination, and extension of Swanson's work on literature-
based discovery of a connection between Raynaud's and fish oil .  Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science 47 (2): 116-128.  Feb 1996. 
15. Gordon MD, Dumais S.  Using latent semantic indexing for literature 
based discovery.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
49 (8): 674-685.  June 1998. 
16. Weeber M, Klein H, de Jong-van den Berg LTW, et al.  Using concepts 
in literature-based discovery: Simulating Swanson's Raynaud-fish oil and 
migraine-magnesium discoveries.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology.  52 (7): 548-557.  May 2001. 
17. Stegmann J, Grohmann G.  Hypothesis generation guided by co-word 
clustering.  Scientometrics 56 (1): 111-135.  2003. 
18. Hearst, M. A.,  “Untangling Text Data Mining”, Proceedings of ACL 99, 
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, University of Maryland, June 20-26, 1999.  
19. Del Río, J. A., Kostoff, R. N., García, E. O., Ramírez, A. M., and 
Humenik, J. A.,  “Citation Mining Citing Population Profiling using 
Bibliometrics and Text Mining”.  Centro de Investigación en Energía, 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. 
http://www.cie.unam.mx/W_Reportes. 
20. Kostoff, R. N., and Del Rio, J. A.,  “The Impact of Physics Research”, 
Physics World, June 2001. 
21.  Kostoff, R. N., Del Río, J. A., Humenik, J. A., García, E. O.,  
Ramírez, A. M., “Citation Mining: Integrating Text Mining And 
Bibliometrics For Research User Profiling,” JASIST.  52:13.  1148-1156  
November 2001. 
 47
Section 3.  Information Content in Medline Record Fields. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N., Block, J. A., Stump, J. A., and Pfeil, K. M.  
“Information Content in Medline Record Fields”.  International Journal of 
Medical Informatics.  73:6.  515-527.  June 2004) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
Background: We have been conducting text mining analyses (extraction of 
useful information from text) of Medline records, using Abstracts as the 
main data source.  For literature-based discovery, and other text mining 
applications as well, all records in a discipline need to be evaluated for 
determining prior art.  Many Medline records do not contain Abstracts, but 
typically contain Titles and Mesh terms.  Substitution of these fields for 
Abstracts in the non-Abstract records would restore the missing literature to 
some degree. 
 
Objectives: Determine how well the information content of Title and Mesh 
fields approximates that of Abstracts in Medline records.  
 
Approach: Select historical Medline records related to Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon that contain Abstracts.  Determine the information content in 
the Abstract fields through text mining.  Then, determine the information 
content in the Title fields, the Mesh fields, and the combined Title-Mesh 
fields, and compare with the information content in the Abstracts. 
 
Results: Four metrics were used to compare the information content related 
to Raynaud’s Phenomenon in the different fields: total number of phrases; 
number of unique phrases; content of factors from factor analyses; content of 
clusters from multi-link clustering.  The Abstract field contains almost an 
order of magnitude more phrases than the other fields, and slightly more 
than an order of magnitude more unique phrases than the other fields. 
 
Each field used a factor matrix with fourteen factors, and the combination of 
all 56 factors for the four fields represented 27 separate, but not unique, 
themes. These themes could be placed in two major categories, with two 
sub-categories per major category: Auto-immunity (antibodies, 
inflammation) and circulation (peripheral vessel circulation, coronary vessel 
circulation).  All four sub-categories included representation from each field.  
Thus, while the focus of the representation of each field in each sub-category 
 48
was moderately different, the four sub-category structure could be identified 
by analyzing the total factors in each field.  
 
In the cluster comparison phase of the study, the phrases used to create the 
clusters were the most important phrases identified for each factor.  Thus, 
the factor matrix served as a filter for words used for clustering.  While 
clusters were generated for all four fields, the Title hierarchy tended to be 
fragmented due to sparsity of the co-occurrence matrix that underlies the 
clusters.  Therefore, the Title clusters were examined at only the lower levels 
of aggregation. 
 
The Abstract, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields had the same first level 
taxonomy categories, autoimmunity and circulation.  At the second level, the 
Abstract, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields had the autoimmune diseases and 
antibodies sub-category in common.  The Abstract and Mesh fields shared 
fascia inflammation as the other autoimmunity sub-category, while the other 
Mesh + Title sub-category focuses on vinyl chloride poisoning from 
industrial contact, and consequences of antineoplastic agents.  However, in 
both cases, even though the words may be different, inflammation may be 
the common theme. 
 
Conclusions: For taxonomy generation, especially at the higher levels, each 
of the four fields has a similar thematic structure.  At very detailed levels, 
the Mesh and Title fields run out of phrases relative to the Abstract field.  
Therefore, selection of field (s) to be employed for taxonomy generation 
depends on the objectives of the study, particularly the level of 
categorization required for the taxonomy. 
 
For information retrieval, or literature-based discovery, selection of the 
appropriate field again depends on the study objectives.  If large queries, or 
large numbers of concepts or themes are desired, then the field with the 
largest number of technical phrases would be desirable.  If queries or 
concepts represented by the more accepted popular terminology is adequate, 
then the smaller fields may be sufficient.  Because of its established and 
controlled vocabulary, the Mesh field lags the Title or Abstract fields in 
currency.  Thus, the Title or Abstract fields would retrieve records with the 
most explicitly stated current concepts, but the Mesh field would capture a 
 49
larger swath of fields that contained a concept of interest but perhaps had a 
wider range of specific terminology in the Abstract or Title text. 
 
In addition, this section provides the first validated estimate of the disparity 
in information retrieved through text mining limited to Titles and Mesh 
terms relative to entire Abstracts.  As much of the older biomedical literature 
was entered into electronic databases without associated Abstracts, 
literature-based discovery exercises that search the older medical literature 
may miss a substantial proportion of relevant information.  On the basis of 
this section, it may be estimated that up to a log order more information may 
be retrieved when complete Abstracts are searched.  
BACKGROUND 
 
Text mining is the extraction of useful information from text (1-3).  In its 
modern day incarnation, it refers to information technology-based extraction 
from very large volumes of text.  One variant of text mining is literature-
based discovery (4-8).  It generates actual discovery from text only, using 
intermediate literatures that link the problem literatures (literatures that 
describe the problem to be solved) to discovery literatures (literatures that 
contain possible solutions to the problem). 
 
The authors have been conducting a literature-based discovery study of 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon.  The first phase of this study is to compare the 
authors’ results with those of Swanson’s pioneering literature-based 
discovery paper on Raynaud’s Phenomenon (6), and with subsequent papers 
that attempted to replicate Swanson’s results (7-8).   
 
Medline has been used as the source database for all of the above Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon studies.  The present study also used Medline Abstracts as the 
data source.  However, in the 1975-1985 time frame that immediately 
preceded Swanson’s initial Raynaud’s Phenomenon publication, only 58% 
of the Medline records relating to Raynaud’s Phenomenon contained 
Abstracts.  Since a critical element of discovery requires establishing that 
prior art does not exist, all prior records need to be evaluated.  Some type of 
information from these non-Abstract records needs to be included in the 
empty Abstract field.  The only other type of text-based information 
available from Medline is contained in the Title and Mesh fields.  This leads 
to the question: how well does the information content in the Title and Mesh 
fields approximate that in the Abstract fields? 
 50
 
Most of the studies comparing text fields in a full text document or database 
record have the objective of comparing information retrieval.  In examining 
different approaches to indexing medical literature, Hersh and Hickam (9) 
found that text word indexing is more effective than MESH term indexing.  
In a test of whether Abstract words occurred as frequently as could be 
expected from full text statistical analysis, Su et al (10) found that 96-98% 
of the Abstracts tested were not significantly different from random samples 
of the articles they represented.  However, from a retrieval perspective, 
Johnson et al (11) found that searching the full text version of NEJM 
retrieved a larger number of records than Medline.  This was due primarily 
to methodology terms found in the text but not in the Title or Abstract.  
Additionally, in Medline, two indexer-supplied fields (descriptors and 
publication types) retrieved 11-89% more than Title or Abstract alone.  This 
important role played by MESH in enhancing information retrieval was 
supported by Srinivasan (12).  However, while MESH terms can enhance 
information retrieval, their limitations include the Indexer Effect (13), 
indexer consistency in Medline (14), indexer-searcher vocabulary mis-
matches (15), and lag in adopting new terminology.  Even concept 
hierarchies to aid the management of controlled vocabularies, such as the 
Metathesaurus of the Unified Medical Language System (16-17), may not 
always incorporate evolving topics in a timely manner (18). 
 
Mijnhout et al (19) concluded that, for comprehensive retrieval, both MESH 
terms and text words should be used in a search strategy, implying a 
disparity between the fields.  He also concluded that, for comprehensiveness, 
multiple databases should be searched.  None of these articles have focused 
on information content exclusively, and used the combined clustering and 
unique phrase occurrence approach that will be described in this paper. 
 
OBJECTIVES  
 
This study will determine how well the information content in the Title and 
Mesh fields of Medline records approximates that contained in the Abstract 
field.  
 
APPROACH 
 
 51
General 
 
The approach consists of two components: quantitative and qualitative.  The 
quantitative component compares total and unique words in each field.  The 
qualitative component compares category taxonomies in each field.  The 
former provides detail, while the latter provides structure. 
 
Specific 
 
The query “RAYNAUD’S DISEASE OR RAYNAUD*[TW]” (restricted to 
1975-1985) was inserted into the PubMed Search engine for Medline, and 
retrieved 932 records with Abstracts (these are the 58% of the total records 
in the 1975-1985 time frame that contained Abstracts).  The contents of the 
Abstracts field, Titles field, Mesh field, and Mesh-Titles field were placed in 
separate databases.  The information content in each of these four databases 
(Abstract, Title, Mesh, and combined Title-Mesh) was compared using text 
mining.  Both qualitative and quantitative metrics were used for the 
comparison. 
 
As with any quantitative comparison procedure, a critical item is the 
selection of appropriate metrics.  In comparing any two databases for this 
study, the main focus is on assessing the importance of unique phrases and 
phrase patterns in each database relative to the other databases.  This 
assessment is made at two levels of aggregation.   
 
At the lower phrase-focused level, the numbers of total and unique phrases, 
and the significance of each phrase, are compared among the databases.  
Because of the present study’s context of information for literature-based 
discovery, and literature-based discovery’s extensive use of word/ phrase 
matching among documents from different retrievals, numbers of phrases 
becomes significant in the matching process.  The greater the number of 
phrases, the larger the dimensions describing each concept, and the greater 
the probability that two equivalent concepts will exhibit some overlap of 
their component phrases.  At the higher phrase-pattern focused level, the 
phrase clusters and overall taxonomies are compared among the databases.   
 
1) Lower Level Comparison 
 
The number of phrases is relatively straight-forward, although not quite as 
simple as it would appear superficially.  It is easy to count phrases produced 
 52
by a Natural Language Processor, or other type of phrase generator.  It is 
more complex to count the subset of generated phrases that have high 
technical content, and that would be used in the performance of an actual 
text mining study.  Judgement is required to translate the raw phrase 
generator outputs to useful phrases.   
 
Even the metrics for classifying a phrase as “high technical content” are ill-
defined.  High technical content is a function of context, and classifying a 
phrase in isolation from its context is fraught with error.  In the phrase 
clustering process presented later in this paper, a method called factor matrix 
filtering is used to insure that high technical content phrases only are used 
for clustering.  Only those phrases that have substantial influence on 
determining the themes of the factors in a factor analysis are used for the 
clustering, and these phrases become high technical content by virtue of 
their function and context. 
 
The significance of each phrase is far more complex to obtain, since it 
depends on the context of the analysis to be performed.  If a macro level 
analysis is the objective, such as development of a higher level taxonomy, 
then a database that is deficient in a few phrases relative to some other more 
detailed database may affect the final taxonomy relatively little (hypothetical 
at this point).  However, if a micro level analysis is the objective, such as 
literature-based discovery (4-8), then a deficiency of a very few phrases may 
be crucial to the results, if the discovery elements are contained within these 
missing phrases.   
 
The metrics used to compare the different databases for their impact on 
taxonomy generation reflect the above issues.  These metrics focus on 
counting the differences in unique phrases contained in each database.  The 
metrics do not address the significance of the absent phrases, since that 
requires judgement about the quality of the application.  The significance of 
the phrase absences from any database relative to other databases is judged 
qualitatively. 
 
2) Higher Level Comparison 
 
The high technical content phrases in each database are aggregated into 
clusters, and the clusters are integrated to form a taxonomy.  The taxonomies 
 53
are then compared for structural and conceptual differences.  Two statistical 
approaches for taxonomy generation are used, factor matrix and multi-link 
clustering. 
 
Since each phrase, phrase cluster, and taxonomy addresses some aspect of 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon, an overview of Raynaud’s Phenomenon will be 
presented before discussing the results.  Because the main Raynaud’s 
terminology used in the literature is not consistent (in many cases, 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon is used interchangeably with Raynaud’s Disease or 
Raynaud’s Syndrome), the overview will include the distinction among 
these Raynaud variants. 
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon Overview 
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon is a condition in which small muscular arteries and 
arterioles, most commonly in the fingers and toes, go into spasm (contract) 
and cause the skin to turn pale (blanching) or a patchy red (rubor) to blue 
(cyanosis).  While this sequence is normally precipitated by exposure to 
cold, and resolves with subsequent re-warming, it can also be induced by 
anxiety or stress.  Blanching represents the ischemic (lack of adequate blood 
flow) phase, caused by digital artery vasospasm.  Cyanosis results from de-
oxygenated blood in capillaries and venules (small veins).  Upon re-
warming, a hyperemic phase ensues, causing the digits to appear red. 
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon can be a primary or secondary disorder.  When 
Raynaud’s symptoms appear alone without an apparent underlying medical 
condition, it is referred to as Primary Raynaud’s Phenomenon or, formerly, 
as Raynaud’s Disease.  In this condition, the blood vessels appear 
anatomically normal after the ischemic events.  When an identifiable cause 
or a specific associated disease accompanies Raynaud’s symptoms, it is 
referred to as Secondary Raynaud’s Phenomenon.  The auto-immune 
disorders, or conditions in which a person produces an immune response 
against his or her own tissues, are the typical medical conditions associated 
with Secondary Raynaud’s.  In these cases, Raynaud’s Phenomenon may be 
more serious than in Primary Raynaud’s and may result in blood vessel 
scarring and long-term consequences.  When Raynaud’s Phenomenon is 
associated with occupational activities, such as vibrating machinery or 
repetitive activity, it is often referred to as Occupational Raynaud’s.  
Similarly, Secondary Raynaud’s may be precipitated by exposure to harmful 
 54
chemical compounds such as vinyl chloride, or to toxic therapeutic agents 
such as  certain  cancer chemotherapy drugs.  
 
Thus, while the symptoms and signs of Raynaud’s Phenomenon occur as a 
direct consequence of reduced blood flow due to reversible blood vessel 
constriction, the underlying etiology may be a function of several parameters 
that affect blood flow.  These include:  
 
*Inflammation from the auto-immune disorders that can cause swelling and 
thereby constrict blood vessels; 
*Increased sympathetic nervous system activity, that can affect the timing 
and duration of the blood vessel muscular contractions that cause 
constriction; 
*Heightened digital vascular reactivity to vaso-constrictive stimuli, that 
causes the blood vessels to over-react and over-contract;  
*Deposits along the blood vessel walls that can reduce blood flow and 
increase the flow sensitivity to contraction stimuli; 
*Blood rheological properties that offer additional resistance to blood flow, 
and magnify the impact of blood vessel constriction; 
*Blood constituents and hormones that can act as vaso-constrictors or vaso-
dilators. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Phrase frequencies were generated for ten years of Mesh Terms, Titles, 
Mesh-Titles, and Abstracts from Medline records focused on Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon (1975-1985).  A sampling across frequency bands in the larger 
text fields showed that about 2/3 of the phrases could be classified as high 
technical content.    
 
1) Quantitative and Qualitative Properties of Phrases in each Field 
 
Table 1A lists the number of phrases in each field, incorporating single, 
double, and triple word phrases. The first column represents the databases in 
which the phrases appeared.  The Abstracts contain almost an order of 
magnitude more phrases than the other two fields.  Also, the low number of 
separate Mesh phrases reflects the restrictions imposed by a controlled 
 55
vocabulary: less diversity, more uniformity. About 90% of the Abstract 
phrases tend to be unique, whereas slightly less than half of the Title and 
Mesh phrases are unique. 
 
TABLE 1A – NUMBER OF PHRASES IN EACH FIELD 
 
FIELD TOTAL UNIQUE 
Abstract 44,029 40114 
Title 5941 2780 
Mesh 2735 1237 
Mesh + Title 7950   
 
TABLE 1B – ‘UNIQUE’ TITLE PHRASES AND ABSTRACT 
REPRESENTATIONS 
 
TITLE ABSTRACT 
ANGIOLOGIC ANGIOLOGICAL 
HAEMORHEOLOGY HAEMORHEOLOGICAL 
FINGER ULCER FINGER ULCERATIONS 
DISEASE GROUPS DISEASE GROUP 
ARTERIAL INFUSION INTRA-ARTERIAL (IA) INFUSION 
ANTIBODIES AGAINST SCL 70 ANTIBODIES AGAINST SCL-70 
PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY 
DISORDERS 
PERIPHERAL CIRCULATION 
DISORDER 
 
At this point, some readers may question the entries in Table 1A that show 
unique Title phrases relative to the Abstracts.  Wouldn’t every important 
technical word/ phrase in the Title appear in the Abstract?  The answer 
depends on the definition of unique.  If ‘unique’ is defined as ‘identical’, the 
answer is no.  If ‘unique’ is defined as ‘very similar’, the answer is yes.  For 
example, Table 1B contains some of the ‘unique’ Title phrases (as defined in 
Table 1A), and their Abstract representations. 
 
Table 2 lists the 20 highest frequency high technical content phrases for each 
of the four databases (fields).  All four databases share the following 
phrases: Raynaud, Disease, Systemic, Blood, Scleroderma, Antibodies, 
Finger(s), Skin, Lupus Erythematosus, Connective Tissue, and Vibration.  
The phrases are mainly single word, with some double word included.  The 
high frequency phrases are relatively simple and generic, and major 
differences among the fields are not evident at this high frequency level of 
description. 
 56
 
TABLE 2 – HIGHEST FREQUENCY NON-DUPLICATIVE HIGH 
TECHNICAL CONTENT PHRASES 
 
ABSTRACT 
PHRASES 
MESH  
PHRASES 
TITLE  
PHRASES 
TITLE + MESH 
PHRASES 
PATIENTS HUMAN RAYNAUD RAYNAUD 
RAYNAUD DISEASE DISEASE DISEASE 
DISEASE RAYNAUD PHENOMENON HUMAN 
PHENOMENON BLOOD SYNDROME BLOOD 
SYNDROME COMPLICATIONS SYSTEMIC COMPLICATIONS 
SYSTEMIC THERAPY PATIENTS DRUG 
BLOOD DIAGNOSIS SCLERODERMA THERAPY 
SCLERODERMA IMMUNOLOGY TREATMENT DIAGNOSIS 
TREATMENT ADULT SCLEROSIS IMMUNOLOGY 
ANTIBODIES ETIOLOGY TISSUE ETIOLOGY 
SKIN MIDDLE CONNECTIVE DISEASES 
TISSUE DISEASES LUPUS MIDDLE 
COLD PATHOLOGY BLOOD SYSTEMIC 
SYMPTOMS PHYSIOPATHOLOGY ERYTHEMATOSUS PATHOLOGY 
VASCULAR THERAPEUTIC ANTIBODIES THERAPEUTIC 
FLOW SYSTEMIC VIBRATION SCLERODERMA 
FINGER SUPPLY VASCULAR SUPPLY 
SCLEROSIS SCLERODERMA PERIPHERAL SYNDROME 
CONNECTIVE SUPPORT PRIMARY SUPPORT 
TEMPERATURE RADIOGRAPHY DISEASES ADVERSE 
 
 
Table 3 lists single word phrases in each database that are unique; i.e., not 
contained in any of the other databases.  The Title-Abstract caveats with 
respect to uniqueness apply here as well. 
 
TABLE 3 – UNIQUE PHRASES IN EACH DATABASE 
 
 ABSTRACT  TITLES MESH 
1 ACETYLSALICYLIC  ADENINE ABORTION 
2 ATHEROSCLEROSIS  CRYOABLATION BIOMECHANICS 
3 ALANINE  EFAMOL CORTEX 
4 ANOREXIA  MALEATE CRYOSURGERY 
5 ANTIGLOBULIN  PREDILECTION DYSPEPSIA 
6 APERISTALSIS  WEARDALE EMBRYOLOGY 
7 CORTISOLAEMIA  SULPIRIDE HYPOTHERMIA 
8 ENDANGIITIS  NIACIN ACETYLGLUCOSAMINIDASE
9 FLUORESCEIN-
CONJUGATED 
KAPOSI ADENOSINE 
10 HEXOPAL  FUROSEMIDE ADULTORUM 
 57
 
The Mesh phrases, on average, appear somewhat more generic than the Title 
or Abstract phrases.  They represent a controlled vocabulary, and can 
contain additional information to that present in Title or Abstract fields (and 
vice versa).  
 
Table 4 contains phrases shared by all fields.  These are the standard well-
known phrases associated with Raynaud’s, especially the more focused 
multi-word phrases. 
 
TABLE 4 – SHARED PHRASES AMONG ALL FIELDS 
 
 SINGLE WORDS DOUBLE WORDS 
1 ABDOMINAL ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS 
2 TOXOPLASMOSIS CONNECTIVE TISSUE 
3 ACANTHOSIS FACIAL HEMIATROPHY 
4 CORPUSCLES MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
5 FIBROSIS PLASMA EXCHANGE 
6 GUANETHIDINE RESPIRATORY FUNCTION 
7 LEUKOCYTES SCLERODERMA SYSTEMIC 
8 METOPROLOL SKIN MANIFESTATIONS 
9 ORTHOSTATIC THROMBOANGIITIS 
OBLITERANS 
10 SUBCUTANEOUS VASCULAR DISEASES 
 
 
2) Taxonomies for all Four Databases 
 
The previous section has shown differences among the databases at the 
micro, or individual phrase, level.  Both the differences in total number of 
phrases, and number of unique phrases, were shown.  For a crude measure of 
significance of these phrase differences, some examples of unique phrases 
were also shown. 
 
However, differences at the macro, or aggregated phrase, level were not 
shown.  These aggregated phrases, or clusters, can be thought of as concepts.  
It would be useful to ascertain whether there are conceptual differences 
among the databases. 
 
 58
There are two measures of importance in measuring conceptual differences.  
One measure is difference in structure of the overall database taxonomy, i.e., 
are there any concepts missing from any of the databases, and even if not, do 
all the concepts bear the same relationships across databases?  The other 
measure is differences in resolution of each concept, i.e., how does the 
information content in each cluster vary across the different databases? 
 
This section addresses the taxonomy structure metric.  Two approaches are 
used to develop taxonomies for each database.  A factor matrix is used first, 
followed by a multi-link clustering method.  The combination has been used 
in previous text mining studies (e.g., 20), although the present application 
uses a synergistic combination of the two methods that offers substantial 
improvement in the quality of the resultant clusters.  The factor matrix, 
which imports a relatively large number of words, is used as a filter for the 
words subsequently input to the clustering algorithms.  This results in a 
selection of context-dependent words for input to the clustering algorithm, 
and produces relatively well defined clusters compared to the context-
independent methods.  In addition, the present application uses single words 
for clustering, rather than the multi-word phrases of previous applications.  
While some of the technical detail is lost by excluding the ordering 
information contained in multi-word phrases, inclusion of all single words 
compensates for the elimination of multi-word phrases due to the selection 
algorithm of the Natural Language Processor. 
 
2A.  Factor Matrix Filtering 
 
Factor analysis aims to reduce the number of variables in a system, and 
detect structure in the relationships among variables.  One of the key 
challenges in factor analysis is defining the number of factors to select.  
Different approaches have been suggested in the literature, but the two most 
widely used are the Kaiser criterion (21-22), and the Scree test (23).  The 
Kaiser criterion states that only factors with eigenvalues greater than unity 
should be retained, essentially requiring that a factor extracts at least as 
much variance as the equivalent of one original variable.   The Scree test 
plots factor eigenvalue (variance) vs factor number, and recommends that 
only those factors that extract substantive variance be retained.  
Operationally, the factor selection termination point becomes the ‘elbow’ of 
the plot, the point where the slope changes from large to small.  
 59
 
In most previous studies performed by the first author, the Kaiser criterion 
has been used to select the number of factors for the factor matrix.  These 
previous studies have used an Excel add-in to generate the factor matrices 
and, due to Excel’s limitations on columns, have been limited approximately 
to 250 x 250 correlation matrices, or 250 words.  The Kaiser criterion has 
yielded factor numbers in the range of 20-45, considered a reasonable 
number for analysis.  However, in the present validation study, another 
software package that did not require Excel was used (TechOasis), and many 
more words were used for the correlation matrix.  The Kaiser criterion 
yielded hundreds of factors, a number far too large for detailed factor 
analysis, and of questionable utility, since many of the eigenvalues were not 
too different from unity.  The Scree Plot was examined, and used to select 
the number of factors for analysis. 
 
Once the desired value of the Scree Plot ‘elbow’ has been determined, and 
the appropriate factor matrix has been generated, the factor matrix can then 
be used as a filter to identify the significant technical words for further 
analysis.  Specifically, the factor matrix can complement a basic trivial word 
list (e.g., a list containing words that are trivial in almost all contexts, such 
as ‘a’, ‘the’, ‘of’, ‘and’, ‘or’, etc) to select context-dependent high technical 
content words for input to a clustering algorithm.  The factor matrix pre-
filtering will improve the cohesiveness of clustering by eliminating those 
words that are trivial words operationally in the application context. 
 
In the factor matrix used, the rows are the words and the columns are the 
factors.  The matrix elements Mij are the factor loadings, or the contribution 
of word i to the theme of factor j.  The theme is determined by those words 
that have the largest absolute values of factor loading.  Each factor had a 
positive value tail and negative value tail.  For each factor, most of the time, 
one of the tails dominated in terms of absolute value magnitude.  This 
dominant tail was used to determine the central theme of each factor. 
 
For the first step in the factor matrix filtering process, the factor loadings in 
the factor matrix were converted to absolute values.  Then, a simple 
algorithm was used to automatically extract those high factor loading words 
at the dominant tail of each factor.  If word variants were on this list (e.g., 
singles and plurals), and their factor loadings were reasonably close (24), 
they were conflated (e.g., ‘agent’ and ‘agents’ were conflated into ‘agents’, 
and their frequencies were added).  A few words were eliminated manually, 
 60
based on factor loading and estimate of technical content.  Basically, any 
word that did not have a high absolute value of factor loading for at least one 
factor was eliminated from the subsequent clustering. 
 
Before the clustering is described, the factors that formed the basis of  the 
factor matrix filtering for all four fields will be described. Table 5 lists the 
number of words that were input to the factor matrix algorithm for each 
field.  In each case, addition of succeeding lower frequency words (from the 
raw data word list ordered by frequency) made the factor matrix difficult to 
generate.   
 
TABLE 5 – NUMBER OF WORDS INPUT TO FACTOR MATRIX 
 
ABSTRACT TITLE MESH M+T 
659 428 465 519 
 
Table 6 lists the different factor themes that can be extracted from all four 
fields, and identifies the factor(s) in which the theme occurs for each field.  
A more expanded description of the non-redundant themes is presented in 
Appendix 1. 
 
TABLE 6 – FACTOR THEMES ASSOCIATED WITH EACH 
RECORD FIELD 
 
FACTOR THEME RECORD FIELD 
ABST TITLE MESH M+T 
ANTIBODIES AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 1 6 1 1 
RAYNAUD'S SYNDROME-RELATED AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 14  8 6 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS CLASSIFICATION  5   
ADRENAL CORTEX HORMONES FOR LUPUS   5 5 
SCLEROTIC AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 6  13  
ENDOTHELIAL CELL ACTIVITY IN PSS  10   
MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE  9   
CIRCULATING IMMUNE COMPLEXES 12 8 3 11 
DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT COMPONENTS  13   
FASCIA-FOCUSED INFLAMMATION 13  1 13 
CORONARY CIRCULATION AND HYPERTENSION 4  10  
SMOOTH MUSCLE RESPONSE TO DRUGS   14 14 
PLASMA LIPID FRACTION CONTROL   11 3 
CARDIAC BLOOD SUPPLY OBSTRUCTIONS  11   
DOUBLE-BLIND VASODILATOR TRIALS 2 4 2 6, 9 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS   9 12 
 61
BIOFEEDBACK TRAINING FOR IMPROVED CIRCULATION 10  6 10 
REDUCED PLATELET AGGREGATION VASODILATORS 5 12 2, 8 2, 8 
PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY SYSTEM VASODILATION 11    
FINGER BLOOD FLOW MEASUREMENTS 8 3   
NAIL-FOLD CAPILLARY MICROSCOPY 9 2  11 
TRANSCUTANEOUS NERVE STIMULATION/VASODILATION  1  14 
SURGICAL/ NERVE BLOCK CIRCULATION OBSTRUCTION SOLUTIONS 7  7, 12 7 
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME  14   
VIBRATION-BASED CIRCULATION PROBLEMS 3 7 13 9, 13 
VINYL CHLORIDE EFFECTS ON BLOOD FLOW AND PROPERTIES 14 7 7, 12 4 
TREATMENTS FOR CHEMICALLY-INDUCED NEOPLASMS   4  
 
At the highest level, the themes can be divided into two categories, auto-
immunity and circulation.  This division into these two categories is 
suggested by the data in the above table, is shown more sharply by the multi-
link hierarchical structures, and reflects the experience of medical practice 
for Raynaud’s Phenomenon.  The first ten themes fit into the auto-immunity 
category, and the remainder fit into the circulation category.   
 
At the next hierarchical level, the auto-immunity category can be divided 
into antibody and inflammation sub-categories, but other divisions are 
possible as well.  The circulation category can be sub-divided into coronary 
vessel circulation and peripheral vessel circulation. 
 
All fields are represented in some themes of each of the four second-level 
categories, although all fields are not represented in all themes.  This should 
not be interpreted that a field-theme combination that is absent from the 
matrix means that the theme is absent from the field.  It only means that, 
within the resolution afforded by a fourteen factor matrix, a specific theme 
was not among the fourteen major themes for that field. 
 
For example, FASCIA-FOCUSED INFLAMMATION is not listed as a Title 
theme on the matrix.  However, EOSINOPHILIC FASCIITIS appears in the 
Title words used to form the factor matrix.  Also, BIOFEEDBACK 
TRAINING FOR IMPROVED CIRCULATION is not listed as a Title 
theme in the matrix, but BIOFEEDBACK appears in the Title word list.  To 
fill in the blanks on Table 6, matrices with more factors would have to be 
generated, in turn producing a larger version of Table 6 with additional 
blanks. 
 
 62
Because of the smaller number of Title words, the themes in each category 
in which the Title is represented tend to be more specific relative to those of 
the Mesh or Abstract.  The larger numbers of words in the Abstract or Mesh 
fields allow more generalized themes to populate the categories.  
 
2B.  Multi-Link Hierarchical Clustering 
 
The filtered and conflated words resulting from the factor matrix filtering 
were input to the WINSTAT clustering algorithm, and the Average Link 
option was selected for clustering.  The major structures, or clusters, from 
the resulting dendrogram (a tree-like structure that shows how the individual 
words cluster into groups in a hierarchical structure) were analyzed, and 
compared for the four fields.  In most cases, only the top three hierarchical 
levels of each field’s taxonomy were described. 
 
First Taxonomy Level 
 
The Abstract, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields have the same first level 
taxonomy categories, auto-immunity and circulation, and these two 
categories are sharply delineated for all three fields.   
 
The hierarchical structure of the Titles dendrogram is very different 
from that of the Abstracts dendrogram.  When the Abstracts clusters 
divide at each lower level in the hierarchy, they split into sub-clusters 
that are of reasonably similar magnitude (usually, not always) and 
usually have complementary themes.  When the Titles clusters divide, 
they are splitting into sub-clusters of very different magnitudes with 
themes that are not very complementary.   
 
For example, the top level split of the Abstracts dendrogram is into two 
clusters containing 90 and 162 words.  The themes of these clusters are auto-
immunity and circulation, respectively, the two main complementary themes 
of Raynaud's Phenomenon.  The top level split of the Titles dendrogram is 
into two clusters containing 4 and 249 words.  The themes of these clusters 
are hereditary deficiency for the smaller cluster, and auto-immunity and 
circulation for the larger cluster.  The next level split for the circulation 
cluster in the Abstracts dendrogram is into two clusters containing 25 and 
 63
137 words.  The themes of these clusters are coronary circulation and 
peripheral circulation, respectively, the two main complementary themes of 
circulation.  The next level split for the auto-immunity and circulation 
cluster in the Titles dendrogram is into two clusters containing 25 and 224 
words.  The themes of these clusters are controlled double blind trials of 
coronary vasodilators and antihypertensives, and autoimmunity and 
peripheral circulation and other aspects of coronary circulation, respectively.  
Thus, rather than splitting high level clusters into the next level clusters in a 
hierarchically conceptual process, the Titles dendrogram is stripping out a 
low level very detailed cluster from a high level cluster division.  This type 
of structure has been found in studies of applications of a particular research 
or technology discipline, where the diversity of the applications produces 
numerous relatively unrelated themes.  For the Titles, the relatively low 
word frequencies produce a sparse co-occurrence matrix, and the resultant 
clusters appear fragmented.  The highest level categorizations in the Title 
field are not viewed as meaningful, and will not be addressed until the third 
level clusters are discussed. 
 
Second Taxonomy Level 
 
Table 7 shows all the second level categories from the Abstract, Mesh, and 
Mesh + Title fields, and the representation of each field in each category.  
Three asterisks denote fully applicable, while two asterisks denote a partial 
match.   
 
TABLE 7 – SECOND LEVEL CATEGORY THEMES IN EACH 
FIELD 
 
CATEGORY ABST MESH M+T 
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES/ ANTIBODIES *** *** *** 
INFLAMMATION/ FASCIA *** *** 
PERIPHERAL VESSEL CIRCULATION *** ** 
CORONARY VESSEL CIRCULATION *** ** 
PERIPHERAL AND CORONARY VESSEL CIRCULATION ** *** 
CHEMICALLY/ CHEMOTHERAPEUTICALLY-INDUCED DISEASES  *** *** 
NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL CIRCULATION TREATMENTS   *** 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CIRCULATION TREATMENTS   *** 
 
 64
In all three fields, ‘auto-immune diseases and antibodies’ is the only 
common category.  Interestingly, it was the first factor in the three factor 
matrices as well.  The main difference between the Mesh and Abstract fields 
at this second hierarchical level is that the Mesh gives more recognition to 
consequences of vinyl chloride poisoning from industrial contact, and 
consequences of anti-neoplastic agents.  Addition of the Title field to the 
Mesh field has the further effect of providing more recognition to 
psychologically-based treatments for improving circulation (biofeedback 
and autogenic training). 
 
Lowest Level-Elemental Clusters 
 
Table 8 shows all the third level categories and sub-themes from the 
Abstract, Title, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields, and the representation of each 
field in each category.  Three asterisks denote fully applicable, while two 
asterisks denote a partial match. 
 
TABLE 8 – THIRD LEVEL CATEGORY THEMES IN EACH FIELD 
 
THIRD LEVEL CLUSTER THEMES AND SUB-THEMES   
  
CATEGORY ABST TITLE MESH M+T 
ANTIBODIES *** *** *** *** 
SCLEROTIC AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES *** *** *** *** 
RAYNAUD'S SYNDROME-RELATED AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES *** ** *** *** 
CREST SYNDROME AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES *** *** *** *** 
CIRCULATING IMMUNE COMPLEXES *** ** *** *** 
LIVER ABNORMALITIES IN RHEUMATIC DISEASES ** *** *** *** 
FASCIA-RELATED INFLAMMATION *** *** *** *** 
DOUBLE-BLIND CLINICAL TRIALS FOR VASODILATORS *** *** *** *** 
VASODILATORS FOR REDUCED PLATELET AGGREGATION *** *** *** *** 
TRANSCUTANEOUS NERVE STIMULATION ***  *** 
ARTERIAL OCCLUSIONS IN EXTREMITIES ** *** *** *** 
FINGER BLOOD FLOW AND TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS *** ** *** *** 
VIBRATION EFFECTS ON NERVOUS SYSTEM AND CIRCULATION *** *** *** *** 
VINYL CHLORIDE EFFECTS ON NERVOUS SYSTEM AND CIRCULATION *** *** *** *** 
CHEMOTHERAPY TOXICITY ** *** *** *** 
NAILFOLD CAPILLARY MICROSCOPY *** ***  
CARDIOVASCULAR/ PULMONARY CIRCULATION PROBLEMS *** ** *** *** 
BIOFEEDBACK AND AUTOGENIC TRAINING *** * *** *** 
 
 65
Most of the sub-themes are covered in all fields, although there are some 
notable absences, and they tend to occur in the circulation category.  
TRANSCUTANEOUS NERVE STIMULATION is identified in Title and 
Mesh + Title, but not in Abstract or Mesh, while NAILFOLD CAPILLARY 
MICROSCOPY is specifically identified in Abstract and Title, but not in 
Mesh or Mesh + Title. 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
Four fields (Abstract, Title, Mesh, Mesh + Title) in 932 Medline records 
were compared for information content.  Four metrics were used to assess 
information content: 1) total number of phrases; 2) number of unique 
phrases; 3) factors; 4) clusters. 
 
The Abstract field contains almost an order of magnitude more phrases than 
the other fields, with the difference becoming more exascerbated as the 
words per phrase increases.  Even though the Mesh field tends to be larger 
than the Title field in volume, it has about half the total number of phrases.  
This is due to the controlled vocabulary limiting the phrase diversity relative 
to the unrestricted vocabulary of the Titles. 
 
The difference in number of unique phrases between the Abstract field and 
the Title or Mesh fields is even more pronounced.  These large differences 
are not evident when the high frequency phrases in each field are compared.  
At this end of the spectrum, many of the phrases tend to be the more generic 
representations of Raynaud’s Phenomenon, and many are shared in 
common.  The phrase differences tend to be more evident and pronounced at 
the lower frequency end of the spectrum. 
 
In the theme comparison phase of the study, fourteen factors were used 
based on Scree plots and standardization.  The Abstract field allowed the 
largest number of words to generate the factor matrices, while the Title field 
allowed the smallest number of words.  These numbers differed by about 
50%. 
 
 66
About 27 separate, but not unique, themes could be discerned from all the 
factors combined.  These themes could be placed in two major categories, 
with two sub-categories per major category: Auto-immunity (antibodies, 
inflammation) and circulation (peripheral vessel circulation, coronary vessel 
circulation).  All four sub-categories included representation from each field.  
Thus, while the focus of the representation of each field in each sub-category 
was moderately different, the four sub-category structure could be identified 
by analyzing the total factors in each field.  
 
In the cluster comparison phase of the study, the phrases used to create the 
clusters were the most important phrases identified for each factor.  Thus, 
the factor matrix served as a filter for words used for clustering.  All clusters 
were based on about 250 words.  A hierarchical multi-link aggregation 
clustering technique was used to form the clusters. 
 
While clusters were generated for all four fields, the Title hierarchy tended 
to be fragmented due to sparsity of the co-occurrence matrix that underlies 
the clusters.  Therefore, the Title clusters were examined at only the lower 
levels of aggregation. 
 
The Abstract, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields had the same first level 
taxonomy categories, auto-immunity and circulation.  At the second level, 
the Abstract, Mesh, and Mesh + Title fields had the auto-immune diseases 
and antibodies sub-category in common.  The Abstract and Mesh fields 
shared fascia inflammation as the other auto-immunity sub-category, while 
the other Mesh + Title sub-category focuses on vinyl chloride poisoning 
from industrial contact, and consequences of antineoplastic agents.   
 
This latter difference illuminates previous observations that the different 
record fields sometimes operate at different meta-levels of description.  
Many antineoplastic agents can produce specific organ inflammation, 
myocutaneous inflammation, or systemic inflammation during the course of 
treatment.  This effect can be referenced as inflammation, antineoplastic 
agents, or both.  While the theme can be different superficially in the 
different fields, as in the present case, underneath the theme/ concept may be 
the same, but expression occurred at different meta-levels.   
 67
 
At the next level of categorization, most of the sub-categories are covered in 
all fields.  There are some notable absences, and they tend to occur in the 
circulation category.  For example, TRANSCUTANEOUS NERVE 
STIMULATION is identified in Title and Mesh + Title, but not in Abstract 
or Mesh, while NAILFOLD CAPILLARY MICROSCOPY is specifically 
identified in Abstract and Title, but not in Mesh or Mesh + Title. 
 
Finally, what is the importance of the differences among the fields 
summarized in the present study?  All levels of text mining, ranging from 
standard information retrieval to the more exotic literature-based discovery, 
tend to access records through phrase matching.  As the results imply, there 
could be substantial differences in numbers and types of records retrieved, 
depending on which fields are accessed by the search engines.   
 
For high level taxonomy generation, the field differences are less severe, but 
when lower level taxonomic detail is required, then the differences become 
important.  The Title and Mesh fields have limited numbers of different 
phrases at the lower frequencies relative to the Abstracts, and this translates 
in differences in diversity of detail possible.  For literature-based discovery 
in particular, access to related and disparate literatures will be limited due to 
sheer phrase volume  and diversity limitations.  The predominant publishing 
group in literature-based discovery (4, 6) has used Title and Keyword 
phrases for information processing almost exclusively.  Use of Abstracts 
should result in much more literature content accessed. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 3. 
 
1. Hearst, M. A.  Untangling Text Data Mining.  Proceedings of ACL 99, 
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics.  University of Maryland.  June 20-26, 1999. 
2. Trybula, W.J.  Text Mining.  Annual Review of Information Science and 
Technology.  34.  385-419.  1999 
3. Losiewicz, P., Oard, D., and Kostoff, R. N.  Textual Data Mining to 
Support Science and Technology Management.  Journal of Intelligent 
Information Systems.  15.  99-119.  2000. 
 68
4. Swanson, D.R, and Smalheiser, N.R.  Implicit Text Linkages Between 
Medline Records: Using Arrowsmith as an Aid to Scientific Discovery.  
Library Trends.  48 (1): 48-59.  1999. 
5. Kostoff, R. N.  Science and Technology Innovation.  Technovation.  
19:10.  593-604.   1999. 
6. Swanson, D.R.  Fish Oil, Raynauds Syndrome, and Undiscovered Public 
Knowledge.  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.  30 (1): 7-18.  1986. 
7. Gordon, M.D., Lindsay, R.K.  Toward Discovery Support Systems: A 
Replication, Re-Examination, and Extension of Swanson's Work On 
Literature-Based Discovery of a Connection Between Raynaud's And 
Fish Oil.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science.  47 
(2): 116-128.  1996 
8. Weeber, M, Klein, H, de Jong-van den Berg L..W., Vos, R.  Using 
Concepts in Literature-Based Discovery: Simulating Swanson's 
Raynaud-Fish Oil and Migraine-Magnesium Discoveries.  Journal of the 
American SocietyfFor Information Science and Technology.  52 (7): 
548-557.  2001. 
9. Hersh, W.R., Hickam, D.H.  A Comparison of Retrieval Effectiveness 
for 3 Methods of Indexing Medical Literature.  American Journal of the 
Medical Sciences.  303 (5): 292-300 May 1992. 
10. Su, K.C, Ries, J.E, Peterson, G.M, Sievert, M.C, Patrick, T.B, Moxley, 
D.E, Ries, L.D.  Comparing Frequency of Word Occurrences in 
Abstracts and Texts Using Two Stop Word Lists.  Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.  682-686 Suppl. S 2001. 
11. Johnson, E.D., Sievert, M.C. and McKinin, E.J.  Retrieving Research 
Studies: A Comparison of Bibliographic and Full-Text Versions of the 
New England Journal of Medicine.  Proceedings of the Nineteenth 
Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care, 1995, 
846-850. 
12. Srinivasan, P.  MeSHmap: A Text Mining Tool for MEDLINE.  Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association.  642-646 Suppl. S 
2001. 
13. Healey, P., Rothman, H., and Hoch, P.  An Experiment in Science 
Mapping for Research Planning.  Research Policy.  Vol. 15.  1986. 
14. Funk, M.E.,  and Reid, C.A.  Indexing Consistency in MEDLINE. Bull 
Med Libr Assoc. 71 (2). 1983.  176–183. 
15. Lancaster, F.W.  Vocabulary Control for Information Retrieval.  
Information Resource Press, 1972. 
16. Lindberg, D.A., Humphreys, B.L. Computer Systems that Understand 
Medical Meaning. In: Scherrer, J.R, Cote, R.A, Mandil, S.H, editors, 
 69
Computerized Natural Medical Language Processing for Knowledge 
Representation. Proceedings of the IFIP-IMIA WG6 International 
Working Conference; 1988 Sep 12-15; Geneva, Switzerland. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland; 1989. p. 5-17. 
17. Humphreys, B.L, Schuyler, P.L. The Unified Medical Language System: 
Moving Beyond the Vocabulary of Bibliographic Retrieval. In: Broering 
NC. editor. High-Performance Medical Libraries: Advances in 
Information Management for the Virtual Era. Westport (CT): Meckler; 
1993. p. 31-44. 
18. Hersh, W.R, Hickam, D.H, Haynes, R.B, McKibbon, K.A.  A 
Performance and Failure Analysis of Saphire with a Medline Test 
Collection.  Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association.  1 
(1): 51-60 Jan-Feb 1994. 
19. Mijnhout, G.S, Hooft, L, van Tulder M.W, Deville, W.L.J.M, Teule, 
G.J.J, Hoekstra, O.S.  How to Perform a Comprehensive Search for 
FDG-PET Literature.  European Journal of Nuclear Medicine.  27 (1): 
91-97 Jan 2000. 
20. Kostoff, R. N., Tshiteya, R., Pfeil, K. M., and Humenik, J. A.  
Electrochemical Power Source Roadmaps using Bibliometrics and 
Database Tomography.   Journal of Power Sources.  110:1.  163-176.  
2002. 
21. Kaiser, H.F.  The Application Of Electronic Computers To Factor 
Analysis.  Educational and Psychological Measurement.  20: 141-151.  
1960. 
22. Jackson, J. E.  A Users Guide to Principal Components.  Wiley, New 
York.  569.  1991. 
23. Cattell, R.B.  The Scree Test for the Number of Factors. Multivariate 
Behavioral Research.  1.  245 –276.  1966. 
24. Kostoff, R. N.  The Practice and Malpractice of Stemming.  JASIST.  
54:10.  June 2003. 
.  
APPENDIX 1 – SUMMARY FACTOR DESCRIPTIONS 
 
ANTIBODIES AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 
Different types of autoantibodies, especially anti-nuclear, anti-centromere, 
and extractable nuclear, and their relation to auto-immune diseases such as 
MCTD and SLE. 
 
 70
RAYNAUD'S SYNDROME-RELATED AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 
Auto-immune diseases associated with Raynaud’s Phenomenon, such as 
CREST syndrome. 
 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS CLASSIFICATION 
Compares specificity of the American Rheumatism Association criteria for 
the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus. 
 
ADRENAL CORTEX HORMONES FOR LUPUS 
Role of glucocorticoids in treating lupus erythematosus. 
 
SCLEROTIC AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 
Scerloderma-spectrum autoimmune diseases, especially the CREST 
syndrome, and especially in females. 
 
ENDOTHELIAL CELL ACTIVITY IN PSS 
Endothelial cell activity in patients with progressive systemic sclerosis. 
 
MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE 
Fatal conditions associated with mixed connective tissue disease. 
 
CIRCULATING IMMUNE COMPLEXES 
Serum levels of circulating immune complexes (including cryoglobulins) 
and immunoglobulins, especially IgG and IgM, with some emphasis on their 
relation to biliary cirrhosis. 
 
DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT COMPONENTS 
Hereditary deficiencies of complement components 
 
FASCIA-FOCUSED INFLAMMATION 
 71
Inflammation, especially of the fascia (eosinophilic fasciitis), and the 
steroids used to control the inflammation. 
 
CORONARY CIRCULATION AND HYPERTENSION 
Coronary circulation and blood pressure problems; action of adrenergic 
antagonists, such as propranolol, on beta-2 adrenergic receptors. 
 
SMOOTH MUSCLE RESPONSE TO DRUGS 
In-vivo and in-vitro animal responses of smooth muscle to pharmacological 
agents, especially norepinephrine. 
 
PLASMA LIPID FRACTION CONTROL 
Prevention of myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, and cardiovascular 
arrhythmia through control of plasma lipid fractions. 
 
CARDIAC BLOOD SUPPLY OBSTRUCTIONS 
Cardiac and cerebral blood supply obstructions in young women, including 
migraine. 
 
DOUBLE-BLIND VASODILATOR TRIALS 
Double-blind trials for vasodilators such as nifedipine, or of imidazole 
derivatives as thromboxane-A synthase inhibitors for reduced platelet 
aggregation. 
 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
Calcium channel blockers and vasodilators, including their effect on smooth 
muscle contraction and treatment of non-cardiac disorders such as asthma. 
 
BIOFEEDBACK TRAINING FOR IMPROVED CIRCULATION 
Use of biofeedback and autogenic training techniques to induce relaxation, 
reduce stress headaches, and raise temperatures through improved 
circulation. 
 72
 
REDUCED PLATELET AGGREGATION VASODILATORS 
Administration of vasodilators to improve circulation.  Focuses on double-
blind clinical trials of imidazole derivatives as thromboxane-A synthase 
inhibitors for reduced platelet aggregation.  Also, therapeutic administration 
of drugs, mainly vasodilators such as prostaglandin-E, to increase regional 
blood supply. 
 
PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY SYSTEM VASODILATION 
Vasodilation of the peripheral circulatory system after immersion, and the 
role of calcium in this process. 
 
FINGER BLOOD FLOW MEASUREMENTS 
Blood flow, and associated finger systolic blood pressure and temperature 
measurements. 
 
NAIL-FOLD CAPILLARY MICROSCOPY 
Diagnostic uses of electron microscopy and nail-fold capillary microscopy. 
 
TRANSCUTANEOUS NERVE STIMULATION/ VASODILATION 
Mediators of skin vasodilation induced by transcutaneous nerve stimulation. 
 
SURGICAL/ NERVE BLOCK CIRCULATION OBSTRUCTION 
SOLUTIONS 
Surgical and nerve block solutions to remove motor system constrictions on 
circulation, including surgical treatments for subclavian artery lesions and 
embolism at the thoracic outlet and other arteries. 
 
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME 
Carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 
VIBRATION-BASED CIRCULATION PROBLEMS 
 73
Impact of vibratory tools (such as chain saws) on circulation, and adverse 
effects of occupational vibration on the peripheral nervous system. 
 
VINYL CHLORIDE EFFECTS ON BLOOD FLOW AND PROPERTIES 
Vinyl chloride effects on blood flow and properties, especially chemically-
induced diseases, such as osteolysis, resulting from the industrial use of 
vinyl chloride compounds. 
 
TREATMENTS FOR CHEMICALLY-INDUCED NEOPLASMS 
Chemotherapeutic treatments for neoplasms, especially testicular neoplasms. 
 74
Section 4.  Systematic Acceleration of Radical Discovery and Innovation 
in Science and Technology    
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “Systematic Acceleration of Radical Discovery 
and Innovation in Science and Technology”.  DTIC Technical Report 
Number ADA430720 (http://www.dtic.mil/).  Defense Technical 
Information Center.  Fort Belvoir, VA.  2005., and Kostoff, R.N.  
“Systematic Acceleration of Radical Discovery and Innovation in Science 
and Technology”.  Technological Forecasting and Social Change.  73 (8): 
923-936. 2006.)     
 
OVERVIEW 
 
A systematic two-component approach (front-end component, back-end 
component) to bridging unconnected disciplines and accelerating potentially 
radical discovery and innovation (based wholly or partially on text mining 
procedures) is presented.  The front-end component has similar objectives to 
those in the classical literature-based discovery (LBD) approach, although it 
is different mechanistically and operationally.  The front-end component  
will systematically identify technical disciplines (and their associated 
leading experts) that are directly or indirectly-related to solving technical 
problems of high interest.  The back-end component is actually a family of 
back-end techniques, only one of which shares the strictly literature-based 
analysis of the classical LBD approach.  The non-LBD back-end techniques 
(literature-assisted discovery) make use of the human experts associated 
with the disparate literatures (disciplines) uncovered in the front-end to 
generate radical discovery and innovation.   
 
Specifically, in the literature-assisted discovery operational mode, these 
disparate discipline experts could be used as: 
  
1.    Recipients of solicitation announcements (BAA, SBIR, MURI, 
journal Special Issue calls for papers, etc),  
2.    Participants in Workshops, Advisory Panels, Review Panels,  
Roadmaps, and War Games, 
3.    Points of Contact for Field Science Advisors, Foreign Field 
Offices, Program Officer site visits, and potential transitions 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
 75
Discovery is ascertaining something previously unknown or unrecognized.  
Innovation reflects the metamorphosis from present practice to some new, 
hopefully “better” practice.  It can be based on existing non-implemented 
knowledge, discovery of previously unknown information, discovery and 
synthesis of publicly available knowledge whose independent segments have 
never been combined, and/ or invention.  In turn, the invention could derive 
from logical exploitation of a knowledge base, and/ or from spontaneous 
creativity (e.g., Edisonian discoveries from trial and error). [1].   
 
More generally, radical discovery and radical innovation depend on the 
source of the inspiration and/ or the magnitude of the impact.  The more 
disparate the source of ideas from the target problem discipline, the more 
radical the potential discovery or innovation.  The greater the magnitude of 
change/ impact resulting from the discovery or innovation, the more radical 
the potential discovery or innovation.  The emphasis of the present section is 
on the breadth of the source. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Literature-based discovery (LBD) is a systematic two-component approach 
to bridging unconnected disciplines (front-end component, back-end 
component) based on text mining procedures.  LBD allows potentially 
radical discovery and innovation to be hypothesized.  Classically, the LBD 
front-end component has been used to identify the pool of potential 
discovery and innovation candidates, and the LBD back-end component has 
been used to hypothesize the potential discovery and innovation based on 
literature analysis alone.   
 
The pioneering LBD study was reported in Swanson’s paper hypothesizing  
treatments for Raynaud’s Disease [2].  Subsequent LBD studies were 
performed by Swanson/ Swanson & Smalheiser on other medical problems  
[e.g., 3-6].  They also developed more formalized analytical techniques for 
hypothesizing radical discovery [e.g., 7-8].  Other researchers have used 
variants of Swanson’s approach for hypothesizing radical discovery [e.g., 9-
12].  Given: 
 
• the length of time since Swanson’s pioneering paper (two decades),  
• the massive number of medical and technical problems in need of 
radical discovery, and  
 76
• the relatively few articles published in the literature using existing 
LBD approaches to generate radical discovery (especially articles not 
published by the Swanson/ Smalheiser team and not replicating the 
initial Raynaud’s results),  
 
it is clear that improvements in the fundamental approach and its 
dissemination and acceptability are required. 
 
Additionally, LBD consists of literature analysis only for the entire process.  
Yet, the front-end of the process generates the pool of discovery candidates, 
including all types of documents and their authors, especially from disparate 
disciplines that historically serve as a powerful source of radical discovery.  
There appear to be no studies reported in the literature that have made 
explicit use of the discipline experts (identified in the front-end of the LBD 
process) for generating radical discovery and innovation.   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Discovery and innovation are the cornerstones of frontier research.  One of 
the methods for generating radical discovery and innovation in a target 
discipline is to use principles and insights from disciplines very disparate to 
the target discipline, to solve problems in the target discipline.  
Unfortunately, identifying these linkages between the disparate and target 
disciplines, and making the subsequent extrapolations has tended to be a 
very serendipitous process.  Until now, there has been no fully systematic 
approach to bridging these unconnected target and disparate disciplines.  The 
present section describes a systematic approach, or more specifically, 
variants of a systematic approach (based wholly or partially on text mining 
procedures) for making these connections.  One of the virtues of these 
specific approaches is that most of them can easily be integrated into the 
operational processes of science and technology (S&T) sponsoring 
organizations, or research performing organizations.  However, some of 
these approaches do have characteristics of ‘disruptive technologies’, due to 
the additional effort required to properly integrate large numbers of concepts 
representing many disparate disciplines. 
   
There are many examples where acceleration of discovery and/ or 
innovation require insights and knowledge from ‘external’ (i.e., indirectly-
related or disparate) technical disciplines, sometimes very disparate 
disciplines.  One could envision a solution to ‘mine detection’ that exploits 
 77
the remote detection of markers of nitrogen homeostasis in the presence of 
clinical disorders.  In this case, the ‘internal’ (i.e., core, or directly related) 
technical discipline is that ordinarily associated with ‘mine detection’, while 
the ‘external’ technical disciplines would be those associated with specific 
aspects of remote (or possibly in-situ) detection not normally associated with 
‘mine detection’.  The real challenge is to have a systematic process that 
identifies these ‘external’ disciplines starting from the ‘internal’ disciplines 
(thereby retaining some indirect thread of connectivity between the ‘internal’ 
and ‘external’ disciplines), and then extrapolates the insights and knowledge 
from these ‘external’ disciplines to solve problems in the ‘internal’ 
discipline or technology of interest. 
  
The challenge has become more critical due to increasing specialization and 
effective isolation of technical/ medical researchers and developers [13].  As 
research funding and numbers of researchers have increased substantially 
over the past few decades, the technical literature has increased substantially 
as a result.  Researchers/ developers struggle to keep pace with their own 
disciplines, much less to develop awareness of other disciplines.  Thus, we 
have the paradox that the expansion of research has led to the balkanization 
of research!  The resulting balkanization serves as a barrier to cross-
discipline knowledge transfers, and retards the progress of discovery and 
innovation [13]. 
  
There are two main text mining avenues for extrapolating knowledge and 
insights from one discipline/ technology to another: literature-based 
discovery and literature-assisted discovery.  The literature-based discovery 
approach uses technical experts to access and examine the literature from 
‘external’ disciplines to help solve problems in the ‘internal’ discipline.  The 
literature-assisted discovery approach uses technical experts from ‘external’ 
disciplines in a variety of interactive and/ or independent creative modes for 
the same purpose.   
 
The main thesis of this section is that the scientific community has not made 
adequate use of these ‘external’ discipline sources of knowledge to 
accelerate potentially radical discovery and innovation.  Further, very 
substantive quality enhancements to funding agency S&T programs, 
individual research projects, journal Special Issues, and multi-disciplinary 
teams and organizations are possible at relatively small marginal costs, if we 
can systematically improve access to the limitless sources of ‘external’ 
discipline/ technology information.  
 78
 
RADICAL DISCOVERY AND INNOVATION CONCEPT 
  
Text mining is the extraction of useful information from large volumes of 
text [14-15].  The author’s text mining effort over the past decade has been 
developing methods to systematically access external sources of information 
that could contribute to problem solving for specific technical disciplines, 
technologies, systems, operations, or technical problems in general [e.g., 16-
25].  These methods have been integrated to form the following systematic 
approach for accelerating radical discovery and innovation. 
 
Figure 1 contains a schematic of our text mining approach to discovery.  The 
inner circle represents the core literature of the problem to be solved.  In the 
example for Figure 1, the problem to be solved is identifying ‘improved’  
alternatives to existing water purification technologies, where ‘improved’ 
could encompass any combination of lower cost, lower energy use, lower 
maintenance, higher reliability, lighter weight, and improved modularity for 
field assembly.  Thus, the core literature is the existing (more or less 
commonly accepted) water purification literature.  The annular region 
between the inner and outer circles represents literatures related more 
indirectly to the core literature. 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WATER 
PURIFICATION 
MASS SEPARATION 
DISINFECTION 
BACK-END FRONT-END 
STEP 1 (CHARACTERIZE 
               CORE LITERATURE) 
 
•QUERY 
•CHARACTERIZATION 
•INFRASTRUCTURE 
•TECH STRUCTURE 
 
STEP 2 (CHARACTERIZE  
              EXPANDED 
              LITERATURE) 
 
•EXPANDED QUERY 
•CHARACTERIZATION 
•INFRASTRUCTURE 
•TECH STRUCTURE 
STEP 3 (DISCOVERY) 
 
IDENTIFY POTENTIAL 
DISCOVERY 
DRAW LINK BETWEEN 
POTENTIAL DISCOVERY 
AND CORE LITERATURE 
 79
The discovery process presented in the present section is divided into two 
components, a front-end and a back-end.   
 
FRONT-END 
 
Step 1 
The front-end component (summarized to the left of the figure) contains two 
major steps: characterization of the core literature (Step 1), and 
characterization of the expanded literature, including identification of 
technical experts associated with this literature (Step 2).  In Step 1, a query 
to retrieve the core literature is developed iteratively [e.g., 26-27].  Once the 
core literature has been retrieved with this query, it is subject to text mining 
[14-25].  Bibliometrics provides the technical infrastructure (key authors/ 
institutions/ countries/ journals, etc) of the core literature [e.g., 16-25], and 
computational linguistics provides the technical structure (technical thrusts, 
hierarchical taxonomies) of the core literature [e.g., 16-25].  Step 1 reflects 
the scope of many of our mono-technology text mining studies to date [e.g., 
16-25]. 
 
The criticality of Step 1 cannot be overemphasized.  The core literature 
represents the starting point for the expansion processes.  The derived 
expanded literature determines the pool of discovery candidates.  Any gaps 
in the core literature will be reflected as gaps in the pool of potential 
discovery candidates.  Therefore, it is imperative that the core literature be 
as complete and comprehensive as possible for the discovery application. 
 
References [26-27] above summarize the author’s approach to query 
generation for core literature retrieval.  Extensive exploitation of co-
occurrence phenoma across many attributes is made.  For discovery 
purposes in particular, techniques that specifically exploit the underlying 
semantic structure of the core literature should also be used, in addition to 
strictly co-occurrence techniques.  The author has made extensive use of 
factor analysis in understanding the semantic/ conceptual structure of 
retrieved literatures, and has made less formal use of factor analysis for 
query refinement of the core literature.  The factor matrix filtering technique 
[28] was developed to exploit the underlying semantic structure of a 
retrieved literature for the purpose of identifying high technical content 
phrases based on the strength of their contribution to semantic concepts.  
This is another approach for selecting new query terms. 
 
 80
More formal techniques that exploit the semantic structure, such as latent 
semantic indexing [10, 29], should also be examined for core literature 
definition.  Whether these semantic structure exploitation techniques offer 
more than properly conducted attribute co-occurrence techniques [e.g., 27] 
remains to be demonstrated in practice.  A multitude of information retrieval 
techniques have been examined for more than a decade at the TREC 
conferences [http://trec.nist.gov/pubs.html], and the interested reader is 
advised to examine the proceedings of these conferences.  
 
Step 2 
 
a. Overview 
In Step 2, the query developed in Step 1 is generalized and expanded, again 
iteratively (see the next section for some practical techniques to generate the 
expanded query).  This expanded query will retrieve records from literatures 
more indirectly related to the core literature.  Insights and principles from 
these disparate literatures/ technical disciplines can be extrapolated to solve 
problems of the core literature.  Thus, in the example on Figure 1, the core 
water purification literature query is expanded to cover/ retrieve all of mass 
separation and disinfection documents.  Insights from very disparate mass 
separation and disinfection approaches can then be extrapolated to solve 
problems in water purification. 
 
b. Details of Query Expansion 
This section provides more detail on query expansion for discovery and 
innovation.  The objective is to generalize the query terms while maintaining 
a delicate balance: the generalized terms bear some relation to the initial 
core literature retrieval terms while the relation is sufficiently indirect for the 
two literatures to be considered disjoint.  Also, the expanded query terms are 
not overly general such that an unwieldy amount of data is retrieved, or the 
records retrieved are so distant from those of the core literature that impacts 
will be minimal [30].   
 
The approach consists of examining each core literature query term, and 
testing different levels of generalizing the term to insure that the above 
objectives are met.  If the records retrieved from the previous iteration are 
clustered, then terms for the expanded query should be selected such that 
each main theme from the clustering is adequately represented in the query 
[31].  Each term being considered for the expanded query should be tested in 
the source database (e.g., Science Citation Index [SCI]) for retrieval 
 81
efficiency of relevant records.  In some cases, very general forms of the term 
should be inserted in the source database, and the retrieved records analyzed 
for more specific variants of the overly general form of the term. 
 
At this point, an example may be illuminating.  Consider the topics 
represented in Figure 1.  The first precursor discovery objective is to expand 
the core water purification literature to include a more general indirectly-
related literature containing potential discovery and innovation candidates.  
Clustering of the core literature may show very narrow and specific aspects 
of the assumed two  main themes: distillation, membrane filtering (mass 
separation), ozonation, chlorination (disinfection).  Phrases selected for the 
query should be drawn from each of the more generic versions of the main 
themes, shown bolded in the previous sentence.   
 
For example, suppose WATER PURIFICATION is one of the query terms 
for retrieving the core literature.  How could it be generalized for expansion, 
according to the principles set forth above?  One approach is incremental 
generalization.  WATER is a sub-set of LIQUID.  Therefore, WATER 
PURIFICATION could be generalized incrementally to LIQUID 
PURIFICATION.  Use of this query term in the source literature would 
retrieve documents on purification of liquids in addition to water, and any 
novel concepts used to purify liquids other than water could be extrapolated 
to help solve the water purification problem.   
 
Before adding this more general term to the query, LIQUID 
PURIFICATION should be inserted into the SCI search engine, and the 
retrieval sampled to insure that a high fraction of records relevant to mass 
separation are being retrieved.  In turn, LIQUID is a sub-set of FLUID.  
Therefore, LIQUID PURIFICATION could be generalized incrementally to 
FLUID PURIFICATION, and now concepts from the additional gas 
purification documents could be extrapolated to water purification 
improvements.  The same following steps above would be repeated.  The 
next generalization might be to MASS PURIFICATION, and so on. 
 
How broadly should a query term be generalized?  The more directly related 
the expanded literature is to the core literature, the more obvious will be the 
connections, but the lower will be the probability for radical discovery and 
innovation.  The more indirectly related the expanded literature is to the core 
literature, the less obvious will be the connections, but the higher will be the 
probability for radical discovery and innovation.  Thus, if radical discovery 
 82
and innovation is the goal, the broadest expansion consistent with available 
resources and reasonable numbers of links in the relational chain should be 
utilized. 
 
For the WATER PURIFICATION query term being discussed, a second 
approach to generalization for expansion is to filter the core literature 
records for all phrases containing the word PURIFICATION.  Then, each 
reasonable query expansion term candidate based on PURIFICATION can 
be checked following the steps above. 
 
A third approach to generalization is to select one of the phrase words that is 
too generic to use as a stand-alone query term (e.g., WATER or 
PURIFICATION) for further examination.  Since purification is the 
technology of interest, the word PURIFICATION would be inserted into the 
SCI search engine, and thousands of records retrieved.  Text analyses would 
be performed on these retrieved records, and all phrases containing the word 
PURIFICATION would be extracted, and examined.  Each PURIFICATION 
phrase variant proposed for the query would follow the same checks 
described above.  While time consuming, this is the author’s preferred 
approach for examining foundational terms for query expansion.  In a water 
purification study, for example, this approach could be used for the very 
generic terms of foundational importance to the core separation processes 
(e.g., REMOVAL, SEPARATION, PURIFICATION, EXTRACTION, etc).  
This approach can provide quite comprehensive query terms.  Because of the 
time involved for this latter expansion approach, only the most important 
generic roots should be examined.  All other terms could be examined for 
expansion using the first or second methods described.  As suggested in the 
core literature development section, once the expanded literature has been 
generated using the approaches of the preceding paragraph, it could be 
broadened further using techniques that exploit the underlying semantic 
structure [e.g., 10, 29]. 
 
How large should resultant queries be?  For queries whose objective is 
retrieval of a statistically representative sample of documents from the 
source literature to define the core literature, our marginal utility approach 
can be used to determine cutoff [22].  Basically, more query terms provide 
increased refinement of a fixed scope literature (e.g., the existing water 
purification literature).  In the reference example [22] (a text mining analysis 
of the NonLinear Dynamics literature), a 156 term query was reduced to 100 
terms, with essentially no loss in fidelity of retrieval of the NonLinear 
 83
Dynamics literature.  Other queries used in the past for this objective ranged 
from a handful of terms to hundreds of terms, depending strongly on the 
technology being examined.   
 
For queries whose objective is retrieval of potential discovery items, most 
comprehensive retrieval coverage of an expanding scope literature, 
consistent with high retrieval precision (mainly relevant records), is 
required.  The numbers of query terms will be higher than in the first case, 
and queries up to many hundreds of terms in length (depending on the 
specific technologies being studied) are possible, and in fact have been 
generated.   
 
 
BACK-END 
The back-end component contains the discovery step, which itself contains 
two sub-components.  The first sub-component is identification of potential 
discovery and innovation candidates from the expanded literature, and the 
second sub-component is drawing the linkages between the potential 
discovery/ innovation candidates and the core literature.  As will be shown 
in this section, there are many ways to identify potential discovery and 
innovation candidates, and to draw the subsequent linkages.  These 
techniques differ mainly by the approach mechanics and the types of people 
used to identify the discovery and innovation candidates.  The two main 
discovery and innovation approach types (Literature-Based, Literature-
Assisted) are described now. 
 
A.  Literature-Based Discovery 
We can use systematic techniques to identify potential discovery and 
innovation based strictly on the ‘external’ literature, an approach known as 
literature-based discovery (LBD) [2,8,9].  LBD is useful in the planning and 
concept identification phases of the S&T development cycle.  The literature-
based approach can be viewed as a very sophisticated type of literature 
survey, and represents a somewhat different way of doing business for most 
S&T sponsoring agencies, researchers, and technical journals.  Done 
properly, LBD has the potential of generating at least an order of 
magnitude more true discovery than what has been reported in the LBD 
literature (as we are in the process of demonstrating). 
 
B.  Literature-Assisted Discovery 
 84
We can identify technical experts associated with the ‘external’ indirectly-
related disciplines, and then have them focus their expertise on solving 
problems of interest from the ‘internal’ disciplines.  This literature-assisted 
people-based approach could easily be incorporated into most S&T 
sponsoring agencies’ existing operational procedures.  However, in some 
applications, proper handling of the infusion of large numbers of concepts 
and insights from disparate disciplines will acquire the characteristics of 
‘disruptive technologies’. 
 
Thus, the differences between paths A and B above are in the ‘back-end’, in 
1) how the linkages between the ‘external’ and ‘internal’ disciplines are 
made, and 2) who makes the linkages. 
 
The ultimate goal should be incorporation of both approaches in parallel, to 
exploit the strengths of each approach while eliminating the weaknesses.  
This synergy would provide the comprehensiveness and objectivity of the 
completely literature-based approach coupled with the interaction and 
feedback of the literature-assisted people-based approach [1]. 
  
With respect to the literature-assisted approach, how would the ‘external’ 
discipline experts be incorporated into different components of the overall 
research enterprise’s operations, for the purpose of enhancing and 
accelerating discovery and innovation?  The following literature-assisted 
 options are a sample of what is possible. 
  
1) Solicitations – Science and Technology Sponsoring Organizations 
Government agencies and private foundations generate numerous 
solicitations for proposals and/ or new ideas for solving problems.  In the 
United States, these include Broad Agency Announcements (BAAs), Small 
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) solicitations, and other similar types.  
For the Federal agencies, these solicitations are usually advertised in some 
widely available forum (e.g., FedBizOpps) and, in parallel, some 
announcements of the solicitation are disseminated to technical experts 
deemed knowledgeable about the topic.  These targeted announcements are 
extremely important, since they insure that the recipient will be aware of 
the solicitation. The numbers of announcements are usually modest, because 
of limited prior access to potentially relevant communities. 
  
OPTION 1.  The first option is that the ‘external’ discipline experts 
identified through the text mining, as well as the comprehensive list of 
 85
‘internal’ discipline experts, constitute the bulk of the announcement 
distribution list.  In this way, their expertise in a directly or indirectly-related 
discipline could be brought to bear on solving the sponsor’s problem of 
interest, with their motivation amplified by the potential for funding, if 
successful.  These ‘internal’ and ‘external’ discipline experts would also 
serve as the gateway to identifying additional technical experts (in their 
specific disciplines) not associated with the particular literatures accessed 
(e.g., through common professional societies, institution sub-divisions, 
attendance at conferences with the experts identified through the strictly 
literature approach), and thereby adding these additional technical experts to 
the problem-solving process.  Use of the expanded notification list could 
result in an order of magnitude more proposals, and perhaps two orders of 
magnitude more potentially radical discovery and innovation proposals.  
 
Potential consequences (‘side-effects’) resulting from this new approach to 
solicitations include 1) substantial increases in numbers of proposals (as we 
have demonstrated successfully), 2) need to expand diversity of reviewers’ 
technical disciplines to insure interdisciplinary proposals receive balanced 
evaluation [13], and 3) need to facilitate/ stimulate discovery process by 
improved notification instructions.  Consequences 1) and 2) could have 
modest ‘disruptive technology’ characteristics, especially if very large 
numbers of proposals from experts in many disparate disciplines are 
received. 
 
2) Solicitations – Science and Technology Journals  
Many technical specialty journals are structured on centuries-old research 
archival and dissemination models.  Their scope is ‘stove-piped’ about quite 
narrow themes.  This parochialism is further compounded by the increasing 
influence of Impact Factor as a publication metric target, restricting the 
types of articles published to increasingly narrower bands.  The publication 
trend is toward more narrowly discipline-focused articles that will receive 
high citations.  The trend is away from articles that encompass very diverse 
disciplines, may not receive high citations on average due to their inter-
disciplinary nature [13], but could stimulate more radical discovery and 
innovation. 
 
My recent citation studies of specific technical journals and of specific 
multi-journal technical disciplines show graphically the narrow dispersion of 
highly cited paper types, especially in the technical specialty journals.  This 
trend needs to be reversed if the technical journals are to assume their 
 86
rightful positions as engines of innovation.  The following paragraphs offer 
one approach for reversing this trend. 
 
Most technical journals produce Special Issues periodically.  These Special 
Issues tend to focus on a single topic, and usually have recognized experts 
on the specific topic present their perspectives.  The papers tend to focus on 
comprehensiveness of coverage about the specific topic, rather then 
venturing into very disparate disciplines in a search for discovery. 
 
There are two main avenues by which Special Issue papers are solicited.  
One is the Guest Editor (usually a recognized expert in the Special Issue 
topic) inviting other recognized experts known to him/ her.  The second is 
the Guest Editor/ journal placing ‘call for papers’ ads in prior issues of the 
journal, or other closely-related topic-centric journals.  In both cases, the 
result is the same: papers centered closely about the topic of interest. 
 
However, the Special Issue concept could be expanded to emphasize radical 
discovery and innovation.  As in the science and technology sponsoring 
organization example, notification of the projected Special Issue could be 
sent to the technical experts identified in the front end of the text mining 
discovery study.  These experts would be encouraged to submit papers for 
the Special Issue that involved extrapolation of insights and principles from 
their own technical specialties to solving problems in the Special Issue topic.  
In this operational mode, the technical journals would serve proactively as 
the engines for radical discovery and innovation. 
 
OPTION 2. The second option is that the ‘external’ discipline experts 
identified through the text mining, as well as the comprehensive list of 
‘internal’ discipline experts, constitute the bulk of the journal Special Issue 
announcement distribution list.  In this way, their expertise in a directly or 
indirectly-related discipline could be brought to bear on solving the Special 
Issue’s particular problem of interest, with their motivation amplified by the 
potential for journal publication, if successful.   
 
The potential consequences from this new mode of Special Issue operation 
mirror those of the first option: more papers than normal, greater topical 
diversity in papers, and need to facilitate discovery and innovation.  It is 
strongly recommended that the Special Issue be expanded in size from the 
normal journal practice, to accommodate the expected increase in number of 
submittals.  Sponsorship of such Special Issues by the science and 
 87
technology funding organizations seems appropriate.  Modest honoraria 
could also be provided to authors as further motivation for participation.  
 
3) Advisory Panels 
Government agencies and private organizations convene numerous advisory 
panels or groups of independent advisors for the purpose of providing expert 
technical advice on problems of present and future interest.  Unfortunately, 
many of these advisory groups are somewhat parochial, both in terms of 
technical scope and people, thereby limiting the breadth of their 
recommendations.   
  
OPTION 3. The third option is that the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) discipline 
experts identified through the text mining constitute a significant portion of 
the members of these groups. 
  
4) Workshops 
Government agencies and private organizations conduct numerous 
workshops for the purpose of generating new project ideas and directions.  
Many of these workshop participants are somewhat parochial, both in terms 
of technical scope and people.  Additionally, venture capital organizations, 
and other components of Wall Street, have great needs for workshops that 
could provide insight on the potential of emerging technologies.  It would be 
useful for these organizations to know whether the core technology of 
interest is amenable to improvement, and whether some of the indirectly-
related technologies can offer potential solutions across many different core 
technologies. 
  
OPTION 4. The fourth option is that the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) discipline 
experts identified through the text mining constitute a significant portion of 
the participants at these workshops [1].  If the workshops are conducted in 
tandem with the solicitation processes above, then the results from the 
solicitations could be used to narrow the pool of candidates for these 
workshops.  The workshop attendees could be drawn from the solicitation 
announcement recipient group that submitted proposals to the sponsoring 
organization solicitations, or the solicitation announcement recipient group 
that submitted papers to the technical journal solicitations.  At a minimum, 
the members of these groups had sufficient insight to perceive how concepts 
from their areas of expertise could be extrapolated to solve problems of 
interest in the core technology. 
  
 88
5) Review Panels 
Government agencies and private organizations conduct numerous review 
panels during the execution of their S&T programs.  Some agencies use such 
panels to help evaluate proposals and provide recommendations.  Many of 
these review/ evaluation panels are somewhat parochial, both in terms of 
technical scope and people.  This limits discussion of the breadth of 
approaches that could be used to achieve the program objectives.   
  
OPTION 5. The fifth option is that a portion of the reviewers be drawn from 
the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) discipline experts identified through the text 
mining. 
  
6) Roadmaps 
Some government agency and private organization programs generate 
technology roadmaps (see [32] for a description of technology roadmaps) as 
part of their planning processes, and/ or as part of their review processes.  
Many of these roadmap development teams have limited perspectives, both 
in terms of technical scope and people.  The breadth of these roadmaps is 
limited by the breadth of their developers. 
  
OPTION 6. The sixth option is that a sub-set of the ‘external’ (and 
‘internal’) discipline experts identified through the text mining constitute a 
significant portion of the roadmap development team.  As in the workshop 
option, the solicitation step could be used to filter the candidate pool for 
prospective roadmap development team members. 
  
7) Points of Contact 
Many government agency components require points of contact (POCs) for 
obtaining information to solve problems.  These include the Field Science 
Advisors for military organizations, Foreign Field Offices of government 
agencies, Program Officers for site visits, and Program Officers to identify 
potential transitions.  In practice, many of these POCs accessed derive from 
limited personal knowledge, both in terms of technical scope and people.  
The breadth of the information obtained from the POCs is limited by their 
breadth of expertise. 
  
OPTION 7. The seventh option is that the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) 
discipline experts identified through the text mining constitute a very 
significant portion of the POCs accessed in practice.  Again, as in the 
 89
workshop option, the solicitation step could be used to filter the candidate 
pool for prospective POCs. 
 
8) Organization and Team Structuring 
Technical teams and organizations can be structured to maximize the 
potential for radical discovery and innovation, based on the principles 
presented in the paragraphs above.  Multi-disciplinary groups/ structures 
such as Integrated Product Teams (IPTs), Multi-Disciplinary Research 
Programs of the URI  (MURIs), and Cooperative Research and Development 
Agreements (CRADAs) could be assembled based on the technical 
disciplines and technical experts identified at the front-end of the discovery 
process above.  Organizations such as Centers of Excellence with a defined 
core competency, and large laboratories with multiple core competencies, 
could be structured to incorporate the technical disciplines surrounding their 
core identified at the front-end of the discovery process.  
 
OPTION 8. The eighth option is that the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) 
disciplines identified through the text mining constitute a significant portion 
of the teams and organizations.  Where possible, the solicitation step could 
be used to filter the candidate pool for prospective team and organization 
members. 
 
9. War Games 
War games model and/ or simulate different pre-combat, combat, and post-
combat scenarios.  Each Title 10 war game, in addition to major and minor 
players, the assessors, and the game controlling authority, also has various 
supporting cells to provide expertise and insight in key areas. For example, 
the Science and Technology Cell's primary function at the Global 98 game 
was to provide future projections of technology that could be available to the 
game players, and to suggest applications resulting from ongoing R&D.  The 
effectiveness of the advice from such S&T cells depends on the breadth of 
technical understanding of the cells’ members.  Additionally, the value of 
the war games depends in part on the technology capabilities designed into 
the games and the post-games evaluation of the role that technology played 
in impacting tactics and strategy. 
 
OPTION 9.  The ninth option is that the ‘external’ (and ‘internal’) 
disciplines identified through the text mining constitute a portion of the 
supporting S&T cells’ memberships, the membership of the games’ 
 90
technology designers, and the membership of the post-games’ technology 
evaluators.   
  
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
I have proposed the identification and exploitation of diverse literatures, and 
their representative experts, to help solve problems of interest through 
potentially radical discovery and innovation.  The approach is based on our 
demonstrated text mining techniques.  Their essential element is 
development of comprehensive and precise queries for retrieving the 
expanded literature of potential discovery candidates, followed by 
exploitation of these retrieved literatures and their associated technical 
expert representatives.   
  
I have identified a number of pathways by which these literatures and people 
could be integrated with present business practices, or could be integrated 
with slight modifications if desired.  This group of ‘external’ literature 
accession techniques has the highest benefit/ cost ratio of any techniques I 
know for enhancing and accelerating radical discovery and innovation.   
 
Additionally, the “structural holes” research of Professor Burt [33], which 
identifies ‘structural holes’ as the weakly-linked or non-linked region 
between different technical disciplines, has shown that most innovations 
studied have been the result of drawing on insights from unconnected, 
sometimes very disparate, disciplines/ technologies.  These findings support 
the thesis that is the basis for my proposal above.  Translated into practice, 
the following important guidelines can be drawn.   
  
1.    If we are interested in meeting short-term deadlines efficiently with 
specific well-defined technology products, then homogeneous well-
coordinated and long-standing groups are most useful.   
2.    If we are interested in radical discovery and innovation, including 
innovation in the advanced technology demonstration of system 
integration sense, then we need to incorporate people we don’t know 
representing disciplines with which we are not familiar.  It is difficult 
to get ‘out-of-the-box’ thinking from people who have spent their 
careers ‘in-the-box’! 
  
The generic literature-based and literature-assisted discovery approaches 
provide a systematic and objective guide to selecting the most appropriate 
 91
disciplines and people for accelerating potentially radical discovery and 
innovation. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 4. 
 
1. Kostoff RN.   Stimulating innovation.  International Handbook of 
Innovation.  Larisa V. Shavinina (ed.).  Elsevier Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, Oxford, UK.  388-400.  2003. 
2. Swanson DR.  Fish oil, Raynauds syndrome, and undiscovered public 
knowledge.  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.  30 (1): 7-18 Fall 1986 
3. Swanson DR. Mmigraine and magnesium - 11 neglected connections.  
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 31 (4): 526-557.  Summer 1988 
4. Swanson DR.  Somatomedin-C and arginine - implicit connections 
between mutually isolated literatures.  Perspectives in Biology and 
Medicine.  33 (2): 157-186 Winter 1990. 
5. Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR.  Assessing a gap in the biomedical 
literature - magnesium-deficiency and neurologic disease.  Neuroscience 
Research Communications 15 (1): 1-9.  July-August 1994. 
6. Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR, Bookstein A.  Information discovery from 
complementary literatures: Categorizing viruses as potential weapons  
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology.  
52 (10): 797-812.  August 2001. 
7. Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR. An interactive system for finding 
complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery.  Artificial 
Intelligence.  91(2).  1997. 
8. Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR.  Using ARROWSMITH: a computer-
assisted approach to formulating and assessing scientific hypotheses  
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 57 (3): 149-153.  Nov 
1998. 
9. Gordon MD, Lindsay RK.  Toward discovery support systems: A 
replication, re-examination, and extension of Swanson's work on literature-
based discovery of a connection between Raynaud's and fish oil .  Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science 47 (2): 116-128.  Feb 1996. 
10. Gordon MD, Dumais S.  Using latent semantic indexing for literature 
based discovery.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
49 (8): 674-685.  June 1998. 
11. Weeber M, Klein H, de Jong-van den Berg LTW, et al.  Using concepts 
in literature-based discovery: Simulating Swanson's Raynaud-fish oil and 
migraine-magnesium discoveries.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology.  52 (7): 548-557.  May 2001. 
 92
12. Stegmann J, Grohmann G.  Hypothesis generation guided by co-word 
clustering.  Scientometrics 56 (1): 111-135.  2003. 
13. Kostoff, RN.  Overcoming specialization.   BioScience.  52:10.  937-941.  
2002. 
14. Kostoff, RN.  Text mining for global technology watch.  In 
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science,  Second Edition.  Drake, 
M., Ed.  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  New York, NY.  2003. Vol. 4.  2789-2799. 
15. Hearst, M.  Untangling text data mining.  In the Proceedings of ACL'99: 
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
University of Maryland, June 20-26, 1999. 
16. Kostoff RN, Eberhart HJ, and Toothman DR.  Database tomography for 
technical intelligence: a roadmap of the near-earth space science and 
technology literature.  Information Processing and Management.  34:1.  69-
85.  1998. 
17. Kostoff RN, Eberhart HJ, and Toothman DR.  Hypersonic and 
supersonic flow roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography.  
Journal of the American Society for Information Science.  50:5.  427-447.  
15 April 1999. 
18. Kostoff RN, Braun T., Schubert A, Toothman DR., and Humenik JA.   
Fullerene roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography.   Journal 
of Chemical Information and Computer Science.   40:1.  19-39.  Jan-Feb 
2000. 
19. Kostoff RN, Green KA, Toothman DR, and Humenik J.  Database 
tomography applied to an aircraft science and technology investment 
strategy.  Journal of Aircraft, 37:4.  727-730.  July-August 2000. 
20. Kostoff RN, and DeMarco RA.  Science and technology text mining.  
Analytical Chemistry.  73:13.   370-378A.  1 July 2001. 
21. Kostoff RN, Tshiteya R, Pfeil KM, and Humenik JA.  Electrochemical 
power source roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography.   
Journal of Power Sources.  110:1.  163-176.  2002. 
22. Kostoff RN, Shlesinger M, and Tshiteya R.  Nonlinear dynamics 
roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography.  International 
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos.  14:1.  61-92.  January 2004. 
23. Kostoff RN, Shlesinger M, and Malpohl G.  Fractals roadmaps using 
bibliometrics and database tomography.   Fractals.   12:1.  1-16.  March 
2004. 
24. Kostoff RN, Karpouzian G, and Malpohl G.  Text mining the global 
abrupt wing stall literature.  Journal of Aircraft.  42:3.  661-664.  2005.   
 93
25. Kostoff RN,  Tshiteya R, Pfeil KM, Humenik JA., and Karypis G.  
Power source roadmaps using database tomography and bibliometrics.  
Energy.  30:5.  709-730.  2005.   
26. Kostoff RN, Eberhart HJ, and Toothman DR.  Database Tomography for 
information retrieval.  Journal of Information Science.  23:4.  1997. 
27. Kostoff RN.  Systematic acceleration of radical discovery and innovation 
in science and technology.  DTIC Technical Report Number ADA430720 
(http://www.dtic.mil/).  Defense Technical Information Center.  Fort 
Belvoir, VA.  2005.   
28. Kostoff RN, and Block JA.  Factor matrix text filtering and clustering.  
JASIST.  56:9.  946-968.  July.  2005. 
29. Deerwester S, Dumais ST, Furnas GW, Landauer TK, Harshman R.  
Indexing by latent semantic analysis.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science 41 (6): 391-407.  Sept 1990. 
30.  Kostoff RN.  Research impact quantification.  R&D Management. 24:3.  
July 1994. 
31. Kostoff RN.  Method for data and text mining and literature-based 
discovery.  United States Patent Number 6,886,010.  26 April 2005. 
32. Kostoff RN, and Schaller RR.   Science and technology roadmaps.  IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management.  48:2.  132-143.  May 2001. 
33. Burt RS.  Structural holes: The social structure of competition.  Harvard 
University Press.  Cambridge, MA.  1992. 
 94
 Section 5.  Overcoming Specialization 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “Overcoming Specialization.”  BioScience.  52:10.  
937-941.  2002.) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
This section describes the use of modern information technology to identify 
the balance of research disciplines required to comprehensively address any 
research problem, including when multi-disciplinary or inter-disciplinary 
approaches should be used. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Many of the most challenging problems in bio-science require advances in a 
multitude of technical and non-technical disciplines in order for progress to 
be made.  Bio-diversity, bio-complexity, bio-technology, species and eco-
system conservation, and bio-terrorism require expertise from myriad 
technical, legal, political, financial, and cultural disciplines.   
 
For example, environmental bio-complexity is founded on the idea that 
research on the individual components of environmental systems provides 
only limited information about the behavior of the systems themselves. 
Careful attention to the interplay among components is critical to obtaining 
the level of predictive information on which management and regulatory 
decisions must be made. 
 
To understand the complex inter-dependencies among living organisms and 
the environments that affect, sustain, and are modified by them, efforts that 
transcend multiple disciplines are required that: span temporal and spatial 
scales, consider multiple levels of biological organization, cross conceptual 
boundaries, use contemporary technologies, and link research to 
environmental decision-making.  Advancing understanding of the nature and 
role of biological complexity demands increased attention and new 
collaborations of scientists from a broad spectrum of fields -- biology, 
physics, chemistry, geology, hydrology, statistics, engineering, computation, 
and social sciences.  In addition, advances in large-scale applications of 
remote sensors to monitor environmental bio-systems require access to the 
latest science and engineering literature in remote sensing, non-destructive 
evaluation, signal and image processing, pattern recognition, multi-source 
 95
data fusion, fluid dynamics, acoustics, robotics, materials, electronics, and 
many other disciplines. 
 
Thus, in complex bio-science problems, addressing only one or a few of the 
component disciplines will result in fragmented or perhaps misleading 
results due to neglect of discipline inter-dependencies.  However, even if the 
many disciplinary facets of a complex bio-science problem are addressed, 
the method of integration of the multiple facets can impact the solution of 
the problem.  Research that includes multiple disciplines but maintains their 
distinctiveness is multi-disciplinary (Collins 2002).  Such research may not 
include joint planning, management, and review of the multiple disciplines.  
Research that integrates the multiple disciplines to effectively form a new 
unified discipline is inter-disciplinary.  Even if all of the multiple component 
disciplines are addressed separately in a multi-disciplinary approach, the 
final research product will not have the same quality as a unified research 
product resulting from an inter-disciplinary study, especially if the different 
disciplines impact each other strongly. 
 
Another strong motivation for examining multiple disciplines is  increased 
evidence that there are common underlying themes across many research 
fields.  For example, the same equations are used to model phenomena in 
some very diverse disciplines, such as the modeling of chaotic behavior.  
Appropriate inter-discipline research and information transfer can allow 
findings and insights from one discipline to be extrapolated and exploited by 
another, perhaps very disparate, discipline.  
 
Paradoxically, in parallel with the increasing need for inter-disciplinary 
projects, researchers have become much more specialized by necessity.   The 
massive global expansion of technical literatures and other science and 
technology products reduces the time available for researchers to remain 
current in their own specialty disciplines, much less to become familiar with 
progress in other disciplines.  In addition to lack of time, they also have 
many other dis-incentives to participate in inter-disciplinary projects (see 
Box 1). If there are no external incentives offered for inter-disciplinary 
research, most researchers will take the path of least resistance, and restrict 
their research projects within their own, or very closely related, disciplines. 
 
In recent years, research sponsoring agencies have decided there is merit to 
inter-disciplinary research, and have provided incentives for the proposal 
and establishment of such programs.  In many cases, the result has been 
 96
programs that are inter-disciplinary on paper only.  They are not managed or 
reviewed as a cohesive inter-disciplinary unit, but are managed and reviewed 
(in practice) as fragmented separate programs.  In other cases, programs (and 
facilities) have been advertised as inter-disciplinary when in reality each 
'discipline' is a minor variant of a single discipline (e.g., Physics/ Materials, 
where the materials group members are basically physicists who happen to 
be focusing on the physics of materials).  The number of true inter-
disciplinary projects and programs that incorporate distinctly different 
disciplines, but are selected, managed, reviewed, and transitioned as 
cohesive units, is a small percentage of all research conducted. 
 
Further, it is difficult to objectively gauge the effectiveness of these inter-
disciplinary efforts.  The metrics used for these assessments, such as 
numbers of paper authors from different disciplines or mixes of discipline 
funding under program managers, are very incomplete.  These quantitative 
metrics are amenable to manipulation, can be deceptive, and intrinsically do 
not describe the quality of the discipline mixing process.  Most egregiously, 
they do not separate artificial inter-disciplinary projects, such as the Physics/ 
Materials example above, from coherent projects consisting of relatively 
disparate disciplines. 
 
However, it is not necessary to conduct all research programs as inter-
disciplinary.  There are some tangible and intangible costs involved in 
conducting inter-disciplinary programs, due to the overhead required to 
integrate diverse technical cultures and traditions (see Box 1).  A program 
should be conducted as inter-disciplinary only if a strong diverse mix of 
disciplines is required to fully address its research objectives. There is no 
intrinsic virtue to conducting projects or programs as inter-disciplinary, 
unless it can be demonstrated that they fundamentally require an inter-
disciplinary approach for maximum advancement. 
 
PROCESS CONCEPT 
 
The fundamental thesis of this section is that the mix of disciplines used in 
the conduct of a science and technology program should correspond to the 
multiple discipline requirements of the program.  I propose a systematic 
three-step process (based on the use of modern information technology) for 
determining the relationship of the  disciplines required to conduct a science 
and technology program to the disciplines selected.  The first step in the 
process is identification of the multiple disciplines that could have some 
 97
impact on the research problem.  The second step is determination of the 
cost-effectiveness (importance versus costs) of employing all the disciplines 
that could potentially impact the problem.  The third step is provision of 
incentives/ mandates to the performers for incorporating those required 
disciplines that will contribute to the problem’s solution cost-effectively. 
 
PROCESS MECHANICS 
 
Background 
 
The proposed three-step process is based on text mining, and uses some of 
the concepts presented in section 4.  For ease of comprehension, some of the 
material from section 4 will be restated, where required.   
 
Text mining is the extraction of useful information from large volumes of 
text (Hearst 1999, Kostoff and DeMarco 2001a, Kostoff 2002a).  Typically, 
text mining uses computational linguistics (e.g., phrase occurrence and co-
occurrence frequencies) and bibliometrics (e.g., author, journal, and 
institution occurrence and co-occurrence frequencies) coupled with expert 
human judgement, to extract useful information from unstructured (free text) 
and semi-structured text (e.g., author, journal, and address fields).  
Extraction of the technical phrases and their occurrence frequencies from 
text identifies the pervasive science and technology areas within the text.  
Extraction of the phrase co-occurrences within some domain (e.g., Abstract, 
paragraph) provides the relationships among the science and technology 
areas, and provides the foundation for identifying new relations among allied 
and disparate science and technology areas. 
 
For the past decade, one of the components of text mining known as 
literature-based discovery (Swanson 1986, Swanson and Smalheiser 1997, 
Gordon and Lindsay 1996, Weeber et al 2001, Kostoff 1999, Kostoff 2002b) 
has been used to identify, retrieve, and integrate appropriate disparate 
literatures for the purpose of generating innovation (see Box 2 for a more 
detailed description of literature-based discovery). In literature-based 
discovery, identification and merging of concepts from very different 
technical disciplines is not an option; it is a requirement.  
 
The literature-based discovery studies that have been performed confirm the 
parochialism of researchers in the specific disciplines studied.  Consider 
Swanson’s initial paper on literature-based discovery (Swanson 1986), in 
 98
which he hypothesized that Fish Oil/ Eicosapentaenoic Acid could alleviate 
some symptoms of Raynaud’s Disease (later confirmed by laboratory and 
clinical tests).  The Raynaud’s Disease researchers were not aware (based on 
what could be deduced from the literature analysis) of the Fish Oil literature, 
and the Fish Oil researchers were not aware of the Raynaud’s literature.  
 
Further, a 2001 bio-terrorism-related literature-based discovery study 
(Swanson et al 2001) identified viruses that are not recognized today as bio-
warfare agents, but have the characteristics to be modified into bio-warfare 
agents.  Such viral agents pose a special threat, since their use would contain 
the element of surprise.  For such agents, there would be no vaccines for 
prevention, no detection, and perhaps no therapies, and the potential 
destructive consequences would be far greater than those of the anthrax 
bacterium.  These viruses had gone un-recognized as candidate bio-warfare 
agents by the technical specialty communities.  The two main bio-warfare 
agent characteristics, virus pathogenicity and virus transmissibility, had been 
studied by two disjoint research communities that were not familiar with 
each other’s literatures (based on what could be deduced from the literature 
analysis).   
 
First and Second Steps 
 
The first step in the process is to perform a literature-based discovery 
analysis of the research problem prior to initiation of a research project. The 
output would consist of identifying: 1) technical disciplines that could 
potentially contribute to advances in the research problem; 2) experts within 
these disciplines; and possibly (not necessarily) 3) potential problem 
solutions.   
 
In the tandem second step, the proposers or principal investigators could 
then estimate the importance of each of the identified disciplines to the 
attainment of the research objectives, and use that as the basis for a strategy 
of constructing the research approach.  
 
This second step would use the output from the literature-based discovery 
for convening workshops or groups of experts (Kostoff 2002b).  In contrast 
to standard workshops (see characteristics below), these workshops would 
be guided, where facilitators would actively enhance the transfer of cross-
discipline information.  The combination of literature-based discovery 
 99
followed by guided workshops would eliminate the deficiencies of standard 
workshops: 
 
1) Small community representation 
2) Parochialism; not all relevant disciplines represented 
3) Human dynamics; can overwhelm technical discussions 
4) High degree of subjectivity 
 
as well as the deficiencies of literature-based discovery: 
 
1) Only a small fraction of R&D conducted gets published  
2) Currency; there is a lag time in publication 
3) Minimal human interaction for concept stimulation 
4) A specific solution to the problem may not be identifiable from the 
literature alone 
 
This combination would retain the strengths of each component to produce a 
systematic enhancement of the environment for stimulating innovation.    In 
the workshop, the range of required disciplines would be clarified further, 
and disciplines added or subtracted to the proposed research approach as 
dictated by the additional costs and benefits to science and technology.  In 
addition, if the literature-based discovery has generated discovery in the 
form of specific hypotheses to be tested, these could be discussed and 
sharpened further. 
 
An initial experiment was performed of this hybrid approach (Kostoff 1999), 
on the topic of Autonomous Flying Systems.   A broad-based literature 
survey was performed, focused more on retrieval than discovery, and experts 
were identified from many disciplines that had some common thread with 
Autonomous Flying Systems.  Experts selected for the workshop were asked 
to identify emerging opportunities from their disciplines well before the 
actual workshop, and then cross-discipline relationships of these 
opportunities were amplified through facilitated pre-meeting internet 
communications.  The workshop meeting time was then used efficiently to 
focus on the most promising cross-discipline relationships and transfers.   
 
The results appeared very positive.  However, it became clear that more 
development of the literature-based discovery process was required to insure 
that the most comprehensive identification of potentially relevant disciplines 
was made.  This is important for identifying, at the workshop, solutions to 
 100
the problem of interest that might not have been identified from the literature 
alone.  
 
Third Step 
 
The first two steps are mechanistic technology steps.  They will work 
technically, although improvements in each are desirable and possible.  The 
third step is the most difficult, since it involves incentives and the 
accompanying human issues of motivation, tradition, culture, and inertia.  If 
progress is to be made in pursuing intrinsically inter-disciplinary research 
appropriately, mandates requiring at least the first step of the hybrid process 
(literature-based discovery) are probably required initially.  After the 
technical community becomes convinced of the benefits of incorporating 
text mining at the initiation of research projects, and becomes familiar with 
the process mechanics involved, then incentives can probably replace 
mandates for performing pre-project text mining. 
 
There is precedent for these types of pre-project literature survey mandates.  
A number of Federal agencies require literature surveys before initiation of 
research projects.  Since text mining (sans workshop) could be viewed as a 
sophisticated form of literature survey, introduction of a pre-project text 
mining requirement would in some sense be an extension of existing 
literature survey requirements.  
 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
A three-step process has been proposed for insuring selection of a 
comprehensive mix of research disciplines to address a research problem.  
The process is based on the text mining variant of literature-based discovery 
to identify and select the comprehensive discipline mix before research is 
started.  When appropriate, workshops can be convened using the 
information developed in the literature-based discovery component. 
 
In this scenario, the literature-based discovery approach would serve as one 
block in the foundation of all research performed, in helping to objectively 
determine the mix of disciplines required to attain the research objectives.  It 
may also provide discovery based on the literature studies alone.  Even if 
actual discovery does not result from the literature phase alone, the 
fundamental value of literature-based discovery in determining discipline 
 101
mixes for subsequent workshops and research program conduct remains un-
diminished. 
 
To insure that most of the potentially important disciplines are identified by 
the literature-based discovery process, more process development is 
required, and more variants of literature-based discovery are required.  The 
quality and credibility of the literature-based discovery output depends on:  
 
1)  Study objectives; metrics used 
2) Source databases used (e.g., Medline, Science Citation Index, Pascal) 
3) Information retrieval techniques used 
4) Record fields analyzed (e.g., Keywords, Titles, Abstracts, Full Text) 
5) Analysis techniques, especially co-occurrence and clustering techniques 
(Kostoff et al 2001b) 
6) Most importantly, the people performing the analysis 
 
Each variant of literature-based discovery will use one or more alternatives 
of these study components, and only very few literature-based discovery 
studies have been published so far.  This expanded development of 
literature-based discovery has not yet been started, and the discipline is one 
that has completely fallen through the cracks relative to government and 
industry funding.  
 
This deficiency is particularly egregious relative to the present global threat 
from bio-terrorism.  To the author’s knowledge, Swanson et al (2001) was 
the only published text mining study to have addressed bio-warfare agent 
prediction.  One small study, using one approach, represents the total 
reported global text mining effort to prevent surprise by potential 
biowarfare agents that could be identified with publically available 
knowledge!  In what other area of science and technology is only one 
approach, no matter how good, used to solve a problem?  Multiple literature-
based discovery approaches, and multiple studies, are required to insure that 
as many candidate bio-warfare agents as possible are identified. 
 
A national effort is needed to develop parallel literature-based discovery 
approaches, to insure that optimal methods are used to identify and integrate 
findings from disparate disciplines.  Further, experiments are required to 
identify how the literature-based discovery results should be integrated with 
workshops to exploit these multi-disciplinary findings and maximize the 
potential for innovation.  Finally, the requirement for incorporating 
 102
literature-based discovery at the initiation of research projects, to insure that 
all relevant research reported and all potentially relevant disciplines are 
identified, should be mandated for all Federally-supported research.  Such a 
process would identify research that required multiple disciplines for rapid 
advancement, as well as research that could produce acceptable results from 
mono-discipline analysis.  
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 5 
 
Bauer HH.  1990.  Barriers against interdisciplinarity-implications for study 
of science, technology, and society (STS).  Science, Technology, and 
Human Values.  15:1.  105-119. 
 
Bruhn JG.  1995.  Beyond discipline: creating a culture for interdisciplinary 
research.  Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science.  30:4.  331-341. 
 
Butler D.  1998.  Interdisciplinary research ‘being stifled’.  Nature.  396.  19 
November.  202.  
 
Collins JR.  2002.  May you live in interesting times: using multidisciplinary 
and interdisciplinary programs to cope with change in the life sciences.  
BioScience.  52:1.  75-83. 
 
Geissler E., ed.  1986.  Biological and Toxin Weapons Today.  SIPRI: 
Oxford University Press.  
 
Gordon MD, Lindsay RK.   1996.  Toward discovery support systems: a 
replication, re-examination, and extension of Swanson's work on literature-
based discovery of a connection between Raynaud's and fish oil.  Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science.  47: 2.  116-128. 
 
Hearst MA.  1999.  Untangling text data mining.  Proceedings of ACL 99, 
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.  
University of Maryland.  June 20-26.  1-9. 
 
Kostoff RN.  1997.  Peer review: the appropriate GPRA metric for research.  
Science.   277.  1 August.  651-652. 
 
Kostoff RN.  1999.  Science and technology innovation.  Technovation.  
19:10.  593-604.   
 103
 
Kostoff, RN,  DeMarco RA.  2001a.  Science and technology text mining.  
Analytical Chemistry.  73:13.   370-378A.   
 
Kostoff RN, Del Rio JA, García, EO, Ramírez AM, Humenik JA.  2001b.  
Citation mining: integrating text mining and bibliometrics for research user 
profiling.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science.  52:13.  
1148-1156. 
 
Kostoff, RN, Hartley J.  2001c.  Structured abstracts for technical journals.  
Science.  5519:1067a.  292. 
 
Kostoff RN.  2002a.  Text mining for global technology watch.  
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science.  In Press. 
 
Kostoff, RN.   2002b.  Stimulating innovation.  International Handbook of 
Innovation.  In Press. 
 
Metzger N, Zare RN.  1999.  Interdisciplinary research: from belief to 
reality.  Science.   283.  642-643. 
 
Naiman RJ.  1999.  A perspective on interdisciplinary science.  Ecosystems.  
2.  292-295. 
 
Swanson DR.  1986.  Fish oil, Raynauds syndrome, and undiscovered public 
knowledge. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.  30: 1.  7-18. 
 
Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR.  1997.  An interactive system for finding 
complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery.  Artificial 
Intelligence.  91:2. 183-203. 
 
Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR, Bookstein A.  2001.  Information discovery 
from complementary literatures: categorizing viruses as potential weapons.  
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology.  
52: 10. 797-812. 
 
Weeber M, Klein H, de Jong-van den Berg LTW, Vos R.  2001.  Using 
concepts in literature-based discovery: simulating Swanson's Raynaud-fish 
oil and migraine-magnesium discoveries.  Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology.  52:7.  548-557. 
 104
 
BOX 1 – MULTI-DISCIPLINARY AND INTER-DISCIPLINARY 
RESEARCH BARRIERS 
 
Some of the specific barriers to multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary 
research include Culture, Time, Evaluation, Publication, Employment, 
Funding, Promotion, and Recognition.   
 
Culture 
Different technical disciplines represent different cultures and traditions.  
Each culture has its own vocabulary, its own perspective on what constitutes 
evidence, its own standards of proof, its own definitions of truth, and its own 
traditions on how research is defined and performed.  Merging of cultures 
and traditions for inter-disciplinary research requires communication, 
coordination, and consensus among cultures, and compromise from all 
parties.  Additional time is required to structure inter-disciplinary proposals, 
and to plan the conduct of research projects (Bauer 1990, Naiman 1999). 
 
Time 
Inter-disciplinary research requires that each participant learn some aspects 
of the other participants’ disciplines, including the cultures and traditions 
noted above.  Time is required to learn these other technologies, cultures, 
traditions, and to effect the coordination and consensus processes.  This time 
expenditure detracts from time spent on the mastery of a single discipline 
(Naiman 1999). 
 
Evaluation 
Peer review is the main and preferred type of research evaluation (Kostoff 
1997).  Traditionally, peer review has consisted mainly of judgements from 
mono-discipline reviewers, often in the same research area as the reviewee 
(Bruhn 1995, Metzger and Zare 1999, Butler 1998).  Reviewers tend to give 
higher marks to in-depth advances made in a single discipline rather than 
less intense advances made across a wider range of disciplines.  
 
Publication 
Most ranked journals tend to have a strong mono-disciplinary mission, and 
many will even discourage submittal of broader-based  inter-disciplinary 
manuscripts (Bruhn 1995, Butler 1998, Naiman 1999).  The manuscript 
review process tends to have similar structure and reviewer parochialism 
problems for inter-disciplinary research as noted above under Evaluation.  
 105
The document Abstract, the main vehicle for communicating research 
content across disciplines in the large databases such as Medline and Science 
Citation Index, is in many cases incomprehensible to all but the research 
area experts (Kostoff and Hartley 2001c). 
 
Employment 
Graduates with specialist degrees are often more marketable than generalists 
(Bruhn 1995).  The problem lessens somewhat as employment in higher 
budget categories (transition to systems development) is pursued, due to 
natural merging of disciplines as focused technologies advance into broader 
systems. 
 
Funding 
Many of the large research-sponsoring organizations are structured along the 
lines of mono-discipline university departments.  Their review panels tend to 
have similar structures, and have the same problems for multi/ inter-
disciplinary research as noted above under Evaluation (Bruhn 1995, Butler 
1998, Metzger and Zare 1999).  In general, mono-discipline research 
proposals fare better than inter-disciplinary research proposals, except where 
programs have been specifically designed to fund inter-disciplinary research 
proposals. 
 
Promotion 
The reward system in universities is designed to recognize the research and 
scholarly contributions of individuals, not teams (Bruhn 1995, Metzger and 
Zare 1999).  Tenure in universities is dependent on the number and quality 
of publications, and is helped by funds that researchers can attract.  As 
shown above, publications and funding are easier to obtain in mono-
disciplinary research, and therefore  inter-disciplinary research is penalized 
further. 
 
Recognition 
National academies and other prestigious professional organizations and 
awards are almost wholly discipline-structured (Metzger and Zare 1999).  
Since recognition has some dependence on publications and citations, and in 
many cases on research empires established (funding obtained), mono-
disciplinary advantages noted above for publications and funding flow into 
recognition as well. 
 
BOX 2 – LITERATURE-BASED DISCOVERY 
 106
 
Literature-based discovery surfaces innovative concepts from directly or 
indirectly-linked literatures.  In published or ongoing studies, the following 
generic steps are used. 
 
1) A problem or topic is defined, and the literature related to that topic is 
retrieved.  For example, in Swanson’s most recently published literature-
based discovery study, bio-warfare agent prediction was the topic of 
interest, and a bio-warfare agent literature was retrieved.  
 
2)  Then, literatures directly and indirectly related to the initial literature are 
identified.  For example, Swanson’s bio-warfare agent study shows that 
directly related literatures such as virus pathogenicity and virus 
transmissibility can be identified. 
 
Finally, innovative concepts that exist in these directly and indirectly related 
literatures, but not in the initial literature, can be identified as true discovery.  
For example, in Swanson’s bio-warfare study, fourteen viruses were 
hypothesized as potential bio-warfare agents.  These viruses have not been 
tested to confirm Swanson’s hypothesis.  However, Swanson’s approach 
also identified 17 viruses out of the 21 in Geissler’s reference on biological 
weapons (Geissler 1986), to high statistical significance, offering some 
confidence in the validity of his predictions on potential bio-warfare agents.  
 107
Section 6.  Detection of Unexpected Asymmetries from the Biomedical 
Literature 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “Bilateral Asymmetry Prediction”.  Medical 
Hypotheses.  61:2.  265-266.  August 2003.) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
This section outlines the process for detecting unexpected asymmetries in 
the biomedical literature, and predicts asymmetries in lateral organ cancer 
incidence from text mining of the Medline database.  Lung, kidney, teste, 
and ovary cancers were examined.  For each cancer, Medline case report 
articles focused solely on 1) cancer of the right organ and 2) cancer of the 
left organ were retrieved.  The ratio of right organ to left organ articles was 
compared to actual patient incidence data obtained from the National Cancer 
Institute’s (NCI) SEER database for the period 1979-1998.  The agreement 
between the Medline record ratios and the NCI’s patient incidence data 
ratios ranged from within three percent for lung cancer to within one percent 
for teste and ovary cancer.  This is the first known study to generate cancer 
lateral incidence asymmetries from the Medline database.  The technique 
should be applicable to other diseases and other types of system 
asymmetries. 
  
BACKGROUND 
 
Unexpected asymmetries in biological or physical systems often stimulate 
further investigation, with the goal of providing insight into the asymmetry’s 
causes.  While the conduct and analysis of laboratory, clinical, or field tests 
can surface such asymmetries, these approaches can be expensive in labor, 
capital, and time expenditures.  Identification of alternative approaches for 
surfacing asymmetries could provide an inexpensive option for obtaining 
this  data. 
 
One largely unexplored source of discovery is semi-automated text analysis 
of large technical literature databases.  The author has been exploring 
different text mining (1,2) approaches to generating innovation and 
discovery from the large technical literature databases (3,4), and 
hypothesized that computational linguistics could be used to identify 
unexpected asymmetries, rapidly and inexpensively. This section confirms 
that hypothesis. 
 
 108
OBJECTIVES 
 
The purpose of the present study is to ascertain whether asymmetries in 
lateral organ cancer incidence could be predicted accurately by application 
of computational linguistics to the Medline database.   
 
APPROACH 
 
Four types of cancers were examined: lung, kidney, teste, ovary.  For each 
cancer, Medline case report articles focused solely on 1) cancer of the right 
organ and 2) cancer of the left organ were retrieved, using information 
retrieval techniques (5) developed by the author.  For example, to obtain the 
Medline records focused on cancer of the left kidney, the following query 
was used: (LEFT KIDNEY OR LEFT RENAL) AND KIDNEY 
NEOPLASMS AND CASE REPORT[MH] NOT (RIGHT KIDNEY OR 
RIGHT RENAL).  The ratio of numbers of right organ to left organ articles 
was compared to actual patient incidence data obtained from the NCI’s 
SEER database for the period 1979-1998.   
 
RESULTS 
 
The results are presented in Table 1.  The first column contains the organ in 
which the lateral asymmetry is studied, the second column contains the ratio 
of Medline case report records focused solely on right organ cancer to those 
focused solely on left organ cancer, and the third column contains a similar 
ratio obtained from the NCI SEER database of patient incidence records. 
 
TABLE 1 – RATIO OF RIGHT TO LEFT ORGAN CANCER 
INCIDENCE 
 
ORGAN  RNK   NCI
LUNG 1.358 1.395
KIDNEY 1.024 1.043
TESTE 1.128 1.134
OVARY 1.034 1.038
 
The agreement between the Medline record ratios and the NCI’s patient 
incidence data ratios ranged from within three percent for lung cancer to 
within one percent for teste and ovary cancer. 
 
 109
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
 
This is the first known study to generate cancer lateral incidence 
asymmetries from the Medline database.  A previous study (6) reported 
obtaining such ratios by analyzing the ratios of the phrases ‘right’ and ‘left’ 
from patient diagnostic records, although the reason for using the secondary 
ratio of right/ left phrase frequencies rather than the primary ratio of right/ 
left record frequencies (i.e., ratio of actual number of patient occurrences) is 
unclear.  
 
The present study results are based on the assumption that, in a large 
population, the number of cancer lateral incidence papers published in 
Medline is proportional to the actual number of cancer lateral incidence 
occurrences.  The excellent agreement of the predictive model with the NCI 
data provides a strong measure of credibility to this assumption.  Such an 
assumption implies that medical research reported on these cancers treats 
laterality as a random variable. 
 
Three obvious research questions are suggested by the present study’s 
results. 
 
1. Can the use of text mining of large databases for identification of 
unexpected asymmetries be extrapolated to other cancers, non-cancer 
chronic diseases, and other types of systems (biological, physical, 
environmental, engineering)?  Such asymmetries have been identified by the 
present predictive model for non-cancer chronic diseases (e.g., tuberculosis).  
A polling of numerous medical experts did not identify any database that 
contains patient lateral non-cancer chronic disease incidence occurrence, 
against which the predictive model’s results could be compared. 
 
2. Can more advanced text mining (1, 3) be used to provide insights to the 
mechanisms underlying the asymmetries, serving as another avenue to 
identifying potential treatments or causes?  Additionally, the use of 
clustering would allow higher resolution of the database’s principal themes, 
and would allow identification of asymmetries at very fine levels of detail. 
 
3. Would further refinement of the query according to the principles  
contained in (5) reduce the differences between the Medline record ratios 
and the SEER patient incidence data? 
  
 110
Answers to these research questions are being pursued in parallel.  In 
particular, the fundamental asymmetry detection approach is being applied 
to identify specific research investment strategy differences among 
countries, by identifying technical phrase frequency differences in country 
technology databases.  The results are very illuminating, and validate the 
applicability of the fundamental technique to very diverse problems in 
disparate disciplines. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 6. 
 
1. Kostoff, RN, DeMarco, R: Science and technology text mining.  
Analytical Chemistry.  73:13.   370-378A.  1 July 2001. 
 
2. Kostoff, RN: Text mining for global technology watch.  Encyclopedia of 
Library and Information Science.  Second Edition.  M. Drake (ed.).  Marcel 
Dekker, Inc.  New York, NY.  Vol. 4.  2789-2799.  2003. 
 
3. Kostoff, RN: Science and technology innovation.  Technovation.  19:10.  
593-604.  October 1999. 
 
4. Kostoff, RN:  Stimulating innovation.  International Handbook of 
Innovation.  Chapter 28.  Larisa V. Shavinina (ed.).  Elsevier Social and 
Behavioral Sciences.  Oxford, UK.  388-400.  2003. 
 
5. Kostoff, RN: The extraction of useful information from the biomedical 
literature.  Academic Medicine.  76:12.  1265-1270. December 2001. 
 
6. Goldman, JA, Chu, WW, Parker, DS, Goldman, RM: Term domain 
distribution analysis: a data mining tool for text databases.  Methods of 
Information in Medicine.  38: 96-101.  1999. 
 111
Section 7.  Factor Matrix Text Filtering and Clustering. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N., and Block, J. A.  “Factor Matrix Text Filtering and 
Clustering.”  JASIST.  56:9.  946-968.  July.  2005.) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
The presence of trivial words in text databases can impact record or concept 
(words/ phrases) clustering adversely.  Additionally, the determination of 
whether a word/ phrase is trivial is context-dependent.  The objective of the 
present section is to demonstrate a context-dependent trivial word filter to 
improve clustering quality.  Factor analysis was used as a context-dependent 
trivial word filter for subsequent term clustering.  Medline records for 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon were used as the database, and words were 
extracted from the record Abstracts.  A factor matrix of these words was 
generated, and the words that had low factor loadings across all factors were 
identified, and eliminated.  The remaining words, which had high factor 
loading values for at least one factor and therefore were influential in 
determining the theme of that factor, were input to the clustering algorithm.  
Both quantitative and qualitative analyses were used to show that factor 
matrix filtering leads to higher quality clusters and subsequent taxonomies. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Science and technology (S&T) form the core of modern economies and 
militaries.  Global S&T expenditures are in the neighborhood of 500 billion 
dollars to a trillion dollars annually, depending on one’s definition of S&T.  
No single organization, or even nation, can begin to cover the full spectrum 
of S&T development required for a modern competitive economy or 
military.  Cooperative S&T development efforts, leveraging, exploiting, and 
awareness of external S&T efforts are required if an organization or nation is 
to remain competitive.    
 
Governments and industrial organizations need ready access to the results of 
all global research performed in order to: 
 
1) Track research impacts, to help identify benefits arising from sponsored 
research;  
2) Evaluate science and technology programs;  
3) Avoid research duplication;  
4) Identify promising research directions and opportunities; 
 112
5) Perform myriad oversight tasks; and, in general, 
6) Support every step of a strategic research planning/ selection/ 
management/ evaluation process that makes optimal use of S&T investment 
resources.   
 
In addition, recent counter-terrorism concerns have highlighted the need for 
ready access to, and analysis of, databases that could link people with 
institutions and activities.  In the S&T arena, this requires linking research 
performers with organizations, countries, and technical areas.   
 
Complementing this massive global S&T expenditure is equally massive 
documentation that can be collectively called the global S&T literature.  It 
consists of myriad S&T planning and vision/ requirements documents (S&T 
planning literature), S&T program descriptive documents (ongoing S&T 
program literature), evaluation documents of ongoing and completed S&T 
programs/ projects (S&T program assessment literature), and myriad S&T 
output and product documents (S&T output literature, such as papers, 
patents, etc).  In order to be able to extract useful information from this 
massive literature, semi-automated text analysis processes, known 
collectively as text mining, are required. 
 
One analytical technique commonly used for achieving most of the 
objectives listed above is a component of text mining: clustering of related 
textual objects.  Clustering is fundamentally a separation process, and is 
used in many different disciplines, such as isotope separation in chemistry 
and physics, and impurity separation in water purification.  In text analysis, 
clustering is intrinsically more complicated than in the physical separation 
processes, because of the multiple meanings and contextual dependence of 
words, phrases, and word/ phrase patterns.   
 
Additionally, in the S&T text, the high technical content phrases/ words are 
imbedded in a much larger sea of low technical content words/ phrases, 
known collectively as trivial words or stop words.  If these context-
dependent trivial words/ phrases are retained during the clustering process, 
they can then become the nucleation centers for clustering rather than the 
desired high technical content words/ phrases, thereby leading to diffuse and 
misleading clusters.  Removing these context-dependent trivial words/ 
phrases prior to the clustering process would be a major contributor towards 
defining the clusters more sharply and accurately. 
 
 113
One candidate method for removing context-dependent trivial words prior to 
clustering is factor analysis (Kendall, 1956; Kaiser, 1960; Cattell, 1966; 
Cooper, 1983; Coovert and McNelis, 1988; McArdle, 1990; Jackson, 1991; 
Yalcin and Amemiya, 2001; Browne, 2001), commonly used to identify the 
pervasive themes in text databases based on correlations, and subsequently 
group these themes.  Factor analysis tends to provide a better estimate of 
quantitative relationships among the theme components than cluster 
analysis, whereas cluster analysis tends to provide a better estimate of the 
structural relationships among the themes, especially hierarchical clustering 
methods. 
 
Factor and cluster analysis algorithms have existed for decades, and are well 
validated. Understood less well are how factor and cluster analysis should 
operate synergistically, and how best to select the data required for input to 
these algorithms.  This study proposes the use of factor analysis as a context-
dependent word filter for cluster analysis. 
 
The factor matrix filtering approach first identifies the high technical content 
words from raw text using factor analysis, and discards the remainder as 
trivial.  It then uses the high technical content words as input to the 
clustering algorithm.  The paper provides an estimate of the benefit of this 
approach, using a Raynaud’s Phenomenon database at the test bed.  This 
paper starts with the Background of the various study elements, describes 
the Approach used, presents the Results, and ends with Conclusions. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
As summarized in the Introduction, this section includes text mining, 
clustering, trivial word removal, factor analysis, and Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon.  The present sub-section will provide sufficient background 
material on each of these topics to clarify the procedures described in the 
Approach sub-section. 
 
Text Mining 
 
Text mining has been developed to extract useful information from the 
global S&T literature, in order to supplement conventional human-based 
approaches (Hearst, 1999; Trybula, 1999; Feldman, 1999; Lagus et al, 1999; 
Weiss et al, 1999; Losiewicz et al, 2000; Kuhnhold, 2000; Visa, 2001; 
Kostoff et al, 2001c; Zhu and Porter, 2002; Kogan et al, 2003; Perrin and 
 114
Petry, 2003).  Its component capabilities of computational linguistics and 
bibliometrics can be summarized as follows. 
 
Science and technology computational linguistics [Kostoff, 2003a; Hearst, 
1999; Zhu and Porter, 2002; Losiewicz et al, 2000] is a process that 
underlies the extraction of useful information from large volumes of 
technical text.  It identifies pervasive technical themes in large databases 
from technical phrases that occur frequently.  It also identifies relationships 
among these themes by grouping (clustering) these phrases (or their parent 
documents) on the basis of similarity.  Computational linguistics can be used 
for: 
 
• Enhancing information retrieval and increasing awareness of the global 
technical literature [Kostoff et al, 1997; Greengrass, 1997; TREC, 2003] 
• Potential discovery and innovation based on merging common linkages 
among very disparate literatures [Swanson, 1986; Swanson and 
Smalheiser, 1997; Kostoff, 2003b; Gordon and Dumais, 1998] 
• Uncovering unexpected asymmetries from the technical literature 
[Goldman et al, 1999; Kostoff, 2003c] 
• Estimating global levels of effort in S&T sub-disciplines [Kostoff et al, 
2000a, 2002, 2004a; Viator and Pestorius, 2001] 
• Helping authors potentially increase their citation statistics by improving 
access to their published papers, and thereby potentially helping journals 
to increase their Impact Factors [Kostoff et al, 2004a, 2004b] 
• Tracking myriad research impacts across time and applications areas 
[Davidse and VanRaan, 1997; Kostoff et al, 2001b]. 
 
Evaluative bibliometrics [Narin, 1976; Garfield, 1985; Schubert et al, 1987] 
uses counts of publications, patents, citations and other potentially 
informative items to develop science and technology performance indicators.  
Its validity is based on the premises that 1) counts of patents and papers 
provide valid indicators of R&D activity in the subject areas of those patents 
or papers, 2) the number of times those patents or papers are cited in 
subsequent patents or papers provides valid indicators of the impact or 
importance of the cited patents and papers, and 3) the citations from papers 
to papers, from patents to patents and from patents to papers provide 
indicators of intellectual linkages between the organizations that are 
producing the patents and papers, and knowledge linkage between their 
subject areas [Narin et al, 1994].  Evaluative bibliometrics can be used to: 
 115
 
• Identify the infrastructure (authors, journals, institutions) of a technical 
domain (Kostoff et al, 2000b, 2004b), 
• Identify experts for innovation-enhancing technical workshops and 
review panels, 
• Develop site visitation strategies for assessment of prolific organizations 
globally, 
• Identify impacts (literature citations) of individuals, research units, 
organizations, and countries (Kostoff et al, 2001b, 2004c)  
 
Evaluative bibliometrics can also used to help generate extensive 
background material for research papers, and for comprehensive literature 
reviews and surveys.  The documents most cited (relative to their 
contemporaries) by a retrieved topical literature of interest can be considered 
to be seminal, and form the core of the background material.  Other relevant 
documents can be added to enhance the background material and eliminate 
gaps in the narration.  Another advantage of this citation-assisted 
background (CAB) approach (Kostoff, 2004d) over traditional literature 
reviews is that the core seminal papers identified are based on the larger 
technical community’s consensus (highest citations), rather than solely based 
on the author(s) personal experiences and biases. 
 
A typical text mining study of the published literature develops a query for 
comprehensive information retrieval, processes the retrieved database using 
computational linguistics and bibliometrics, and integrates the processed 
information. 
 
Clustering 
 
Clustering is grouping by attributes.  Since technical text can contain many 
attributes, many taxonomies can be generated from a body of text.  Two 
types of clustering that have been used extensively by the first author are 
concept clustering and document clustering, Concept clustering is the 
grouping of related words or phrases to identify technical themes in the text 
database.  It has been used to generate literature taxonomies (Kostoff and 
DeMarco, 2001c), to facilitate Web searching (Khare, 2003), to summarize 
text (Ko et al, 2003), to generate hypotheses and discovery (Stegmann and 
Grohmann, (2003), and to generate thesauri (Hodge and Austin, 2002).   
Document clustering (Cutting et al, 1992a; Guha et al, 1998; Hearst et al, 
1998; Karypis et al, 1999; Rasmussen, 1992; Steinbach et al, 2000; Willet, 
 116
1988; Zamir and Etzioni, 1998; Karypis, 2002; Guerrero-Bote et al, 2003; 
Casillas et al, 2003; Schenker et al, 2003) is the grouping of related 
documents by theme. 
 
Clusters can be aggregated into a hierarchical structure, to provide a 
taxonomy or classification scheme of the discipline(s) being studied.  The 
quality of the final clusters and taxonomy is strongly dependent on the 
quality of the words selected for input to the factor and cluster analyses.  If 
important high technical content words and phrases are omitted from the 
input, the themes derived from these words will be lost to the final results.  If 
too many non-technical words are selected for the input, then artificial 
clusters will be generated based on overlap of non-technical words, and/ or 
words/ phrases will be re-assigned among clusters due to non-technical 
linkages.  A misleading taxonomy will result.   
 
One of the reviewers of this section asked how the proposed improved 
clustering approach could lead to improved information retrieval from 
Medline (the source of the Raynaud’s records used as the database).  The 
response depends on how clustering is employed in the information retrieval 
process. 
 
In the first author’s Simulated Nucleation information retrieval approach 
(Kostoff et al, 1997), clustering (including the factor matrix clustering 
approach presented in the present paper) is used to reduce time spent on 
query development, as well as to expand the query.  This iterative relevance 
feedback query expansion technique starts with generation of a test query.  
Records are then retrieved from a source database (e.g., Medline) using this 
query.  The next series of steps involves separating the relevant from non-
relevant records, and identifying text patterns characteristic of relevant 
records but essentially non-existent in non-relevant records, and vice versa.  
The query is then modified with these patterns so that it will retrieve more 
relevant records, and will filter out more non-relevant records. 
 
Before clustering was used by the first author to supplement the information 
retrieval process, the separation of relevant from non-relevant records was 
performed manually.  Many records (Abstracts, if records are journal 
articles) were read, and the relevant and non-relevant were separated.  
Computational linguistics were performed on each group (relevant, non-
relevant) of records, to identify the text patterns characteristic of each group. 
 
 117
For the past few years, the first author has used clustering for the relevant/ 
non-relevant separation.  Records are retrieved, then immediately clustered.  
In almost all cases, the relevant records will cluster together, as will the non-
relevant records.  Substantial time is saved by substituting computer-based 
clustering for manual separation.  Additionally, when selecting additional 
words for the query, words can be selected from all the clusters to insure that 
all the main concepts have at least some representation in the query.  Factor 
matrix filtering provides sharper clusters, insuring that query terms selected 
will contribute to improving recall and precision. 
 
Trivial Word Removal 
 
An intrinsic problem in any text grouping procedure, or indeed in any text 
feature extraction procedure, is dilution of the results by the inclusion of 
trivial words/ phrases.  In technical literature, trivial words/ phrases are 
terms with little technical information content.  The most common trivial 
words are generic connectors such as ‘the’, ‘of’, ‘and’, etc.  They tend to 
have low technical content regardless of context.  Many other words become 
trivial in selected contexts.   
 
The presence of trivial words can alter the results of clustering substantially.  
Experiments by the first author on the details of technical text clustering in 
project narratives and journal article Abstracts showed that, on average, 
there were very few non-trivial words in each document that were important 
for determining the main theme of the article.  In an ideal world, these few 
words would serve as the anchors for clustering, and produce sharp well-
defined clusters.  Unfortunately, the presence of the trivial words/ phrases 
provides competing anchors for the clusters, and generates clusters and 
taxonomy structures that are less-well defined.  As stated in (Wang et al, 
2003), “In many document data sets, only a relatively small number of the 
total features may be useful in classifying documents, and using all the 
features may adversely affect performance".  Any techniques that would pre-
process data prior to clustering, and eliminate any words/ phrases that are 
trivial in the context of the application, would help sharpen the resultant 
clusters.   
 
Most, if not all, text mining approaches start this word selection/ filtering 
process by attempting to reduce the dimensionality of the system (reducing 
the number of words or phrases to be manipulated).  After the raw text of the 
literature to be analyzed is converted to words or phrases, all text mining 
 118
approaches separate out the ‘trivial’ terms from the high technical content 
terms.  Almost all the approaches reported in the literature assume the 
‘trivial’ terms are context-independent, and these approaches use a pre-
determined trivial word or stop list to remove such words from the initial 
pool of words.   
 
One innovative approach for identifying context-dependent trivial words 
selected articles about genes from diverse classes, then eliminated the high 
frequency words in the total dataset by assuming these high frequency words 
were generic rather than gene specific, and would serve to diffuse the 
clustering process (Kankar et al, 2002). 
 
Some approaches use statistical techniques to eliminate trivial words/ 
phrases.  A key concept is that words/ phrases that appear uniformly over the 
collection are trivial from the viewpoint of theme discrimination among 
documents/ concepts.  Weighting terms based on maximal tf*idf (term 
frequency-inverse document frequency) is a popularly-used filter (Salton 
and Buckley, 1998).   Feldman et al (1998) use the standard deviation of the 
relative frequency of a term over all the documents of the collection as a 
weighting.  Stensmo’s probabilistic information retrieval system (Stensmo, 
2002) bypasses the need for stop-word lists by removing unneeded 
parameters dynamically based on a local mutual information measure. 
 
Perhaps the most extensive work in this area is attributable to Bookstein 
(Bookstein et al, 1995, 1998, 2003) and Wilbur (Wilbur and Sorotkin, 1992; 
Kim and Wilbur, 2001; Wilbur and Yang, 1996).   Bookstein asserts that the 
greater the deviation of a term’s distribution from a Poisson distribution, the 
more likely that the term is a useful one.  His approach examines term 
clumping tendencies in full text, and is not very relevant to Abstracts or 
titles.  Wilbur examines a variety of statistical measures to estimate term 
importance, including term strength (how strongly the term's occurrences 
correlate with the subjects of documents in the database). 
 
Other techniques use noun phrase extraction based on natural language 
processing, such as part-of-speech tagging and filtering (Brill, 1993, 1994; 
Cutting, 1992b).  Identification of parts of speech may not be easily made 
for literature that describes the latest science and technology, with its 
continual infusion of new terminology.  Lexicons, dictionaries, and thesauri 
have an intrinsic lag time, and consequently new terms may appear 
 119
incomprehensible to any computer-based tagger.  Additionally, there are 
both semantic and syntactic components to identifying high quality phrases.  
While tagging can address the syntactic issue, it cannot eliminate the 
semantic problem.  As stated in the above papers, all the statistical feature 
selection approaches and part-of-speech tagging approaches leave much to 
be desired, mainly because of the influence of context on feature desirability. 
 
After the words/ phrases have been selected initially, almost all techniques 
use some further processing of the words/ phrases before input to the factor 
or clustering algorithms.  Many techniques use stemming (e.g., Porter, 1980; 
Kostoff, 2003d), where words are grouped according to common roots, and 
conflated (singulars are combined with their plurals, full spellings are 
combined with their acronyms, and different tenses are combined).  A few 
techniques select synonyms from a controlled vocabulary to reduce the 
number of words while retaining the concepts (see Weeber et al (2001), 
which used a medical thesaurus for this purpose in literature-based 
discovery).  Finally, for those techniques that use both factor analysis and 
clustering, each approach is pursued independently. 
 
It is the contention of the authors that the words to be selected as input to the 
cluster analyses should be context-dependent.  ‘High-technical content’ has 
different meanings for different literatures and applications.  ‘Trivial’ has 
different levels of context dependency.  Stemming and conflation should be 
dependent on context as well.  This section will show how context-
dependency can be used in the word or phrase selection process through 
factor matrix filtering.  A companion paper shows how context-dependency 
can be incorporated in the conflation process through factor matrix filtering 
(Kostoff, 2003d).   
 
Factor Analysis 
 
Factor analysis of a text database aims to reduce the number of words/ 
phrases (variables) in a system, and to detect structure in the relationships 
among words/ phrases.  Word/ phrase correlations are computed, and highly 
correlated groups (factors) are identified.  The relationships of these words/ 
phrases to the resultant factors are displayed clearly in the factor matrix, 
whose rows are words/ phrases and columns are factors. In the factor matrix, 
the matrix elements Mij are the factor loadings, or the contribution of word/ 
phrase i (in row i) to the theme of factor j (in column j).  The theme of each 
factor is determined by those words/ phrases that have the largest values of 
 120
factor loading.  Each factor has a positive value tail and negative value tail.  
For each factor, one of the tails dominates in terms of absolute value 
magnitude.  This dominant tail is used to determine the central theme of 
each factor. 
 
One of the key challenges in factor analysis is defining the number of factors 
to select.  Different approaches have been suggested in the literature, but the 
two most widely used are the Kaiser criterion (Kaiser, 1960; Jackson, 1991), 
and the Scree test (Cattell, 1966).  The Kaiser criterion states that only 
factors with eigenvalues greater than unity should be retained, essentially 
requiring that a factor extracts at least as much variance as the equivalent of 
one original variable.   The Scree test plots factor eigenvalue (variance) vs 
factor number, and recommends that only those factors that extract 
substantive variance be retained.  Operationally, the factor selection 
termination point becomes the ‘elbow’ of the Scree plot, the point where the 
slope changes from large to small. 
 
As one of the reviewers of this section correctly noted, the “interpretation of 
the Scree Plot is partly subjective”, and “consistency among different 
interpreters is low”.  Appendix 1 discusses this interpretation problem in 
more detail, and shows that part of the inconsistency may stem from the 
fractal-like nature of the Scree Plots.  Appendix 1 also discusses the 
consequences of selecting factor matrices with different numbers of factors. 
 
In most previous studies performed by the first author, the Kaiser criterion 
has been used to select the number of factors for the factor matrix.  These 
previous studies have used an Excel add-in to generate the factor matrices, 
and, due to Excel’s limitations on columns, have been limited approximately 
to 250 x 250 correlation matrices, or 250 words.  The Kaiser criterion has 
yielded factor numbers in the range of 20-45, considered a reasonable 
number for analysis.  However, in the present Raynaud’s Phenomenon 
study, another software package that did not require Excel was used 
(TechOasis), and 659 words were used for the correlation matrix.  The 
Kaiser criterion yielded 224 factors, a number far too large for detailed 
factor analysis, and of questionable utility, since many of the eigenvalues 
were not too different from unity.  It was decided to examine the Scree Plot 
for factor number determination.   
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon  
 
 121
Both authors are conducting a study of Raynaud’s Phenomenon (a peripheral 
circulatory disorder) using text mining, to extend the literature-based 
discovery techniques from Swanson’s classical paper (Swanson, 1986).  Of 
central interest are the pervasive medical themes of the Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon literature, identified by factor analysis and cluster analysis.  
 
Since each factor from the factor analysis, or cluster from the cluster 
analysis, addresses some aspect of Raynaud’s Phenomenon, an overview of 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon will be presented before discussing the factor and 
cluster results.  Because the main Raynaud’s terminology used in the 
literature is not consistent (in many cases, Raynaud’s Disease is used 
interchangeably with Raynaud’s Phenomenon or Raynaud’s Syndrome), the 
overview will include the distinction among these Raynaud variants. 
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon is a condition in which small arteries and arterioles, 
most commonly in the fingers and toes, go into spasm (contract) and cause 
the skin to turn pale (blanching) or a patchy red (rubor) to blue (cyanosis).  
While this sequence is normally precipitated by exposure to cold, and 
subsequent re-warming, it can also be induced by anxiety or stress.  
Blanching represents the ischemic (lack of adequate blood flow) phase, 
caused by digital artery vasospasm.  Cyanosis results from de-oxygenated 
blood in capillaries and venules (small veins).  Upon re-warming, a 
hyperemic phase ensues, causing the digits to appear red. 
 
Raynaud’s Phenomenon can be a primary or secondary disorder.  When the 
signs of Raynaud’s Phenomenon appear alone without any apparent 
underlying medical condition, it is called Primary Raynaud’s, or formerly, 
Raynaud’s Disease.  In this condition, the blood vessels return to normal 
after each episode.  Conversely, when Raynaud’s Phenomenon occurs in 
association with an underlying condition or is due to an identifiable cause, 
then it is referred to as Secondary Raynaud’s, or formerly, as Raynaud’s 
Syndrome.  The most common underlying disorders associated with 
Secondary Raynaud’s are the auto-immune disorders, or conditions in which 
a person produces antibodies against his or her own tissues.  In contrast to 
Primary Raynaud’s, where the blood vessels remain anatomically normal 
after each episode, in Secondary Raynaud’s there may be scarring and long-
term damage to the blood vessels; thus Secondary Raynaud’s is potentially a 
more serious disorder than Primary.  Certain repetitive activities may result 
in a predisposition to Raynaud’s Phenomenon.  These cases of so-called 
 122
“Occupational Raynaud’s” typically result from the chronic use of vibrating 
hand tools.  
 
Thus, while Raynaud’s Phenomenon is a direct consequence of reduced 
blood flow due to reversible blood vessel constriction, it may be a function 
of many variables that can impact blood flow.  These include:  
 
*Inflammation from the auto-immune disorders that can cause swelling and 
thereby constrict blood vessels; 
*Increased sympathetic nervous system activity, that can affect the timing 
and duration of the blood vessel muscular contractions that cause 
constriction; 
*Heightened digital vascular reactivity to vaso-constrictive stimuli, that 
cause the blood vessels to over-react and over-contract;  
*Deposits along the blood vessel walls that can reduce blood flow and 
increase the flow sensitivity to contraction stimuli; 
*Blood rheological properties that offer additional resistance to blood flow, 
and magnify the impact of blood vessel constriction; 
*Blood constituents and hormones that can act as vaso-constrictors or vaso-
dilators. 
 
APPROACH  
 
In the first part of this study, 930 Medline Abstract-containing records 
related to Raynaud’s Phenomenon, and published in the 1975-1985 time 
period (to approximate Swanson’s database), were retrieved with a 
Raynaud’s-specific query.  These Abstracts were subjected to factor analysis 
and clustering, as part of the analysis. 
 
All the single words were automatically extracted from the database of 930 
Abstracts, subject to elimination of very trivial words (removing  words like 
‘of’, ‘the’, ‘and’, ‘if’, etc).  Non-trivial single words (659) were then 
manually extracted (by experts) from the database of Abstracts, along with 
the number of documents in which each word appeared (document 
frequency).  For this database, the 659 extracted words were near the limit 
that allowed a factor matrix to be computed.  The co-occurrence of word 
pairs in the same document (word co-occurrence frequency) was computed, 
and a correlation matrix (659 x 659) of word pairs was generated.  The 
variables were factorized, and a factor matrix was generated. 
 
 123
Factor Matrix Generation 
 
Once the desired number of factors has been determined from the Scree Plot 
‘elbow’, and the appropriate factor matrix has been generated, the factor 
matrix can then be used as a filter to identify the significant technical words 
for further analysis.  Specifically, the factor matrix can complement a basic 
trivial word list (i.e., a list containing words that are trivial in almost all 
contexts, such as ‘a’, ‘the’, ‘of’, ‘and’, ‘or’, etc) to select context-dependent 
high technical content words for input to a clustering algorithm.  The factor 
matrix pre-filtering will improve the cohesiveness of clustering by 
eliminating those words that are trivial words operationally in the 
application context. 
 
The variance accounted for by each underlying factor (eigenvalue) was 
generated by Principal Components Analysis.  Figure 1 shows the factor 
eigenvalue-factor number plot (Scree Plot) for the 659 un-rotated factors 
on a linear scale.  The ‘elbow’, or break point, of the curve appears to be 
about fourteen factors.   
 
INSERT FIGURE 1  
 
Factor Matrix Filtering 
 
The fourteen factor matrix determined by the Scree Plot of Figure 1 was 
examined in detail, and is presented in the Results section.  To diversify the 
factor loading patterns, and simplify interpretation of each factor, varimax 
orthogonal rotation was used. 
 
Factor Matrix Word Filtering and Selection 
 
After the factor matrix has been generated, its highest technical content 
words are input to the clustering algorithm.  In the present experiment, the 
659 words in the factor matrix would have to be culled to the ~250 allowed 
by the Excel-based clustering package, WINSTAT.  The ~250 word limit is 
an artifact of Excel.  Other software packages may allow more or less words 
to be used for clustering, but all approaches perform culling to reduce 
dimensionality.  The filtering process presented here is applicable to any 
level of filtered words desired. 
 
 124
Another caveat.  A trivial word list of the type described previously (words 
that are trivial in almost all contexts) was used to arrive at the 659 words 
used for the factor matrix input.  This was not necessary.  The raw words 
from the word generator could be used as input, and would be subject to the 
same filtering process.  To allow more important words to be used in this 
demonstration, the very trivial words were removed. 
 
The factor loadings in the factor matrix were converted to absolute values.  
Then, a simple algorithm was used to automatically extract those high factor 
loading words at the dominant tail of each factor.  The highest absolute 
value of factor loading for each word/ phrase was identified from the total 
factor matrix.  The words/ phrases were ranked in inverse order of highest 
absolute value of factor loading.  If word variants were on this list (e.g., 
singles and plurals), and their factor loadings were reasonably close 
(Kostoff, 2003d), they were conflated (e.g., ‘agent’ and ‘agents’ were 
conflated into ‘agents’, and their frequencies were added).  All words/ 
phrases below the ~250 term limit allowed by Excel were eliminated. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Factor Matrix Analysis 
 
For the fourteen factor matrix, the high factor loading words in the dominant 
tail of each factor are shown in parentheses after the factor number, followed 
by a brief narrative of the factor theme. 
 
Factor 1 (nuclear, antibodies, extractable, speckled, connective, immuno-
fluorescence, antinuclear, tissue, anti-RNP, MCTD, mixed, 
ribonucleoprotein, swollen, RNP, antibody, antigen, titer, SLE, lupus, 
erythematosus) focuses on different types of autoantibodies, especially anti-
nuclear and extractable nuclear, and their relation to auto-immune diseases. 
 
Factor 2 (double-blind, placebo, mg, daily, weeks, times, agent, nifedipine, 
trial)  focuses on double-blind trials for vasodilators. 
 
Factor 3 (vibration, tools, workers, vibrating, exposure, chain, prevalence, 
time, exposed, sensory, white, circulatory, complaints) focuses on the impact 
of vibratory tools on circulation. 
 
 125
Factor 4 (coronary, ventricular, heart, angina, hypertension, myocardial, 
cardiac, failure, pulmonary) focuses on coronary circulation and blood 
pressure problems.  
 
Factor 5 (prostaglandin, platelet, E1, prostacyclin, aggregation, infusion, 
hours, healing, ischaemic, thromboxane, administered, vasodilator, 
intravenous) focuses on the administration of vasodilators to improve 
circulation. 
 
Factor 6 (calcinosis, sclerodactyly, esophageal, dysmotility, telangiectasia, 
anticentromere, variant, diffuse, scleroderma) focuses on scleroderma-
spectrum types of autoimmune diseases. 
 
Factor 7 (extremity, sympathectomy, artery, surgery, arteries, upper, 
occlusions, arterial, brachial, thoracic, operation, surgical, angiography, 
occlusive) focuses on surgical solutions to remove constrictions on 
circulation. 
 
Factor 8 (C, degrees, systolic, pressure, cooling, blood, finger, measured, 
flow) focuses on blood flow, and associated finger blood pressure and 
temperature measurements. 
 
Factor 9 (capillaries, capillary, nail-fold, microscopy, capillaroscopy) 
focuses on the diagnostic use of nail-fold capillary microscopy. 
 
Factor 10 (training, biofeedback, relaxation, stress, outcome, measures, 
headaches, temperature, conducted, thermal, physiological, responses) 
focuses on the use of biofeedback training to reduce stress headaches, and 
raise temperatures through improved circulation. 
 
Factor 11 (vasodilation, peripheral, immersion, calcium, water) focuses on 
vasodilation of the peripheral circulatory system after immersion, and the 
role of calcium in this process. 
 
Factor 12 (complexes, immune, circulating, complement, IgG, serum, levels, 
IgM) focuses on serum levels of circulating immune complexes and 
immunoglobulins, especially IgG and IgM. 
 
 126
Factor 13 (eosinophilia, fasciitis, fascia, eosinophilic, visceral, 
hypergammaglobulinemia, absent, scleroderma-like, corticosteroids) focuses 
on inflammation, especially of the fascia. 
 
Factor 14 (systemic, lupus, RA, erythematosus, PSS, sclerosis, rheumatoid, 
arthritis, SLE) focuses on autoimmune diseases associated with Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon. 
 
The fourteen factor matrix themes can be divided into the two main thrusts 
of circulation and autoimmunity, where circulation covers factors 2, 3, 4, 5, 
7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, and autoimmunity covers factors 1, 6, 12, 13, 14.  
 
An examination of the words eliminated and those retained showed that 
most of those retained appeared to have high technical content, and would 
have been selected by previous manual filtering processes for input to the 
clustering algorithms.  Some of the words in isolation appeared not to have 
the highest technical content, also as shown above, but it was concluded that 
they were important because of their contribution to theme determination in 
the present clustering application.  Similarly, some of the words eliminated 
by the factor matrix filter appeared to be high technical content, and in 
previous manual filtering processes might have been selected for the 
clustering algorithm input ( e.g., acrocyanosis, vasomotor, cerebral, 
gastrointestinal).  The conclusion for these words was not that they were 
unimportant per se.  Rather, they did not have sufficient influence in 
determining the factor themes, and would not make an important 
contribution to the cluster structure determination.  Thus, the context 
dependency (their influence on factor theme determination) of the words 
was the deciding factor in their selection or elimination, not only the 
judgement of their technical value in isolation (independent of factor theme 
determination), as was done in previous manual filtering approaches. 
 
Word Clustering 
 
The 252 filtered and conflated words were input to the WINSTAT clustering 
algorithm, and the Average Link option was selected for clustering.  Figure 
2 is the dendrogram of the 252 words.  This is a tree-like structure that 
shows how the individual words cluster into groups in a hierarchical 
structure.  One axis is the words, and the other axis (‘distance’) reflects their 
similarity.  The lower the value of ‘distance’ at which words, or word 
groups, are linked together, the closer their relation.  As an extreme case of 
 127
illustration, words that tend to appear as members of multi-word phrases, 
such as ‘lupus erythematosus’, ‘connective tissue’, or ‘double blind’ appear 
adjacent on the dendrogram with very low values of ‘distance’ at their 
juncture.   
 
INSERT FIGURE 2  
 
Now the major structures, or clusters, will be described, following the 
hierarchical structure of the dendrogram.  The capitalized words listed in 
parentheses after each cluster number are the boundaries of that cluster from 
the dendrogram.  Only the top three hierarchical levels will be described. 
 
The top hierarchical level can be divided into two major clusters.  Cluster 1 
(PATIENTS-OLD) focuses on autoimmunity, and Cluster 2 
(TREATMENT-ACID) focuses on circulation.  The second hierarchical 
level can be divided into four clusters, where Cluster 1 is divided into 
Clusters 1a and 1b, and Cluster 2 is divided into Clusters 2a and 2b.    
Cluster 1a (PATIENTS-NEUROPATHY) focuses on autoimmune diseases 
and antibodies, while Cluster 1b (LESIONS-OLD) focuses on inflammation, 
especially fascial inflammation.  Cluster 2a (TREATMENT-
CONSECUTIVE) focuses on peripheral vascular circulation, while Cluster 
2b (PULMONARY-ACID) focuses on coronary vascular circulation.  These 
four high level categories are not computer artifacts, but correspond 
extremely well to how medical problems with a Raynaud’s Phenomenon 
component are diagnosed and treated in medical practice. 
 
Most of the clusters in the second hierarchical level can be rationally divided 
into two sub-clusters, to produce the third hierarchical level clusters.  Cluster 
1a1 (PATIENTS-MARKER) has multiple themes: different types of 
antibodies, especially anti-nuclear and extractable nuclear, and their relation 
to autoimmune diseases; sclerotic types of autoimmune diseases; and 
autoimmune diseases associated with Raynaud’s Phenomenon.  It 
incorporates the themes of Factors 1, 6, and 14.  Cluster 1a2 (SERUM-
NEUROPATHY) focuses on circulating immune complexes, and parallels 
the theme of Factor 12.  Cluster 1b  (LESIONS-OLD) is too small to 
subdivide further, and stops at the second hierarchical level.  It parallels the 
theme of Factor 13.   
 
 128
Cluster 2a1 (TREATMENT-RESERPINE) has multiple themes: double-
blind clinical trials for vasodilators; administration of vasodilators to reduce 
platelet aggregation and improve circulation; blood flow, and associated 
finger blood pressure and temperature measurements; and occupational 
exposures, mainly vibrating tools and vinyl chloride, that impact the 
peripheral and central nervous systems and impact circulation.  It 
incorporates the themes of Factors 2, 3, 5, 7, 8.  Cluster 2a2 (CAPILLARY-
CONSECUTIVE) focuses on nailfold capillary microscopy as a diagnostic 
for for microcirculation, and parallels the theme of Factor 9.  Cluster 2b1 
(PULMONARY-LUNG) focuses on cardiovascular system problems, and 
parallels the theme of Factor 4.  Cluster 2b2 (BIOFEEDBACK-ACID) 
focuses on biofeedback training to reduce stress and headaches, and increase 
relaxation, and parallels the theme of Factor 10.  
 
Thus, use of the factor matrix for context-dependent trivial word elimination 
has produced a taxonomy that is technically defensible.  What is the 
evidence that this taxonomy is improved compared to a taxonomy resulting 
from non-use of factor matrix filtering?  There are two tandem approaches 
for comparing the quality of taxonomies, quantitative and qualitative.  The 
quantitative approach identifies metrics for gauging the cohesiveness and 
uniqueness of clusters, and evaluates the performance of each taxonomy 
against the metrics.  The qualitative approach examines the overall 
taxonomy structure as well as the individual clusters for reasonableness and 
technical defensibility. 
 
Appendix 2 describes the marginal impact on taxonomy quality from the 
substitution of trivial words for technical content words.  Appendix 2 shows 
that, for the word clustering approach of this section, the substitution of 
trivial words for higher technical content words has both quantitative and 
qualitative consequences.  First, the ‘distance’ of the overall dendrogram 
(the ‘distance’ of the final aggregation-highest point on the dendrogram) 
increases when the trivial words are inserted.  The effect of adding trivial 
words is to reduce the sharpness and uniqueness of individual clusters, and 
enhance linkages among disparate clusters through the trivial words only.  
Since ‘distances’ are low when words in a cluster are very closely related, 
‘distances’ increase as the relations become more diffuse. 
 
Second, the trivial words can act as a magnet, and change the balance of 
words in a cluster.  In Appendix 2, the two trivial words used for 
replacement (the highest frequency words ‘of’, ‘the’) appeared on the 
 129
dendrogram in the same first level cluster.  They, in turn, attracted words 
formerly in the other first level cluster, and in some cases, these words were 
shifted to the less defensible technical category. 
 
Appendix 2 shows further that use of the factor matrix filtering for selecting 
the words input to the cluster above (compared to use of the highest 
frequency words with no filtering) had two consequences.  The overall 
taxonomy ‘distance’ decreased with the use of factor matrix filtering, and 
the word assignment to clusters improved from a technical perspective.  
Thus, factor matrix filtering improved the quality of the taxonomy and its 
constituent clusters.  The only negative feature of factor matrix filtering is 
the modest time required for incorporation of this additional analytical step. 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
Factor matrix filtering is an effective method for identifying the major 
themes in a text database, identifying the critical words that define the 
theme, selecting these critical words in context for clustering, and 
identifying which variants of these words can be conflated within the context 
of the specific database examined.   
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 7 
 
Bookstein, A., Klein, S.T., Raita, T.  Detecting content-bearing words by 
serial clustering.  (1995).    Proc. 18-th ACM-SIGIR Conf., Seattle, WA.  
319-327. 
Bookstein, A., Klein, S.T., Raita, T.   (1998).  Clumping properties of 
content-bearing words.  Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science.  49 (2).  102-114.  Feb. 
Bookstein, A., Kulyukin, V., Raita, T., Nicholson, J.  (2003).  Adapting 
measures of clumping strength to assess term-term similarity.  Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology.  54 (7).  611-
620.  May. 
Brill, E.  (1993).  Automatic grammar induction and parsing free text: A 
transformation-based approach.  Proceedings of the 31st meeting of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics.  Columbus, OH. 
Brill, E.  (1994).  Some advances in transformation-based part of speech 
tagging.  Proceedings, Twelfth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence.  Seattle, WA. 
 130
Browne, M.W.  (2001).  An overview of analytic rotation in exploratory 
factor analysis.  Multivariate Behavioral Research. 36 (1).  111-150. 
Casillas, A, de Lena, M.T.G., and Martinez, R.  (2003).  Document 
clustering into an unknown number of clusters using a genetic algorithm.  
Text, Speech and Dialogue, Proceedings, 2807. Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence.  43-49. 
Cattell, R.B.  (1966).  The Scree Test for the number of factors.  Multivariate 
Behavioral Research.  1.  245 –276. 
Cooper, J.C.B.  (1983).  Factor-Analysis - An overview.  American 
Statistician, 37 (2).  141-147. 
Coovert, M.D., and  McNelis, K.  (1988).  Determining the number of 
common factors in factor-analysis - A Review and Program.  Educational 
and Psychological Measurement, 48 (3).  687-692.  Fall. 
Cutting, D. R., Karger, D. R, Pedersen, J. O. and Tukey, J. W.  (1992a).  
Scatter/Gather: A cluster-based approach to browsing large document 
collections. In Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval 
(SIGIR'92).  318-329. 
Cutting, D., Kupiec, J., Pederson, J., and Sibun, P.  (1992b).  A practical part 
of speech tagger.  Presented at the Third International ACL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing.  Trento, Italy. 
Davidse, R.J., Van Raan, A.F.J.  (1997).  Out of particles: impact of 
CERN, DESY, and SLAC research to fields other than physics. 
Scientometrics  40:2 . 171-193. 
Feldman, R., Fresko, M., Kinar, Y., Lindell, Y., Liphstat, O., Rajman, M., 
Schler, Y., and Zamir, O.  (1998).  Text mining at the term level.  Principles 
of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.  Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence.  1510.   65-73. 
Feldman, R.  (1999).  Text mining via information extraction.  Principles of 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.  1704.  165-173. 
Garfield, E.  (1985).  History of citation indexes for chemistry - a brief 
review.   JCICS.  25(3):  170-174. 
Goldman, J.A., Chu, W.W., Parker, D.S., Goldman, R.M.  (1999).  Term 
domain distribution analysis: a data mining tool for text databases.  
Methods of Information in Medicine.  38.  96-101. 
Gordon, M.D., Dumais, S.  (1998).  Using latent semantic indexing for 
literature based discovery.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science.  49 (8): 674-685. 
Greengrass, E.  (1997).  Information retrieval: An overview.  National 
Security Agency.  TR-R52-02-96. 
 131
Guerrero-Bote, V.P., Lopez-Pujalte, C., de Moya-Anegon, F., Herrero-
Solana, V.  (2003).  Comparison of neural models for document clustering.  
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 34 (2-3).  287-305. Nov. 
Guha, S., Rastogi, R. and Shim, K.  (1998).  CURE: An efficient 
clustering algorithm for large databases.  In Proceedings of the ACM-
SIGMOD 1998 International Conference on Management of Data 
(SIGMOD’98).  73-84. 
Hearst, M. A.  (1998).  The use of categories and clusters in information 
access interfaces.  In T. Strzalkowski (ed.), Natural Language Information 
Retrieval.  Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Hearst, M. A.  (1999).  Untangling text data mining.  Proceedings of ACL 
99, the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics.  University of Maryland.  June 20-26. 
Hodge, V.J., and Austin, J.  (2002).  Hierarchical word clustering - 
automatic thesaurus generation.   Neurocomputing, 48.  819-846.  Oct. 
Jackson, J. E.  (1991).  A users guide to principal components.  Wiley, New 
York, NY. 
Kaiser, H.F.  (1960).  The application of electronic computers to factor 
analysis.  Educational and psychological measurement.  20.  141-151.   
Kankar, P., Adak, S., Sarkar, A., Murali, K., and Sharma, G.  (2002).  
MedMesh summarizer: Text mining for gene clusters.  Proceedings of the 
Second SIAM International Conference on Data Mining.  Robert Grossman, 
Jiawei Han, Vipin Kumar, Heikki Mannila, and Rajeev Motwani, Editors.  
April.  Arlington, VA. 
Karypis, G., Han, E.H., and Kumar, V.  (1999).  Chameleon: A 
hierarchical clustering algorithm using dynamic modeling. IEEE 
Computer: Special Issue on Data Analysis and Mining 32(8). 68-75. 
Karypis, G. (2002). CLUTO—A clustering toolkit. 
http://www.cs.umn.edu/˜cluto. 
Kendall, M.G., and Lawley, D.N.  (1956).  The principles of factor-analysis.   
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A-General, 119 (1).  83-84. 
Khare, A.  (2003).  Connecting word clusters to represent concepts with 
application to web searching.   Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information 
and Engineering Systems, Pt 1, Proceedings, 2773: 816-823.  Lecture Notes 
in Artificial Intelligence. 
Kim, W, and Wilbur, W.J.  (2001).  Corpus-based statistical screening for 
content-bearing terms.  Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology.  52 (3).  247-259.  Feb 1. 
 132
Ko, Y., Kim, K., and Seo, J.  (2003).  Topic keyword identification for text 
summarization using lexical clustering.   IEICE Transactions on Information 
and Systems, E86D (9): 1695-1701 Sep. 
Kogan, J., Nicholas, C., and Volkovich, V.  (2003).  Text mining with 
information - theoretic clustering.   Computing in Science & Engineering, 5 
(6).  52-59. Nov-Dec. 
Kostoff, R.N., Eberhart, H.J., and Toothman, D.R.  (1997).  Database 
Tomography for information retrieval.  Journal of Information Science.  
23:4.  301-311. 
Kostoff, R.N., Green, K.A., Toothman, D.R., and Humenik, J.A.  (2000a).   
Database Tomography applied to an aircraft science and technology 
investment strategy.  Journal of Aircraft.  37:4.  727-730.   
Kostoff, R.N., Braun, T., Schubert, A., Toothman, D.R., and Humenik, J.A.  
(2000b).  Fullerene roadmaps using bibliometrics and Database 
Tomography.  Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science.   
40(1): 19-39.   
Kostoff, R.N., and DeMarco, R.A.  (2001a).  Science and technology text 
mining.  Analytical Chemistry.  73:13.   370-378A.  1 July. 
Kostoff, R.N., Del Rio, J.A., García, E.O., Ramírez, A.M., Humenik, J.A.  
(2001b).  Citation mining: integrating text mining and bibliometrics for 
research user profiling. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology.  52:13.  1148-1156.  
Kostoff, R.N., Toothman, D.R., Eberhart, H.J., and Humenik, J.A.   (2001c).  
Text mining using database tomography and bibliometrics: A review.  
Technology Forecasting and Social Change.  68:3.  November. 
Kostoff, R.N., Tshiteya, R., Pfeil, K.M., and Humenik, J.A.  (2002).  
Electrochemical power source roadmaps using bibliometrics and database 
tomography.   Journal of Power Sources.  110:1.  163-176. 
Kostoff, R.N.  (2003a).  Text mining for global technology watch.  In 
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science,  Second Edition.  
Drake, M., Ed.  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  New York, NY. Vol. 4.  2789-2799.  
Kostoff, R.N.  (2003b).  Stimulating innovation.  International Handbook 
of Innovation. Larisa V. Shavinina (ed.).  Elsevier Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, Oxford, UK.  
Kostoff, R.N.  (2003c).  Bilateral asymmetry prediction.  Medical 
Hypotheses.  61:2.  265-266.   
Kostoff, R. N.  (2003d).  The practice and malpractice of stemming.  
JASIST.  54:10.  984-985.  August. 
Kostoff, R.N., Shlesinger, M.F., Malpohl, G.  (2004a).  Fractals roadmaps 
using bibliometrics and database tomography.   Fractals.   12:1.  1-16. 
 133
Kostoff, R.N., Shlesinger, M., and Tshiteya, R.  (2004b).  Nonlinear 
dynamics roadmaps using bibliometrics and Database Tomography.  
International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos.  14:1.  61-92. 
Kostoff, R.N., Bedford, C.W., Del Rio, J. A., Cortes, H., and Karypis, G.  
(2004c).  Macromolecule mass spectrometry: Citation mining of user 
documents.  Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry.  15:3.  
281-287.  March. 
Kostoff, R.N., and Shlesinger, M.F.  (2004d).  CAB-Citation-assisted 
background.   Scientometrics.  62:2.  199-212.  2005.   
Kuhnhold, M.  (2000).  The concept of "text mining".  
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 42 (2).  175-179.  Apr. 
Lagus, K., Honkela, T., Kaski, S., and Kohonen, T.   (1999).  Websom for 
textual data mining.  Artificial Intelligence Review.  13(5-6).  345-364.  
December. 
Losiewicz, P., Oard, D., and Kostoff, R.N.   (2000).Textual Data Mining to 
Support Science and Technology Management.  Journal of Intelligent 
Information Systems.  15. 
McArdle, J.J.  Principles versus Principals of Structural Factor-Analyses.   
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 25 (1).  81-87. Jan 1990. 
Narin, F.  (1976).  Evaluative bibliometrics: the use of publication and 
citation analysis in the evaluation of scientific activity (monograph).  NSF 
C-637.  National Science Foundation.  Contract NSF C-627.  NTIS 
Accession No. PB252339/AS.   
Narin, F.,  Olivastro, D.,  Stevens, K.A.  (1994).  Bibliometrics theory, 
practice and problems.  Evaluation Review.  18(1).  65-76. 
Perrin, P. and Petry, F.E.  (2003).  Extraction and representation of 
contextual information for knowledge discovery in texts.  Information 
Sciences, 151.  125-152.  May. 
Porter, M.F.  (1980).  An algorithm for suffix stripping.  Program, 14(3). 
130-137. 
Rasmussen, E.  (1992).  Clustering Algorithms. In W. B. Frakes and R. 
Baeza-Yates (eds.).  Information Retrieval Data Structures and 
Algorithms, Prentice Hall, N. J. 
Salton, G. and Buckley, C.  (1998).  Term-weighting approaches in 
automatic text retrieval.  Information Processing and Management.  24:5.  
513-523. 
Schenker, A., Last, M.,  Bunke, H., and Kandel, A.  (2003).  Graph 
representations for web document clustering.  Pattern Recognition and 
Image Analysis, Proceedings, 2652.  935-942. 
 134
Schroeder, M.  (1991).  Fractals, chaos, power laws: Minutes from an 
infinite paradise.  (W.H. Freeman, New York, NY).  
Schubert, A., Glanzel, W., Braun, T.  (1987).  Subject field characteristic 
citation scores and scales for assessing research performance.  
Scientometrics.  12 (5-6): 267-291. 
Stegmann, J., and Grohmann, G.  (2003).  Hypothesis generation guided by 
co-word clustering.  Scientometrics, 56 (1).  111-135. 
Steinbach, M., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V.  A.  (2000).  Comparison of 
document clustering techniques.  Technical Report #00--034. Department 
of Computer Science and Engineering.  University of Minnesota. 
Stensmo, M.  (2002).  A scalable and efficient probabilistic information 
retrieval and text mining system.  Artificial Neural Networks.  ICANN 2002.  
2415.  643-648. 
Swanson D.R.  (1986).  Fish oil, Raynaud’s Syndrome, and undiscovered 
public knowledge.  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.  30 (1).  7-18.  
Fall. 
Swanson, D.R., Smalheiser, N.R.  (1997).  An interactive system for 
finding complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery.   
Artificial Intelligence.  91 (2). 183-203. 
TREC  (2003).  (Text Retrieval Conference), Home Page, 
http://trec.nist.gov/. 
Trybula, W.J.  (1999).  Text mining.  Annual Review of Information Science 
and Technology.  34.  385-419. 
Viator, J.A., Pestorius, F.M .  (2001).  Investigating trends in acoustics 
research from 1970-1999.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.  
109 (5): 1779-1783 Part 1. 
Visa, A.  (2001).  Technology of text mining.  Machine Learning and Data 
Mining in Pattern Recognition.  2123.  1-11. 
Wang, B.B., McKay, R.I., Abbass, H.A., and Barlow, M.  (2003).  A 
comparative study for domain ontology guided feature extraction.  Twenty-
Fifth Australian Computer Science Conference [ACSC2003], Adelaide, 
Australia, Vol. 16, Michael Oudshoorn, ed. 
Weeber M., Klein H., Aronson A.R,, Mork J.G, de Jong-van den Berg, 
L.T.W, and Vos R.  (2000).  Text-based discovery in biomedicine: The 
architecture of the DAD-system.   Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association.  903-907 Suppl. S. 
Weiss, S.M., Apte, C., Damerau, F.J., Johnson, D.E., Oles, F.J., Goetz, T., 
and Hampp, T.  (1999).  Maximizing text-mining performance.  IEEE 
Intelligent Systems & Their Applications.  14:4.  63-69.  July-August. 
 135
Wilbur W. J. and Sirotkin K.  (1992).  The automatic identification of stop 
words.  Journal of Information Science.  18 (1).  45-55. 
Wilbur W.J. and Yang Y.M.  (1996).  An analysis of statistical term strength 
and its use in the indexing and retrieval of molecular biology texts.  
Computers in Biology and Medicine.  26 (3).  209-222.  May. 
Willet, P.  (1988).  Recent trends in hierarchical document clustering: A 
critical review. Information Processing and Management.   24:577-597. 
Yalcin, I. and  Amemiya, Y.  (2001).  Nonlinear factor analysis as a 
statistical method.  Statistical Science, 16 (3).  275-294.  Aug. 
Zamir, O. and Etzioni, O.  (1998).  Web document clustering: A 
feasibility demonstration. In: Proceedings of the 19th International ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR'98).  46-54. 
Zhu, D.H. and Porter, A.L.  (2002).  Automated extraction and visualization 
of information for technological intelligence and forecasting.  Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change.  69:5.  495-506.  June. 
 
APPENDIX 1 – SCREE PLOT INTERPRETATION 
 
A parametric analysis of factor number determination as a function of Scree 
Plot scale was performed, to test whether factor number determination was 
scale dependent.  The results follow.   
 
1) Demonstration of Fractality 
 
Factor matrices with different numbers of factors specified were computed.  
Eigenvalues were generated by Principal Components Analysis, and these 
eigenvalues represented the variance accounted for by each underlying 
factor.  Figure 1 shows the factor eigenvalue-factor number plot for the 659 
un-rotated factors on a linear scale.  The ‘elbow’, or break point, of the curve 
appears to be about fourteen factors.  To improve resolution, the curve was 
stretched in the x direction by halving the number of factors shown on one 
page.  The curve had a similar shape to the 659 factor case, but the factor 
termination point appeared to decrease.  The halving process was repeated 
until ten factors were plotted on one page, and the resolution effectively 
increased by an order of magnitude overall.   
 
Figure 3 shows the ten factor plot.  The elbow of the curve appears to be 
about two factors.  Thus, the number of factors selected based on significant 
 136
slope change decreased from fourteen in the 659 factor plot to two in the ten 
factor plot. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 3  
 
 
In fractal analysis, a fractal object has a number of characteristics 
(Schroeder, 1991).  Among these are self-similarity (similar to itself at 
different magnifications), and adherence to a scaling relationship (the 
measured value of a property will depend on the resolution used to make the 
measurement).  The Scree Plot appears to have these two fractal properties.  
As the resolution increases, more structure appears, and the value of the 
break point changes. 
 
The simplest and most common form of the scaling relationship is that of a 
power law.  When such a power law is plotted on a log-log scale, the scaling 
relationship appears as a straight line.  Figure 4 is a plot of the break point 
on a linear scale, and Figure 5 is a re-plot of Figure 4 on a log-log scale.  
The log-log plot is approximately linear, reflects power law scaling, and 
validates the break point selection as a fractal process.  This observation 
about the fractal-like nature of the Scree Plot analysis process does not 
appear to have been reported in the literature previously.  Further, this 
sensitivity of factor number to scale confirms the reviewer’s concerns about 
the precision of the Scree Plot approach to determining number of factors to 
be selected. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 4  
 
 
INSERT FIGURE 5  
 
The reviewer also raised the concern about the impact of the inconsistency 
among analysts in interpreting the Scree Plot on the final taxonomy.  
Essentially, this issue concerns the consequences of selecting a few more or 
less factors to run.   
 
 137
The considerations involved in selecting the number of factors to run are 
similar to those involved in selecting the number of clusters for the cluster 
analysis.  Basically, the issue revolves around the level of resolution desired.  
More clusters, or more factors, provide more resolution, detail, and 
information.  In addition, more factors capture a greater fraction of total 
variance.  The cost of more factors or clusters is more computer running 
time, and especially more time for interpretation of results.  Thus, the 
number of clusters and/ or factors to be selected depends on the objectives of 
the study. 
 
As an example of the need for resolution, the first author has performed text 
mining of both homogeneous databases and heterogeneous databases in the 
past few years.  The homogeneous databases derive from monodiscipline 
studies, where the topical material is closely related (e.g., the anthrax 
database).  The heterogeneous databases derive from multi-discipline 
databases, where the topical material can be very disparate (e.g., China’s 
research output).   
 
The single discipline studies require relatively few clusters to capture the 
main themes of the database, because the topical variation is modest, and 
relatively few hierarchical taxonomy levels are required for the same reason.  
The multi-discipline studies require many clusters to resolve the disparate 
themes, and many taxonomy levels may be required to portray the structure 
accurately.   
 
For example, suppose it were desired to examine the research outputs of a 
major country whose research budget was one billion dollars per year, 
whose research program consisted of 100 different disciplines, and whose 
research output database consisted of 10000 records.  If two clusters were 
used for the analysis, only one hierarchical taxonomy level would be 
possible, and each cluster (on average) would cover 500 million dollars per 
year worth of research, fifty technical disciplines, and 5000 records.  
Obviously, the results and corresponding insights would be very generic and 
aggregated, and probably of very limited utility.  If, however, 1000 clusters 
were used, then ten hierarchical taxonomy levels would be possible, and 
each elemental cluster (on average) would cover one million dollars worth of 
research, 1/10 of a technical discipline, and ten records.  Much more detailed 
understanding of the country’s research would be obtained, down to 
approximately the individual program level.  Obviously, much more work 
 138
would be required to generate useful information from the 1000 cluster case 
than the two cluster case. 
 
In the present study, the issue of factor number variations was examined by 
the authors in the initial phase of the study by performing a parametric study 
of number of factors verses taxonomy structure.  Factor matrices ranging 
from two factors in size to fourteen factors were run, and the results 
analyzed.  The main themes did not change, and the context-dependent 
trivial words identified remained essentially the same.  The main changes 
were the number of hierarchical levels that could be generated, and the 
resolution afforded by each factor. 
 
For the two factor and fourteen factor taxonomies, the main themes are still 
autoimmunity and circulation.  The fourteen factor taxonomy allows more 
structural detail to be shown, as displayed in the Results section.  More 
levels in the taxonomy could have been generated with the fourteen factor 
taxonomy, if desired, and more sub-themes could have been generated with 
more detailed specificity.  Obviously, if there had been three main themes 
instead of two for this topical area, then the two factor case would have 
missed one of the themes.  In practice, the analyst should always perform 
some type of sensitivity study on number of factors, to insure that no main 
themes are being missed with the final number of factors chosen. 
 
APPENDIX 2 – FACTOR MATRIX FILTERING 
 
The purpose of this Appendix is to show how two word clusters, generated 
using the WINSTAT multi-link hierarchical aggregation technique, can be 
compared.  The comparison method is a combination of quantitative and 
qualitative approaches.   
 
This Appendix contains two sections.  The first section shows the impact on 
the ‘distance’ metric, and on the assignment of words to clusters, of 
substituting the most trivial words for higher technical content words in the 
selection of cluster input words.  The second section shows the impact on 
the ‘distance’ metric, and on the assignment of words to clusters, of 
substituting non-factor matrix-selected words by factor matrix-selected 
words in the selection of cluster input words.  
 
Impact of Trivial Words on Cluster Quality 
 
 139
The impact was shown by conducting a simple experiment where trivial 
words were substituted for higher technical content words, and the change in 
cluster quality evaluated.  The same 930 record database that was used in the 
main text of the study was used in this Appendix, for consistency.  The 
words contained in the Abstract were extracted using the TechOasis 
software package, subject to the standard StopWord list filtering.  This 
StopWord list contains words that are trivial in almost every context (e.g., 
the, if, or, and, etc).   
 
In the first case, the 252 highest frequency words extracted from the 
Abstract were used as input for the WINSTAT clustering process.  In the 
second case, the two highest frequency trivial words on the StopWord list 
(of, the) were substituted for the two lowest frequency words of the 252 
words used for the first case (abnormalities, C).  While these two words are 
not of the highest technical content, they are certainly of higher content than 
‘of’, ‘the’. 
 
Clusters were run using the 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, and 253 highest frequency 
words, respectively. For display purposes, the 64 word dendrograms were 
selected.  Figure 6 shows the non-trivial word dendrogram, while Figure 7 
shows the dendrogram that includes the two trivial words.  The overall 
‘distance’ metric value associated with Figure 6 is 132.56, while the overall 
‘distance’ metric value associated with Figure 7 is 139.54.  For the 252 word 
cases, the respective overall ‘distance’ metric values are 513.81 and 596.32.  
As expected, substitution of the trivial words ‘of’, ‘the’ for the higher 
technical content words ‘abnormalities’, ‘C’ results in an increase in the 
value of the ‘distance’ metric.  As the constituent clusters become more 
diffuse with the addition of trivial words, the ‘distance’, a measure of cluster 
cohesiveness, increases. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 6 
 
INSERT FIGURE 7 
 
Of equal importance is the impact on assignment of words to clusters.  The 
cluster thematic differences are most pronounced at the highest taxonomy 
levels, and these differences become more subtle as the lowest taxonomy 
levels are accessed.  As shown in the text, and known from medical 
experience, the first taxonomy level of the Raynaud’s Phenomenon literature 
has the two major categories of auto-immunity and circulation.  The 
 140
literatures, and key phrases, associated with each category tend to be 
distinct.  How did the substitution of trivial words for higher content words 
impact the assignment of words to the highest level categories in the 
taxonomy? 
 
On Figure 6, there are two obvious first level clusters.  One ranges from the 
words Raynaud’s to Diagnosis, and the other ranges from the words Blood 
to Disorders.  The Raynaud’s-Diagnosis cluster focuses on Auto-immunity, 
while the Blood-Diagnosis cluster focuses on Circulation.  The words in the 
clusters range from very specific (e.g., lupus, scleroderma, vascular, arterial) 
to quite general (e.g., test, years, cases, severe).  The presence of the general 
words is a consequence of not using any filtering (manual, factor matrix, etc) 
for the demonstration in this section, other than the StopWord list and the 
frequency cut-off.  
 
On Figure 6, the first level Auto-immunity category contains 31 words 
(48%), and the first level Circulation category contains 33 words (52%).  
The key auto-immunity single words and obvious word combinations (e.g., 
systemic sclerosis, lupus erythematosus) are in the Auto-immunity category, 
and the key circulation single words and obvious word combinations (e.g., 
blood flow, finger temperature) are in the Circulation category. 
 
On Figure 7, there is a major change in the taxonomy structure.  The first 
level of the taxonomy splits into two categories.  One is a very small 
category, ranging from Of to Clinical (in abbreviated form, Of-Clinical), and 
the other is a much larger category (Systemic-Disorders).  The small 
category is a very generic overview of the database.  The larger category 
combines the Auto-immunity and Circulation categories.   
 
The larger category splits into two second level sub-categories.  One has an 
Auto-immunity focus (Systemic-3), and the other has a Circulation focus 
(Blood-Disorders).  The Auto-immunity sub-category contains 33 words 
(59%), while the Circulation sub-category contains 23 words (41%).  Thus, 
for the major technical sub-division between Auto-immunity and 
Circulation, Auto-immunity has gone from 48% of the words to 59% when 
the trivial words are substituted, while Circulation has decreased from 52% 
to 41%, a noticeable change. 
 
What are the words that switched categories?  Most were generic, 
concentrated in a small Circulation cluster near the far end of the 
 141
dendrogram on Figure 6 (Group-3).  The other two were more specific 
(peripheral, vascular).  They switched from the Circulation category on 
Figure 6 to the Auto-immunity category on Figure 7.  While it could be 
argued that the generic terms that switched categories were only weakly 
linked thematically to the Circulation category initially, the switch of the 
more specific terms (peripheral, vascular) is less defendable.   
 
There are 52 records in the 930 Raynaud’s record database that contain the 
words peripheral and vascular.  A sampling of the 52 records shows that the 
combination of peripheral and vascular is always used in the context of 
circulation.  For primary Raynaud’s, there is only the association with 
circulation.  For secondary Raynaud’s, where circulatory problems may be a 
symptomatic spin-off of the auto-immune disease, such articles might 
include the underlying auto-immune disease in conjunction with the 
circulatory problem.  However, the main association of the peripheral-
vascular combination is with circulation problems.  Thus, in addition to 
changing the first level structure of the taxonomy, an additional thematic 
effect of substituting the two trivial words into the clustering input has been 
to re-assign the combination peripheral and vascular from the more 
appropriate technical category to the less appropriate category. 
 
The number of trivial words used in this substitution experiment was small 
(two).  As the number of words used to form the clusters increases, the effect 
of the two substituted trivial words on the results is expected to decrease.  In 
the 252 word case that includes the substituted trivial words, the 
combination peripheral and vascular  reverts to the Circulation category in 
the clusters with the substituted trivial words.  However, the separate generic 
first level category containing the substituted trivial words and the more 
generic words remains.  
 
Additionally, in the 252 word case that includes the substituted trivial words, 
the combination vascular and peripheral reverts to the appropriate high level 
Circulation category.  However, the individual words vascular and 
peripheral are in different lower level categories relative to the 252 word 
case that does not include the substituted trivial words.  In the latter case, 
peripheral and vascular are adjacent.  Thus, the simple substitution of two 
trivial words has changed the taxonomy structure at the highest level, and 
more pervasively at the lowest levels. 
 
 142
Impact of Factor Matrix-Selected Words on Cluster Quality 
 
The impact was shown by comparing the word dendrogram from the main 
text (whose input words were obtained with factor matrix filtering) with a 
word dendrogram whose input words were not obtained with factor matrix 
filtering.  The comparison results will depend strongly on the method used 
for word selection in the latter case.  To minimize human intervention, and 
the potential for arbitrary bias, the highest frequency words after StopWord 
list filtering were selected for clustering, including conflation of closely 
related words. 
 
The 252 word dendrograms are shown on Figures 2 and 8.  Figure 2 
incorporates factor matrix filtering, while Figure 8 does not.  The overall 
distance metric associated with Figure 2 is 513.06, while the overall distance 
metric associated with Figure 8 is 527.28.  For the 64 word cases, the 
respective ‘distance’ metric values are 134.08 and 140.5.  As expected, 
substitution of factor matrix filtering for non-factor matrix filtering results in 
a decrease in the value of the ‘distance’ metric.  As the constituent clusters 
become sharper with the removal of context-dependent trivial words from 
factor matrix filtering, the ‘distance’, a measure of cluster cohesiveness, 
decreases. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 8 
 
As in the previous example, the assignment of words to clusters is of equal 
importance to the change is particular metrics.  How did the addition of 
factor matrix filtering impact the assignment of words to the highest level 
categories in the taxonomy? 
 
To re-iterate the structure of Figure 2, there are the two first level categories 
of Auto-immunity (Patients-Old) and Circulation (Treatment-Acid).  Auto-
immunity can be subdivided into its second level categories of Auto-immune 
Diseases/ Antibodies (Patients-Neuropathy) and Inflammation (Lesions-
Old), and Circulation can be sub-divided into its second level categories of 
peripheral vascular circulation (Treatment-Consecutive) and coronary 
vascular circulation (Pulmonary-Acid).  The categories are sharp, 
correspond to medical diagnosis and treatment, and the contents are 
appropriately placed. 
 
 143
Figure 8 contains a different higher category level structure.  The first level 
can be divided into two categories, a very generic small category (13 words) 
centered around Raynaud’s Phenomenon and scleroderma (Raynaud’s-
Symptoms), and the other being large (239 words) and including both Auto-
immunity and Circulation (Systemic-Abnormality).  The small generic first 
level category can be subdivided into its second level categories centered 
around Raynaud’s Phenomenon/ Scleroderma (Raynaud’s-Severity) and 
very generic terms (One-Symptoms).  The larger second level category can 
be sub-divided into its second level categories of Auto-immunity (Systemic-
Signs) and Circulation (Treatment-Abnormality). 
 
Not only is the structure of the first level different between the two figures, 
but, for example, the word ‘scleroderma’ is in different first level categories.  
In the factor matrix filtered case (Figure 2), scleroderma is in the Auto-
immunity category, closely linked to both relatively generic terms (patients, 
diseases) and a very specific term (progressive systemic sclerosis, PSS).  
This is due to 1) PSS being a pseudonym for scleroderma and 2) 
scleroderma being a sign of a group of diseases that involve the abnormal 
growth of connective tissue, which supports the skin and internal organs, and 
therefore used as a more generic umbrella term for these disorders.  In the 
non-factor matrix filtered case (Figure 8), scleroderma is in the generic first 
level category, coupled to the generic terms ‘patients, diseases’, as in Figure 
2, but de-coupled from its pseudonym PSS. 
 
A third level sub-division is required for Figure 8 for comparison with the 
second level sub-division of Figure 2.  The second level Auto-immunity 
category of Figure 8 (Systemic-Signs) sub-divides into third level categories 
of Auto-immune Diseases/ Antibodies (Systemic-Comparison) and 
Inflammation (Lesions-Signs).  The Inflammation category contains 13 
words, of which perhaps 3 relate specifically to inflammation (lesions, 
vasculitis, inflammatory).  Contrast this with the second level Inflammation 
category from Figure 2.  This Inflammation category contains 16 words 
(similar in magnitude), of which 8 relate specifically to inflammation 
(lesions, corticosteroids, eosinophilia, fasciitis, hypergammaglobulinemia, 
scleroderma-like, inflammatory, polyarthritis).  The difference in level of 
detail is striking. 
 
The second level Circulation category of Figure 8 (Treatment-Abnormality) 
sub-divided into third level categories of Circulation (Treatment-Data) and a 
very generic unfocused category (Criteria-Abnormality).  In the third level 
 144
Circulation category, peripheral vascular circulation is intermingled with 
coronary artery circulation, and lower taxonomy levels need to be accessed 
before these circulation sub-categories can be differentiated. 
 
On Figure 8, the circulation sub-category of Coronary Artery Circulation 
(Combined-Five) contains 12 terms, of which 3 are relatively specific 
(hypertensive, cardiac, heart).  On Figure 2, the second level category of 
Coronary Artery Circulation (Pulmonary-Acid) contains 25 terms, of which 
about 20 are relatively specific (pulmonary, fibrosis, hypertension, cardiac, 
cardiovascular, heart, coronary, myocardial, ventricular, angina, necrosis, 
spasm, chest, lung, biofeedback, training, relaxation, stress, migraine, 
headaches).  The biofeedback thrust was not even mentioned on Figure 8.  
Additionally, Figure 2 provides much more detail about the physical 
consequences of insufficient coronary artery circulation, whereas Figure 8 
alludes to the general area with no specific detail. 
 
There are many other differences in structure and content between the two 
dendrograms.  In summary, the factor matrix filtering provides a lower value 
of overall ‘distance’ (translating into a more sharply defined overall 
taxonomy.  The clusters are improved from a medical perspective, and the 
contents are far more detailed. 
 145
Figure 1 
SCREE PLOT-659 FACTOR
0
5
10
15
0 200 400 600 800
FACTOR NUMBER
FA
C
TO
R
 
EI
G
EN
VA
LU
E
 
 
 
 146
Figure 2 
 
patients
diseases
scleroderma
systemic
scleros is
progressive
PSS
skin
involvement
tissue
connective
mixed
MCTD
lupus
erythematosus
antibody
antinuclear
antigens
nuclear
extractable
immunofluorescence
speckled
sera
ribonucleoprotein
anti-RNP
swollen
high
pattern
features
renal
ANA
specificity
arthritis
rheumatoid
RA
factor
myositis
polymyositis
dermatomyositis
rheumatic
arthralgia
serological
CREST
sclerodacty ly
calcinosis
telangiectasia
esophageal
dysmotility
anticentromere
variant
diffuse
acrosclerosis
human
acid
marker
serum
IgG
IgM
circulation
immune
complexes
complement
levels
elevated
cryoglobulinemia
positive
negative
activity
protein
DNA
liver
c irrhosis
autoimmune
neuropathy
lesions
localized
biopsy
corticosteroids
v isceral
eosinophilia
fasc iitis
fasc ia
hypergammaglobulinemia
scleroderma-like
subcutaneous
deep
inflammatory
polyarthritis
feet
old
treatment
drugs
side
agents
calcium
nifedipine
blocker
mg
placebo
double-blind
daily
trials
times
dose
crossover
inhibitor
thromboxane
double
blind
periods
vasospastic
attacks
idiopathic
frequency
alpha
antagonist
hypertensive
open
blood
flow
measured
fingers
pressure
systolic
cooling
local
measures
artery
digital
vascular
hand
cold
temperatures
C
degrees
water
immersion
normal
controls
group
responses
increase
decrease
rate
P
mean
occlusions
plethysmography
venous
room
fingertip
increased
plasma
viscosity
reduction
arm
ulcers
healing
administered
infusion
intravenous
prostaglandin
E1
platelet
aggregation
prostacyclin
administration
vasodilator
microc irculation
stimulation
smooth
peripheral
c irculatory
pain
nerves
median
sensory
motor
time
recovery
v ibration
tools
v ibrating
chain
prevalence
white
v ibratory
Exposure
workers
exposed
chloride
vinyl
occupational
age
men
system
nervous
central
ischaemic
thrombosis
upper
extremity
brachial
sympathectomy
thoracic
operation
surgery
surgical
sympathetic
arteriography
distal
angiography
clear
oral
Reserpine
capillary
nailfold
microscopy
capillaroscopy
vivo
red
distribution
collagen
light
stage
i
consecutive
pulmonary
fibrosis
hypertension
cardiac
cardiovascular
heart
failure
coronary
myocardial
ventricular
angina
necrosis
spasm
chest
lung
biofeedback
training
relaxation
stress
migraine
headaches
physiological
conducted
thermal
acid
0
100
200
300
400
500
Distance
 147
Figure 3 
SCREE PLOT - 10 FACTORS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0 5 10 15
FACTOR NUMBER
FA
C
TO
R
 
EI
G
EN
VA
LU
E
 
 148
Figure 4 
SCREE PLOT BREAK POINT
0
5
10
15
0 200 400 600 800
NUMBER OF FACTORS ON SHEET
N
U
M
B
ER
 O
F 
FA
C
TO
R
S-
B
R
EA
K
 
PO
IN
T
 
 149
Figure 5 
SCREE PLOT BREAK POINT
1
10
100
1 10 100 1000
NUMBER OF FACTORS ON SHEET
N
U
M
B
ER
 O
F 
FA
C
TO
R
S-
B
R
EA
K
 
PO
IN
T
 
 150
Figure 6 
 
Raynaud's
phenomenon
patients
disease
syndrome
clinical
one
two
three
patient
systemic
sclerosis
progressive
lupus
erythematosus
scleroderma
tissue
connective
antibodies
diseases
features
high
pulmonary
abnormalities
treatment
therapy
cases
case
severe
symptoms
diagnosis
blood
flow
measured
increased
cold
temperature
finger
C
digital
arterial
hand
normal
subjects
control
response
vascular
peripheral
skin
Primary
test
time
hands
group
groups
years
age
P
20
15
2
1
3
disorders
020406080
100
120
140
160
Distance
 151
Figure 7 
 
of
the
Raynaud's
patients
phenomenon
disease
syndrome
clinical
systemic
sclerosis
progressive
lupus
erythematosus
scleroderma
tissue
connective
antibodies
diseases
features
high
pulmonary
treatment
therapy
vascular
peripheral
cases
case
severe
symptoms
diagnosis
one
two
three
patient
group
groups
years
age
2
1
3
blood
flow
measured
increased
digital
arterial
skin
cold
temperature
finger
hand
normal
subjects
control
response
Primary
test
P
20
15
time
hands
disorders
020406080
100
120
140
160
180
Distance
 152
Figure 8 
 
Raynaud's
phenomenon
patients
diseases
syndromes
cases
scleroderma
severity
one
two
three
four
symptoms
systemic
sclerosis
progressive
PSS
skin
involvement
abnormality
pulmonary
fibrosis
CREST
sclerodactyly
calc inosis
telangiectasia
esophageal
variant
diffuse
diagnosis
patterns
high
antibody
ANA
antigens
nuclear
sera
immunofluorescence
tissue
connective
mixed
MCTD
lupus
erythematosus
SLE
arthritis
rheumatoid
serum
features
specificity
cells
human
detection
renal
prognosis
incidence
types
years
aged
onset
evidence
similar
common
frequent
laboratory
good
tests
positive
negative
factors
immune
complement
correlation
duration
capillary
microscopy
comparison
lesions
picture
forms
manifestations
vasculitis
cutaneous
and/or
collagen
inflammatory
reports
literature
association
signs
treatment
therapy
drugs
doses
vasospasm
attacks
weeks
mg
placebo
double-blind
daily
trials
received
administration
periods
days
suffering
reduction
frequency
groups
normal
controls
P
responses
increasing
blood
flow
fingers
measures
pressure
systolic
cooling
artery
digital
decreased
hands
cold
temperatures
degrees
C
water
localized
low
occlusions
plethysmography
venous
difference
Primary
secondary
mean
number
vascular
peripheral
circulation
disorders
conditions
disturbances
functional
organic
caused
induced
methods
techniques
vessels
small
levels
elevated
plasma
viscosity
range
index
additional
combined
hypertensive
cardiac
heart
failure
agents
rates
side
new
initial
mild
five
seven
Eight
nine
six
ten
mechanism
times
Exposure
workers
vibration
prevalence
population
early
stages
average
relationship
women
men
total
medical
examinations
carried
basis
ischemia
pain
surgery
sympathectomy
thoracic
extremity
upper
limbs
system
nerves
sympathetic
management
complete
objective
Data
criteria
based
general
part
essential
least
history
physical
female
idiopathic
order
firs t
second
long-term
action
value
particular
large
months
ulcers
oral
confirmed
noted
chronic
acute
course
risk
activity
direct
body
muscle
absence
biopsy
distal
established
role
pathogenesis
etiology
major
abnormality
0
100
200
300
400
500
Distance
 153
Section 8.  Use and Misuse of Citation Analysis in Text Mining. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  "The Use and Misuse of Citation Analysis in 
Research Evaluation". Scientometrics.  43:1.  September 1998.) 
 
The present section addresses some of the many possible uses of citations, 
including bookmark, intellectual heritage, impact tracker, and self-serving 
purposes. The main focus is on the applicability of citation analysis as an 
impact or quality measure. If a paper's bibliography is viewed as consisting 
of a directed (research impact or quality) component related to intellectual 
heritage and random components related to specific self-interest topics, then 
for large numbers of citations from many different citing papers, the most 
significant intellectual heritage (research impact or quality) citations will 
aggregate and the random author-specific self-serving citations will be 
scattered and not accumulate. However, there are at least two limitations to 
this model of citation analysis for stand-alone use as a measure of research 
impact or quality. First, the reference to intellectual heritage could be 
positive or negative. Second , there could be systemic biases which affect 
the aggregate results, and one of these, the "Pied Piper Effect", is described 
in detail. Finally, the results of a short citation study comparing Russian and 
American papers in different technical fields are presented. The questions 
raised in interpreting this data highlight a few of the difficulties in 
attempting to interpret citation results without supplementary information.  
 
 
Leydesdorff (Leydesdorff, 1998) addresses the history of citations and 
citation analysis, and the transformation of a reference mechanism into a 
purportedly quantitative measure of research impact/ quality. The present 
paper examines different facets of citations and citation analysis, and 
discusses the validity of citation analysis as a useful measure of research 
impact/ quality. 
 
1. Citations 
1.1. Citations as bookmarks 
The starting point for this section centers around the need for citations. Why 
do we use citations in a paper? There are obviously many reasons for 
citations, ranging from contributions to the advancement of science and 
knowledge to less noble purposes for inclusion in text. Some of these 
reasons will be enumerated in the following paragraphs. 
 154
 
We start with the bookmark function of citations. The average reader of a 
technical paper typically does not have the luxury to expend large amounts 
of time on extracting useful information from the paper. The shorter the 
paper, the greater is the likelihood that it will be read in its entirety. 
Citations, like acronyms or mathematical symbols or 'laws', provide a 
condensed reference to a much larger body of data. The relatively few 
readers who would be interested in such details can examine them at a later 
date.  
 
I could write a paper including Lotka's law without providing a reference to 
Lotka's law, or without even mentioning the name 'Lotka's law'. Whenever 
the need to include Lotka's law arose, I would write out the definition. This 
unabridged approach to writing would lead to an unnecessarily lengthy 
document, and would lose the average reader quite rapidly. Using the 
abridged description 'Lotka's law' allows for an efficiency of presentation. 
Including such a citation allows the reader to access more details, shows 
evidence of my awareness of other related works, and probably provides 
more credibility to my paper in the reader's eyes. 
1.2. Citations as intellectual heritage linkages 
Other than the shorthand function, citations provide links to the intellectual 
heritage foundation for the citing paper, and help provide the historical 
context for displaying the unique contributions of the citing paper. While the 
intellectual heritage linkage role of citations is probably the dominant 
consideration when viewing citations as a measure of research impact, one 
needs to be careful on this point of important contributors to intellectual 
heritage. In the best of all worlds, only a small fraction of all potential 
intellectual sources will be and can be acknowledged. Especially in any 
technical field, there are thousands of papers and other sources which have 
contributed to the intellectual foundation, as there are thousands of bricks 
which contribute to the support structure of a building's roof. In particular, 
there may be sources which are not obvious, at least consciously, to the 
paper's author. Perhaps a major foundational concept for a paper came from 
attendance at a seminar or a lunchtime discussion, either of which have 
escaped the author's memory. Intrinsically, the intellectual attribution 
process is very incomplete. 
 
Given the finite space allowed in the journals, only a small sampling of the 
total true intellectual foundation for a paper can be cited, even if all these 
sources were tangible and identifiable by the author. The selection process 
used by an author to include a relatively few citations in the bibliography for 
identifying the intellectual heritage is poorly understood. While some sort of 
Lotka's law approach is assumed to be at work in selecting only the seminal 
contributions to the foundation, serious questions exist: what are the 
selection criteria; what are the cutoff criteria? This uncertainty therefore 
translates into an undefined role for citations as a measure of intellectual 
heritage. Some studies (MacRoberts, 1996) have attempted to measure the 
 155
fraction of intellectual heritage that selected papers included in their 
bibliographies. While these studies are insightful and useful, the benchmark 
used (the analyst's perception of what the main intellectual heritage is) is 
also selective and arbitrary, and limits the utility of such analyses. A more 
useful approach might be a few case studies where all the references in a 
sample of published papers are discussed with the authors, and the reasons 
for inclusion of each reference (and exclusion of other potential references) 
in the papers are enumerated. 
1.3. Citations for tracking research impacts 
One critical element of the research management process is identifying and 
articulating the impact and benefits of research. This helps convince the 
research sponsors that there has been (or will be) payoff from their research 
investment, and provides the rationale for continuing the research 
investment. However, tracking the impacts of research is notoriously 
difficult. In the process of having impact, research undergoes a 
transformation to development and engineering, and is effectively 
camoflouged. Also basic research typically has a multiplicity of impacts in 
diverse fields. Many of these fields are unfamiliar to the researcher and the 
sponsor, and therefore any impacts far afield from the researcher's discipline 
go unrecognized. 
 
For basic research, these latter indirect impacts are an important component 
of the research's total impact (Kostoff, 1994). While the magnitude of these 
indirect impacts may be small in many (not all) cases, because of the large 
number of indirect impact pathways, the cumulative effect of all the small 
indirect impacts resulting from a body of research may be quite large. In 
fact, in some cases this cumulative effect of indirect impacts could dominate 
the direct impacts of research (Kostoff, 1994). 
 
One largely unutilized role of citations is to serve as a 'radioactive tracer' of 
research impacts. Citations allow the analyst to track the documented flow 
and evolution of research over time until the linkages to far downstream 
products can be identified. Citations allow the different types of impacts to 
be identified as well. For example, the sponsors of mission-oriented research 
may want to ascertain whether: 1) certain types of technical disciplines are 
accessing the research products; 2) certain types of organizations; or 
specified countries, are utilizing the research products; 3) the research is 
having its initial direct impact on other basic research or applied research or 
development. Citations are a documented approach to generating this 
important diagnostic information. 
 
However, using citations for this diagnostic purpose is much more difficult, 
complex, and time-consuming than the mainstream application of counting 
citations for relative impact. The mainstream use of citation counts is 
algorithm based, and large volumes of data can be processed rapidly to 
provide copious relative impact results. The tracking application is 
intrinsically slow and laborious, requiring judgement of the appropriateness 
 156
and quality of the impact as well as impact quantity. Because of the potential 
information available from the tracking application, this is a very fruitful 
area for future citation research and analysis. 
 
Other positive (and negative) uses of citations can be found in MacRoberts 
(1996) and Kostoff (1997a). 
1.4. Citations for self-serving purposes 
Citations also play other roles, of a less positive (to the advancement of 
science, anyway) nature. One role is self- aggrandizement, or the ego 
satisfaction of self-citation for purposes not justified technically. Another 
role for citations is political. For example, we all know of cases where 
including citations to journal editors or potential reviewers or 'politically 
correct' papers will help a paper's chances of being accepted for publication 
in a specific journal.  
 
Because citations can impact rewards such as promotion/ tenure/ grant 
consideration, there is a financial self-interest role based on increasing 
citation volume. This is where 'citation clubs' are formed, and each member 
cites the other members regularly. Each member has increased citation 
volume, which eventually translates to more money for each member due to 
promotions or contracts or other benefits. In addition, there is a potential 
exclusivity role for citations, whereby they are used mutually among closed 
groups of researchers to exclude (by sheer volume of citations) competitive 
concepts which threaten existing mainline infrastructures (see the 'Pied Piper 
Effect' in Section 2). 
 157
2. Citation analysis 
2.1. Conclusions from Section 1 
Sub-section 1 described some of the many possible uses of citations, 
including bookmark, intellectual heritage, impact tracker, and self-serving 
purposes. Since the main published uses of citation analyses tend to focus on 
absolute and relative measures of impact (and inferred measures of quality), 
the discussion in this section will concentrated on the applicability of 
citation analyses as an impact or quality measure. The main message to be 
derived from sub-section 1 is that there are many reasons for an individual to 
select particular references for inclusion in a paper, only one of which is the 
dominant contribution of citations to research impact, significant intellectual 
heritage. Trying to draw conclusions about the quality or impact of a specific 
reference based on one particular paper's list of references is akin to solving 
the inverse problem in science: there may be many solutions; they are not 
unique; the correct solution cannot be determined without other information. 
What meaning, then, can be ascribed to the field of citation analysis and the 
metric of citation counts if the basic unit has such associated uncertainty? 
More importantly, what is the purpose of using such a metric, and why is its 
use so widespread? 
2.2. Expanded utilization of quantitative measures 
While there may be many reasons for the growth and utilization of citation 
analysis, its expanded use stems (from my perspective) from the evolution of 
research sponsorship. Technical research has evolved from a rich man's 
pastime (Science, 1998) to industrial support to almost exclusive 
government support. The approaches used by industry to assess the value of 
basic research were primarily based on economics. Existing economic tools 
show that basic research, with its short term costs and long-term high risk 
payoff horizons, could not be justified as economically cost-effective by 
most industries. Therefore, since research is viewed by society as a 
necessity, the support for research has by default almost exclusively shifted 
to government. 
 
As the U.S. national debt has increased drastically in the last two decades, 
competition for scarce funds in the Federal arena has increased substantially 
as well. Basic research, with its long- term payoff horizon, now has to 
compete strongly with medicare, welfare, and other service provision and 
development programs. In Europe and Asia, basic research has undergone a 
similar transformation, with more of a strategic focus to the research.  
 
In this environment of scarce government funds, accountability of all 
government programs has increased substantially. There are two major 
characteristics of this increased accountability: more detailed programmatic 
information is requested by the program assessors, and more quantified 
information is requested. The upsurge in computer availability over the past 
decade has enabled large quantities of detailed information to be stored, 
 158
tracked, and interpreted, and has driven the request for the large volumes of 
detailed program information. The request for increased quantitative 
information also derives from the increased computer capabilities for 
handling and analyzing large amounts of this type of data. In addition, there 
is substantial motivation from the assessors to have simple quantitative 
indicators which could drive the resource allocation process, and 
substantiate and justify the resource allocation decisions that are generated, 
rather than use the more complex and expensive and subjective qualitative 
peer review evaluation processes. 
 
This desire for increased accountability, focused on quantitative measures of 
research output and impact, counterbalanced by the intrinsic long-term 
uncertain payoff from research, has produced a dilemma. The simple 
research outputs, such as published papers and patents, can be easily 
quantified in the short term. However, they are intermediate measures, not 
long-tern benefit measures. The quantifiable impacts from research such as 
societal outcomes or economic payoffs are long-term phenomena and cannot 
be generated in the short term. Because the research oversight organizations 
want valid performance metrics applicable to existing research (Kostoff, 
1997b), the question arises whether credible short term proxies for long-term 
research impacts and outcomes can be defined. 
 
Citation analyses generate relatively short-term quantifiable items, they have 
the appearance of short-term research impacts, and are therefore attractive 
candidates as short-term proxies for research impact and perhaps quality. 
The real question becomes: what, if anything, do they measure? 
2.3. Enhanced value of aggregating citations 
The previous section showed that any citation, or group of citations, in a 
particular paper's bibliography does not provide a unique indicator of 
positive impact of the cited source on the citing paper. Is there any 
combination of citations possible which could translate into research impact 
or quality? 
 
Possibly. Consider the following analogy to gas dynamics. Assume there is a 
flowing gas with gross velocity V and constant temperature T and pressure 
P. If one examines a group of molecules in the gas, each member of the 
group will have a different direction and magnitude to its velocity vector. 
Thus, the aggregate characteristics of the gas cannot be related to the 
velocity and 'kinetic temperature' of any one molecule. However, by 
summing over the velocity distribution functions of large groups of 
molecules (i.e., taking 'moments' of the velocity distribution function), gross 
gas properties such as V and P and T can be obtained. 
 
In gas kinetics, one way of viewing each component molecule in its relation 
to the aggregate is to conceptualize the molecule's velocity vector as 
consisting of a component with mean velocity V (the aggregate velocity) and 
a component with random velocity. In the summation process used to derive 
 159
aggregated gas properties, the random component is integrated out, leaving 
only the mean component V. Can an analogous model be applied to citation 
analysis? 
 
I believe it can. Assume that some, if not most, citations reflect intellectual 
heritage. For any single paper, the citations which reflect intellectual 
heritage may not be obvious, and of those citations which do reflect 
intellectual heritage, the dominant or highest priority ones may not be 
obvious. However, from the nature of the positive and negative reasons for 
citing shown above, it appears that the main positive reason (intellectual 
heritage) for citation impact or quality purposes is tied to or reflective of 
intrinsic technical considerations, and the negative reasons are related to 
non-technical self-serving individual characteristics. Thus, if we view a 
paper's bibliography as consisting of a directed (research impact or quality) 
component related to intellectual heritage and random components related to 
specific self-interest topics, then for large numbers of citations from many 
different citing papers, the most significant intellectual heritage (research 
impact or quality) citations will aggregate and the random author- specific 
self-serving citations will be scattered and not accumulate. 
2.4. Limitations of citations as stand-alone measures of impact 
While corroborations of large numbers of citations with other indicators of 
substantial research impact and quality have shown general agreement, 
especially with use of large citing and cited universes, there are at least two 
limitations to this model of citation analysis for stand-alone use as a measure 
of research impact or quality. First, the reference to intellectual heritage can 
be positive or negative. A paper could be highly cited because it contributed 
to the growth of a field, or it could be highly cited because its flaws were 
obvious to many people, and they wanted to correct the record. Second, 
there could be systemic biases which affect the aggregate results, one of 
which I have termed the "Pied Piper Effect" (Kostoff, 1997c), and will 
describe here briefly. 
 160
2.5. The Pied Piper Effect 
Assume there is a present-day mainstream (characterized by high citations) 
approach in a specific field of research; for example, the chemical/ radiation/ 
surgical approach to treating cancer (See Appendix 1 for a more detailed 
example of the "Pied Piper Effect"). Assume that in, say, fifty years a cure 
for cancer is discovered, and the curative approach has nothing to do with 
today's mainstream highly-cited research. In fact, assume it turns out that 
today's highly-cited mainstream approach was completely orthogonal or 
even antithetical to the correct approach, and that one of the alternative 
lowly-cited approaches existing today provided the foundation for the 
eventual cure. Then what meaning can be ascribed to those research papers 
in cancer today that define the mainstream approach; i.e., they are highly 
cited for supposedly positive reasons? 
 
In this case, a paper's high citations are a measure of the extent to which the 
paper's author(s) has persuaded the research community that the research 
direction contained in his paper is the correct one. The citations are not a 
measure of the intrinsic correctness of the research direction. In fact, the 
citations may reflect the desire of a closed research community (the author 
and the citers) to persuade a larger community (which could include 
politicians and other resource allocators) that the research direction is the 
correct one. The citations become the operational mechanism by which the 
established infrastructure is able to protect its intellectual and capital 
investments and exclude other competitive approaches which could threaten 
the integrity of that infrastructure. Citations become the vehicle by which 
scientific monopoly is established and perpetuated.  
 
This is the "Pied Piper Effect". The large number of citations in the above 
medical example becomes a measure of the extent of the problem, the extent 
of the diversion from the correct path, not the extent of progress toward the 
solution. The "Pied Piper Effect" is a key reason why, especially in the case 
of revolutionary research, citations and other quantitative measures must be 
part of and subordinate to a broadly constituted peer review in any credible 
evaluation and assessment of research impact and quality (Kostoff, 1997a). 
2.6. Case study of comparative citations 
This section ends with a description of a recent short citation study which 
eventually led to a citing comparison of some Russian/ American papers in 
different technical fields. The questions raised in interpreting the data 
highlight a few of the difficulties in attempting to interpret citation results 
without supplementary information. 
 
In a Text Mining study (Kostoff, 1998a) of hypersonic/ supersonic flow over 
aerodynamic bodies, I generated publication and citation distribution 
functions for different parameters (authors/ journals/ organizations/ 
countries). I observed large numbers of authors/ papers/ journals with 
relatively few citations each, and a few authors/ papers/ journals with large 
 161
numbers of citations. I then performed small focused studies to determine 
the characteristic differences between highly cited and lowly cited papers in 
hypersonic flow.  
 
Appendix 2 summarizes the results from these focused studies. A key point 
is that Russian publications tended to populate the poorly cited papers 
sample, and NASA (U.S.A.) publications tended to populate the highly cited 
papers sample. To study this Russian/ American difference further, I 
examined all the papers in the Science Citation Index (SCI) written by the 
three most prolific Russian authors and the three most prolific American 
authors in hypersonic/ supersonic flow (names were obtained from the larger 
Data Mining study). The results, also shown in Appendix 2, were equally 
striking. Essentially, the Russian papers in this field are not being cited by 
the larger technical community, or even the Russian technical community. 
 
Because of these findings, I performed another small focused study on the 
field of near-earth space. I chose this field since we had examined it for a 
previous Data Mining study (Kostoff, 1998b). I selected all English language 
papers published in 1993 in the SCI (with Russian-Acad-Sci authors only) 
which contained the word SATELLITE*. I chose Russian-Acad-Sci authors 
because they were the most prolific according to the larger space Data 
Mining study.  
 
There were 29 such papers, of which 16 were both relevant to satellites in 
space and were written by Russian authors only. For each of the 16 papers, I 
then attempted to identify a paper published by American authors only in 
1993 which had at least one reference in common with the Russian paper, 
and had an approximately similar theme. The SCI allows this capability. I 
found seven of these pairs; unfortunately, there were not always American 
papers which met the necessary criteria for pairing with the Russian papers. 
 
Of the 16 relevant Russian papers, 14 had zero cites, one had four cites (two 
self cites), and one had six cites (two self cites). For the seven pairs of 
Russian/ American papers, the Russian citation average was 1.4 cites per 
paper, and the American citation average was about 34 cites per paper (of 
which about 6.5 were self cites, or about 20%). Also, for these seven pairs, 
the Russian median was zero cites per paper, and the American median was 
37 cites per paper. This is not a large sample, but the differences are so great 
that I suspect a large sample would give about the same message. 
 
Finally, I performed a small focused study on the field of fullerenes. I 
selected all English language papers in the SCI published in 1993/ 1994 
which contained the phrase CARBON NANOTUBE*. This is one of the 
'hottest' areas of fullerene research. There were 131 such papers, all were 
relevant to the desired topic. I then examined the citation patterns of papers 
written by Russian authors only and American authors only.  
 
There were 44 papers published by American authors only, and three papers 
by Russian authors only. The American papers averaged 27.3 cites per 
 162
paper, while the Russian papers averaged 6 cites per paper. The American 
median was 20 cites per paper, while the Russian median was 4 cites per 
paper. (As an aside, the Japanese papers appeared to very numerous and well 
cited, followed by the Western European papers). 
 
I may examine other fields, and I may use larger samples, but I seem to be 
getting a loud and clear message. Whether or not the Russians are prolific in 
a field in terms of paper production, their works are not getting cited by the 
larger technical community. Possible explanations are: 
1) They could be doing good (citeable) work, and not reporting it; 
2) The work reported may be good, but very applied, and not amenable to 
citing in the literature; i.e., citation is not the appropriate measure of 
quality or utility or impact in this case; 
3) The work reported could be good, but might not be published in the 
forefront literature, and the technical community therefore might not be 
very aware of this work. 
4) The work could be poor, and the citations pinpoint this. 
I have asked perhaps a dozen experts for explanations of these findings, and 
the number of reasons given approaches the number of experts. This 
potential diversity of explanations for citation analysis results pinpoints the 
major operational problem with using these indicators in stand-alone mode. 
 
In the mid-1970s, I led two delegations on Controlled Fusion to the Soviet 
Union. I visited the Kurchatov Institute in Moscow, and Academgorod near 
Novosibirsk. Both times, I was impressed by the technical quality of the 
Russian work in Fusion (both fast-pulsed systems and near-steady state), 
although there were obvious gaps. At the time, I had the impression that this 
high technical quality extended to other fields, with obvious exceptions in 
computers, microelectronics, etc. The present citation results seem to reflect 
a different level of technical performance than what I thought I had seen in 
the mid-1970s. 
 
Did I have a misperception then? Had I examined citation performance 20 
years ago, would I have arrived at the same conclusions as today? Or has the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union resulted in a real degradation of their 
technical performance? Or, are my study approach and groundrules overly 
limited and not applicable? Or do all of the above explanations and 
questions have some validity, and point out graphically the deficiencies of 
trying to use simple quantitative indicators in a stand-alone mode (such as 
citation counts) to measure extremely complex and sophisticated issues.  
2.7. Citation analysis as a warning signal 
Perhaps this particular example has shown the value, if any exists, of using 
quantitative metrics such as citation counts for research quality or impact 
studies. The quantitative results serve as the 'red flags' or warning lights that 
a problem may exist; they are the modern day equivalents of the 'canary in 
the mine' approach to volatile gas detection. However, it was uncertain 
 163
exactly what killed the canary decades ago, and it is uncertain today what 
specific citation counts mean. This is precisely how I use citation studies 
today; they serve as indicators that further investigation into specific areas is 
warranted, and they are always accompanied by, and subordinate to, expert 
analysis/ peer review. 
 164
Appendix 1 of Section 8 
The Pied Piper Effect: A specific example 
A 1995 article in Science purports to identify the Top 10 U.S. Universities in 
Clinical Medical Research from 1990-1994 (Science, 1995). The published 
papers and citations per paper are ranked in decreasing frequency by medical 
research institution, and the institutions with the highest frequencies of 
publicationa and citations are identified as the top universities in clinical 
medicine research. This Science article crystallizes the problem of using 
metrics as a gauge of research productivity and, by inference, quality. This 
statement will be amplified with an illustrative example which questions the 
linkage between high research output and high research quality. The 
example focuses on cataracts, but is extrapolateable to other chronic 
systemic problems as well.  
 
In 1995, I did a literature survey of research papers related to eye cataracts. I 
examined four years (1991-1994) of abstracts from the Science Citation 
Index (SCI) and the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI). Of the many 
hundreds of abstracts identified, perhaps 99% dealt with different aspects of 
the surgical treatment of cataracts. Maybe 1% or less dealt with nutritional 
approaches, and these were mainly vitamin and mineral supplementation for 
prevention. There were no papers in these peer-reviewed journals dealing 
with alternative approaches to cataract treatment. 
 
The mainstream medical community views cataracts as an eye problem. The 
lens degenerates for unknown reasons, in their view, and when it has 
deteriorated sufficiently, it should be replaced surgically. This approach 
arises from the paradigm of viewing the eye as a separate component of the 
total physical system, and the lens replacement becomes equivalent 
conceptually to replacing a car's windshield when it has become pitted. 
 
An alternative paradigm, subscribed to in part by practitioners such as Leslie 
Salov, M.D., Gary Todd, M.D., Fereydoon Batmanghelidj, M. D., and Ben 
Lane, O.D., is that the body experiences chronic systemic problems 
(deficiencies of various types), and these problems manifest themselves as 
symptoms in specific organs. For some people, the weak organ is the eye, 
and the symptom is the cataract. Healing, in this paradigm, consists of 
identifying and eliminating the systemic deficiencies. Surgically removing 
the cataract, while improving functioning (at least temporarily), does nothing 
to address the fundamental problems which are at the foundation of the 
cataract's presence. Under this alternative paradigm, surgical removal is 
equivalent to removing the warning light on a car's dashboard when it 
signifies a problem. In both cases, the long-term consequences of the short- 
term pallative actions could be very severe. 
 
These alternative approaches never surface in the peer reviewed literature, as 
the author's survey showed. The journal reviewers (and the funding proposal 
reviewers as well) are researchers trained along the orthodox paradigms, and 
 165
they provide high marks to those papers (and proposals) aligned with the 
reviewers' backgrounds. In addition, there are institutional and commercial 
biases which also govern the willingness of the reviewers and editors (and 
sponsors) to provide positive evaluations of alternative approaches. Thus, 
the copious papers and citations (and grants) from this component of 
medical research reflect activity among a closed group whose members 
subscribe to essentially the same orthodox paradigm. Far from being a 
measure of quality, the numbers of papers and citations (and projects) from 
some branches of medical research could be interpreted as a measure of the 
extent of the problem. 
 
In studies on research evaluation (Kostoff, 1995), I differentiate between the 
two major characteristics of high quality science, doing the job right and 
doing the right job (in the best of all worlds, the right job would be done 
right). The Science article (Science, 1995) is an example of doing the job 
right. Once the research target has been selected (paradigm of using the 
surgical approach to eliminating cataracts), the orthodox medical research 
community performs an excellent and highly productive effort in finding the 
best ways to achieve the target. It is analogous to firing a missile very 
precisely at the wrong target, and is the essence of achieving high precision 
with low accuracy. However, one can question seriously whether the 
orthodox medical community is doing the right job (using the right 
paradigm), and the present closed funding, review, and publication structure 
effectively precludes innovations which will address the right job. 
 
The Science article, and the above comments, illustrate the danger of relying 
on metrics alone to infer quality from scientific activity. Metrics have an 
important role in a comprehensive evaluation procedure of research (Kostoff, 
1997a), but as a stand-alone approach as reflected in the Science article they 
are subject to misinterpretation.  
 166
Appendix 2 of Section 8 
Characteristics of highly-cited and poorly-cited papers 
To ascertain whether any relationship between highly cited and lowly cited 
papers and their associated journals and performing organizations could be 
observed, the characteristics of samples of highly and lowly cited papers 
were analyzed. The database used to extract the samples was the expanded 
web version of the SCI. In contrast to the CD-ROM version of the SCI used 
to obtain the bulk data for this paper, the web version has 60% more journals 
(~5200), and is more convenient for performing citation analyses (however, 
the web version in its present incarnation is less convenient than the CD-
ROM version for most bulk data analysis, since each record must be 
downloaded individually). All records in the web version which contained 
the term HYPERSONIC (a small subset of the supersonic/ hypersonic field) 
and were published in 1993 were examined. 
 
There were 155 raw 'hits', or records obtained by the query, of which 15 
(10%) were not applicable to the topic of hypersonic flow over aerodynamic 
bodies. Of the remainder, 64 records (46%) had zero citations by other 
papers; 55 records (39%) received between one and four citations; and 21 
records (15%) were cited five or more times by other documents in the 
expanded SCI, and were viewed as highly cited papers.  
 
Seven of those highly cited papers (33%) were published in the AIAA 
Journal (231-number of papers from database published in journal); three 
papers in the Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets (109); three papers in the 
Journal of Fluid Mechanics (48); and one paper each in a variety of journals 
which contained fewer papers from the total database. The median journal in 
the sample contained 48 of the total database papers, as contrasted to the 
median journal in the total database containing one paper. Since the number 
of journals which contain n published papers follows approximately a 1/n^4 
distribution as was shown in Kostoff (1998a), the journals in the highly cited 
sample are, on average, the very top echelon of the total database journals in 
terms of numbers of papers published. 
 
In the highly cited paper sample, twelve were from foreign institutions; 
twelve were from universities; and six were from NASA laboratories. The 
five most highly cited papers were from universities. The median 
organization in this sample contributed thirteen papers to the total database, 
as contrasted to the median organization in the total database contributing 
one paper. Since the number of papers n contributed by an organization to 
the total database also follows a 1/n^4 distribution as was shown in Kostoff 
(1998a), the organizations in the highly cited sample are, on average, the 
very top echelon of the total database organizations in terms of numbers of 
papers contributed. 
 
The 64 records with zero citations were also examined, albeit from a 
different perspective. Because the range of citations in the total 140 record 
 167
sample was between zero and ten, it was felt that there probably was a 
quality stratification within the sample group with zero citations, and thus 
the very poor performers could not be isolated as precisely as the good 
performers. The following observations were made of the zero cited papers 
sample. 
AIAA Journal contributed 3% of the zero cited papers, as contrasted to 33% 
of the papers in the highly cited sample; Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets – 
13% zero cited/ 14% highly cited; Journal of Fluid Mechanics – 0% zero 
cited/ 14% highly cited; HIGH TEMPERATURE - 9% zero cited/ 0% highly 
cited; Journal of Aircraft - 8% zero cited/ 0% highly cited; PMM Journal of 
Applied Mathematics and Mechanics – 6% zero cited; 0% highly cited; 
Zeitschrift für Flugwissenschaften und Weltraumforschung -6% zero cited/ 
not listed in CD-ROM database. The journals with a high ratio of highly 
cited papers to zero cited papers tend to emphasize the more fundamental 
research. The journals with a low ratio of highly cited papers to zero cited 
papers tend to emphasize the more applied research. The fact that the applied 
papers are being cited less than the more fundamental papers does not mean 
they are less useful or of lower quality; they may be of substantial use to 
developers, who publish much less than researchers, and this more practical 
use would not be reflected in the present type of bibliometrics study. 
 
Industrial organizations contributed 27% of the zero cited papers, as 
contrasted to 10% (2 papers) of the highly cited papers (these two highly 
cited papers were actually one paper split into two sections and published 
sequentially in the same journal issue); university organizations -33% zero 
cited; 57% highly cited; NASA - 9% zero cited/ 29% highly cited; American 
organizations -36% zero cited/ 43% highly cited; European organizations -
25% zero cited/ 38% highly cited; Asian organizations -9% zero cited/ 14% 
highly cited; Middle Eastern organizations -5% zero cited; 0% highly cited; 
Russian organizations -23% zero cited; 5% highly cited. This last 
observation is quite surprising, since two of the top four paper contributing 
organizations in the total CD-ROM database were Russian.  
 
In summary, this small sample analysis led to the following conclusions for 
hypersonic flow. Fundamental research papers are more likely to be cited 
than applied research papers; university papers are more likely to be cited 
than industry papers; the journals which contain concentrations of highly 
cited papers are also the core journals in terms of papers published; NASA 
produced many papers (147 in the total CD-ROM database), and had a 
substantial fraction of the highly cited papers; Russia produced slightly more 
papers than NASA (169 in the total CD-ROM database), and had almost no 
highly cited papers. 
 
The NASA/ Russia citation differential led to another short study which 
examined American/ Russian differentials in supersonic/ hypersonic flow 
citations. Two groups of papers were generated. The first group consisted of 
all papers (from the web version of the SCI) published in 1993/ 1994 by the 
three most prolific supersonic/ hypersonic flow Russian authors identified in 
Kostoff (1998a); the second group included all papers by the three most 
 168
prolific supersonic/ hypersonic flow American authors from Kostoff 
[1998a]. There were 12 papers in the first (Russian) group, and 36 papers in 
the second (American) group. All papers related to supersonic/ hypersonic 
flow. The citations received by all these papers were examined. 
 
Of the twelve Russian papers, nine received zero cites, two received one cite 
each, and one received three cites. The average cites per paper is 0.4. All of 
the five total cites were self- cites (There is nothing intrinsically wrong with 
self cites; in those cases where the author has done the pioneering work in 
the field, self-cites are most appropriate. However, when all cites are self-
cites, then the true impact of the paper on the larger scientific community 
must be called into question).  
 
Of the 36 American papers, seven received zero cites. The total number of 
citations received was 106, of which 56 were self cites. The average cites per 
paper is three. While all these citation numbers reported are quite small, 
reflecting the low level of effort in this technical field, there is obviously a 
systemic difference between the citations received by the Russian and American 
papers. Whether these differences extend beyond supersonic/ hypersonic flow to 
other topical areas is an interesting question.  
 
There are two crucial pieces of data missing from these two short studies 
(and from most bibliometrics analyses) which prevent harder conclusions 
about quality and value to be drawn. The amount of research effort 
represented by each paper is unknown to the analyst, and the eventual use of 
the results from each paper is unknown to the analyst. Thus, the number of 
highly cited papers per dollar of research investment (or some similar 
research efficiency metric), probably a better measure of value than pure 
numbers of papers or highly cited papers, cannot be stated. Also, the quality 
of the eventual hypersonic vehicles that resulted from the papers' research, 
probably a better measure than numbers of cited papers, was not tracked and 
cannot be stated. In addition, the papers in these two short studies were not 
read in detail independently by hypersonic flow experts, and thus their 
quality could not be gauged independently from another perspective and 
correlated to the citation results. 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 8 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1994), Research impact quantification, R&D 
Management, 24:3, July. 
 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1995). Federal research impact assessment: Axioms, 
approaches, applications, Scientometrics, 34:2. 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1997a), The Handbook of Research Impact 
Assessment, Seventh Edition. DTIC Report Number ADA296021. Also, 
available at http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/kostoff/index.html 
 169
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1997b), Peer review: The appropriate GPRA metric 
for research, Science, Vol. 277. 1 August. p. 651-652. 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1997c), Use and misuse of metrics in research 
evaluation, Science and Engineering Ethics, 3:2. 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1998a), Hypersonic and supersonic flow roadmaps 
using bibliometrics and database tomography, (submitted for publication). 
 KOSTOFF, R. N. (1998b), Database tomography for technical 
intelligence: A roadmap of the near-earth space science and technology 
literature, Information Processing and Management, (accepted for 
publication). 
 LEYDESDORFF, L. (1998), Theories of citation, Scientometrics (this 
issue). 
 MACROBERTS, M. and MACROBERTS, B. (1996), Problems of citation 
analysis, Scientometrics, 36 (3) 435. 
Top 10 U. S. universities in clinical medicine research, 1990-1994, Science,. 
Vol. 269. 1 September, 1995. p. 1223. 
Scientists who fund themselves, Science, Vol. 279. 9 January, 1998, p. 179. 
 
 170
Section 9.  Citation Mining for Research Impact Identification. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N., Del Rio, J. A., García, E. O., Ramírez, A. M., and 
Humenik, J. A. “Citation Mining: Integrating Text Mining and Bibliometrics 
for Research User Profiling”.  JASIST.  52:13.  1148-1156.  52:13.  
November 2001.) 
 
I.  OVERVIEW 
 
Background: Identifying the users and impact of research is important for 
research performers, managers, evaluators, and sponsors.  It is important to 
know whether the audience reached is the audience desired.  It is useful to 
understand the technical characteristics of the other research/ development/ 
applications impacted by the originating research, and to understand other 
characteristics (names, organizations, countries) of the users impacted by the 
research.  Because of the many indirect pathways through which 
fundamental research can impact applications, identifying the user audience 
and the research impacts can be very complex and time consuming. 
Objective: The purpose of this section is to describe a novel approach for 
identifying the pathways through which research can impact other research, 
technology development, and applications, and to identify the technical and 
infrastructure characteristics of the user population. 
Approach: A novel literature-based approach was developed to identify the 
user community and its characteristics.  The research performed is 
characterized by one or more papers accessed by the Science Citation Index 
(SCI) database, since the SCI’s citation-based structure enables the 
capability to perform citation studies easily.  The user community is 
characterized by the papers in the SCI that cite the original research papers, 
and that cite the succeeding generations of these papers as well.  Text 
mining is performed on the citing papers to identify the technical areas 
impacted by the research, the relationships among these technical areas, and 
relationships among the technical areas and the infrastructure (authors, 
journals, organizations).  A key component of text mining, concept 
clustering, was used to provide both a taxonomy of the citing papers’ 
technical themes and further technical insights based on theme relationships 
arising from the grouping process.  Bibliometrics is performed on the citing 
papers to profile the user characteristics.  Citation Mining, this integration of 
citation bibliometrics and text mining, is applied to the ~300 first generation 
citing papers of a fundamental physics paper on the dynamics of vibrating 
sand-piles.   
 171
Results: Most of the ~300 citing papers were basic research whose main 
themes were aligned with those of the cited paper.   However, about twenty 
percent of the citing papers were research or development in other 
disciplines, or development within the same discipline.  The text mining 
alone identified the intra-discipline applications and extra-discipline impacts 
and applications; this was confirmed by detailed reading of the ~300 
abstracts.   
Conclusions: The combination of citation bibliometrics and text mining 
provides a synergy unavailable with each approach taken independently.  
Furthermore, text mining is a REQUIREMENT for a feasible 
comprehensive research impact determination.  The integrated multi-
generation citation analysis required for broad research impact determination 
of highly cited papers will produce thousands or tens or hundreds of 
thousands of citing paper Abstracts.  Text mining allows the impacts of 
research on advanced development categories and/ or extra-discipline 
categories to be obtained without having to read all these citing paper 
Abstracts.  The multi-field bibliometrics provide multiple documented 
perspectives on the users of the research, and indicate whether the 
documented audience reached is the desired target audience. 
 
II.  BACKGROUND 
 
Identification of diverse research impacts is important to research managers, 
evaluators, and sponsors, and ultimately to performers.  They are interested 
in the types of people and organizations citing the research outputs, and 
whether the citing audience is the target audience.  Also, they are interested 
in whether the development categories and technical disciplines impacted by 
the research outputs are the desired targets.  Since fundamental research can 
evolve along myriad paths, tracking diverse impacts becomes complex.   
 
Presently, there are three generic approaches to tracking the impact of 
research: qualitative, semi-quantitative, and quantitative (Kostoff, 1997).  
Qualitative approaches are variants of peer review.  Panels of experts are 
assembled, and impacts are identified based on the participants’ knowledge, 
and usually personal experiences.  The results are usually long on 
subjectivity, and short on independent documentation. 
 
Semi-quantitative approaches are probably the most widely used for tracking 
impact (Kostoff, 1994).  They include retrospective studies such as 
Hindsight (DOD, 1969) and Traces (IITRI, 1968), and various types of 
 172
research sponsor accomplishment books such as those from DOE (DOE, 
1983, 1986) and DARPA (IDA, 1991).  A detailed treatment is contained in 
(Kostoff, 1997).  Semi-quantitative approaches  tend to be grounded in 
corporate memory of the participants, although some studies (Narin, 1989) 
follow the citation trail for supplementation.   Their focus is detailed 
examination of a few high impact cases, rather than a wide-scale 
identification of many diverse impacts.  As in the peer review approach, 
semi-quantitative approaches also have a high subjective component. 
 
Quantitative approaches are also widely used for impact tracking (Kostoff, 
1994).  They tend to be divided between economic methods such as cost-
benefit and internal rate-of-return (Averch, 1994; Tassey, 1999), and S&T 
indicators such as publications and patents (Narin, 1994), and their citations.  
They are the most objective of the three generic methods for tracking and 
quantifying research impact.  However, many assumptions related to cost 
and benefit allocation are required for the economic studies (Kostoff, 1997).  
Additionally, many assumptions are required to accept correlation between 
numerical indicator values and degree of impact.     
 
Thus, one of the gaps of all these impact tracking techniques is objective 
identification of the full scope of impacts produced by the research.  These 
impacts include both the directly identifiable research impacts and the 
indirect impacts.  For that fraction of performed research that is documented 
in the technical literature, tracking of direct and indirect research impacts on 
intermediate and final useful products becomes possible through tracking of 
generations of citations to the original research. If this wide scale impact 
information were obtained, then the in-depth studies performed by the semi-
quantitative methods could cover an expanded range, or the roadmap of 
impacts could be presented as a self-contained valuable finding.  
 
Even though the premier database for citation tracking, the Science Citation 
Index (SCI), contains a number of data fields abstracted from the full-text 
published papers, past citation-based studies using the SCI have focused 
almost exclusively on citation counts as an impact metric.  Reviews of these 
citation studies can be found in (De Solla price, 1986; Braun, 1987; Egghe, 
1990).  The potential impact of citation counts on decision-making is small, 
since the information content of citation counts alone is very limited.  
However, these citing records contain a wealth of information in their two 
main categories of diverse fields.  The non-free-text fields, such as Author, 
Journal, Address, etc, describe the infrastructure characteristics of the citing 
 173
community.  The free-text fields, such as Title, Abstract, and Keywords 
(Keywords is not strictly a free-text field, but has sufficient technical 
characteristics to be included in this grouping), describe the technical 
characteristics of the impacted research, development, and applications 
areas.  
 
Use of the SCI non-free-text fields for citing paper bibliometric analysis has 
been published on a very sporadic basis, and typically only for one or two 
data fields (Steele, 2000; Herring, 1999; Davidse, 1997).  The focus of most 
of these studies has been on relating citations or citation rates to the few 
field variables examined.  There do not appear to have been any citation 
studies performed for the specific purpose of user population profiling, 
where many of the available fields are examined in an integrated manner. 
 
Use of the SCI free-text fields for coupled trans-citation citing paper/ cited 
paper text mining analysis has not been published, although text mining 
studies of SCI and other database free-text fields have been reported (e.g., 
Kostoff, 2000a, 2000b).   
 
III.  OBJECTIVES 
 
The objectives of the present section are: 
 
i) Demonstrate the feasibility of tracking the myriad impacts of research 
on other research, development, and applications, using the technical 
literature. 
ii) Demonstrate the feasibility of identifying a broad range of research 
product user characteristics, using the technical literature. 
iii) Relate thematic characteristics of citing papers to their cited papers. 
 
IV.  APPROACH 
 
The present section describes a novel process, Citation Mining, that uses the 
best features of citation bibliometrics and text mining to track and document 
the impact of basic research on the larger R&D community across many 
generations. In Citation Mining, text mining (Kostoff, 2000a, 2000b; 
Losiewicz, 2000) of the cited and citing papers (trans-citation) supplements 
the information derived from the semi-structured field bibliometric analyses.  
Text mining illuminates the trans-citation thematic relationships, and 
provides insights of knowledge diffusion to other intra-discipline research, 
 174
advanced intra-discipline development, and extra-discipline research and 
development.  The addition of text mining to citation bibliometrics makes 
feasible the large-scale multi-generation citation studies that are necessary to 
display the full impacts of research. 
 
A proof-of-principle demonstration of Citation Mining for user population 
profiling and research impact was performed on four sets of cited papers.  
The papers were selected based on the authors’ technical interests, rather 
than a random representative sample.  It was desired to have one group of 
papers representative of basic research, and another group representative of 
applied research.  Two of the sets were selected Mexican and U. S. applied 
photo-voltaic research papers, and two of the sets were selected British and 
U. S. fundamental vibrating sand-pile research papers.  The complete 
detailed results are reported in Del Rio (2000).   
 
The present section focuses on the trans-citation coupled citing paper/ cited 
paper text mining results for one of the sets, a highly cited U. S. vibrating 
sand-pile paper (Jaeger, 1992). Vibrating sand-piles are important in their 
own right, since they model the behavior of granular systems used in 
agriculture (seeds, grains), geology (avalanches, soil mechanics), 
construction (gravel, sand), and manufacturing (powders, lubricants, sand-
blasting).  The underlying phenomena exhibited in their static and dynamic 
states can be found in many disparate applications, such as fusion 
confinement, geological formations, self-assembly of materials, thin film 
structure ordering, shock-wave statistics, and crowded airspace.   
Statistically, the sand-pile paper selected has sufficient citing papers for 
adequate text mining statistics.  It covers an exciting area of physics 
research, and its technical sub-themes have potential for extrapolation to 
other technical disciplines. 
 
The analyses performed were of two types: bibliometrics and text mining, 
where the text mining was subdivided into two components, phrase 
frequency analysis and phrase clustering analysis.  These different types of 
analyses are described in the following sections. 
 
IV-A.  Bibliometrics Analysis 
The citing paper summaries (records) were retrieved from the SCI.  
Analyses of the different non-free-text fields in each record were performed, 
to identify the infrastructure characteristics of the citing papers (authors, 
journals, institutions, countries, technical disciplines, etc).  The detailed 
 175
analysis methodologies and extensive results are described in Del Rio 
(2000). 
 
IV-B.  Phrase Frequency Analysis 
The purpose of the phrase frequency analysis was to manually generate a 
taxonomy (technical category classification scheme) of the database, from 
the quantified technical phrases extracted from the free-text record fields.  
To generate the database, the citing papers’ Abstracts were aggregated.  
Computational linguistics analyses were then performed on the aggregate.  
Technical phrases were extracted using the Database Tomography process 
(Kostoff, 2000a, 2000b; Losiewicz, 2000).  An algorithm extracted all 
single, adjacent double, and adjacent triple word phrases from the text, and 
recorded the occurrence frequency of each phrase.  While phrases containing 
trivial/ stop words at their beginning or end were eliminated by the 
algorithm, extensive manual processing was required to eliminate the low 
technical content phrases.  Then, a taxonomy of technical sub-categories was 
generated by manually grouping these phrases into cohesive categories.  
Intra-discipline applications, and extra-discipline impacts and applications 
were identified from visual inspection of the phrases.   
 
IV-C.  Phrase Clustering Analysis 
The purpose of the phrase clustering analysis was to generate taxonomies of 
the database semi-automatically, again from the quantified technical phrases 
extracted from the free-text record fields.  The clustering analysis further 
used quantified information about the relationships among the phrases from 
co-occurrence data (the number of times phrases occur together in some 
bounded domain).  The clustering analyses results complemented those from 
the phrase frequency analyses, and offered added perspectives on the 
thematic structure of the database. 
 
After the phrase frequency analyses were completed, co-occurrence matrices 
of Abstract words and phrases (each matrix element Mij is the number of 
times phrase or word i occurs in the same record Abstract as phrase or word 
j) were generated using the TechOasis phrase extraction and matrix 
generation software.  As in the phrase frequency analysis, the phrases 
extracted by the TechOasis natural language processor required detailed 
manual examination, to eliminate the low technical content phrases.  The co-
occurrence matrices were input to the WINSTAT statistical clustering 
software, where clusters (groups of related phrases based on co-occurrence 
 176
frequencies) based on both single words and multi-word phrases were 
generated.  
 
Two types of clustering were performed, high and low level.  The high level 
clustering used only the highest frequency technical phrases, and resulted in 
broad category descriptions.  The low level clustering used low frequency 
phrases related to selected high frequency phrases, and resulted in more 
detailed descriptions of the contents of each broad category. 
 
IV-C-1.  High Level Clustering 
The TechOasis phrase extraction from the citing Abstracts produced two 
types of lists.  One list contained all single words (minus those filtered with 
a stop word list), and the other list contained similarly filtered phrases, both 
single and multi-word.  Both lists required further manual clean-up, to insure 
that relatively high technical content material remained.  The highest 
frequency items from each list were input separately to the TechOasis matrix 
generator, and two co-occurrence matrices, and resulting factor matrices, 
were generated. 
 
The co-occurrence matrices were copied to an Excel file, and the matrix 
elements were non-dimensionalized.  To generate clusters defining an 
overall taxonomy category structure for the citing papers, the Mutual 
Information Index was used as the dimensionless quantity.  This indicator, 
the ratio of: the co-occurrence frequency between two phrases (i,j) squared 
(Cij^2) to the product of the phrase occurrence frequencies (Ci*Cj), 
incorporates the co-occurrence of each phrase relative to its occurrence in 
the total text. The co-occurrence matrix row and column headings are 
arranged in order of decreasing frequency, with the highest frequency phrase 
occurring at the matrix origin.  Based on the intrinsic nature of word and 
phrase frequencies, the row and column heading frequencies decrease 
rapidly with distance from the matrix origin.  With increasing distance from 
the origin, the matrix becomes more and more sparse, although the phrases 
themselves have higher but more focused technical content.  In parallel, the 
Mutual Information Index’s values decrease rapidly as the distance from the 
matrix origin increases.  Thus, the Mutual Information Index is useful for 
relating the highest frequency terms only, and for providing the top-level 
structural description of the taxonomy categories. 
 
IV-C-2.  Low Level Clustering 
 177
To obtain a more detailed technical understanding of the clusters and their 
contents, the lower frequency phrases in each cluster need to be identified.  
A different matrix element non-dimensional quantity is required, one whose 
magnitudes remain relatively invariant to distance from the matrix origin.  In 
addition, a different approach for clustering the low frequency phrases in the 
sparse matrix regions is required, one that relates the very detailed low 
frequency phrases to the more general high frequency phrases that define the 
cluster structure.  In this way, the low frequency phrases can be placed in 
their appropriate cluster taxonomy categories. 
 
The method chosen to identify the lower frequency phrases is as follows.  
Start with the cluster taxonomy structure defined by grouping the higher 
frequency phrases using the Average Neighbor agglomoration technique and 
the Mutual Information Index.  Then, for each high frequency phrase in each 
cluster, find all phrases whose value of the Inclusion Index Ii exceeds some 
threshold.  Ii is the ratio of Cij to Ci (the frequency of occurrence of phrase i 
in the total text), where phrase i has the lower frequency of the matrix 
element pair (i,j).  A threshold value of 0.5 for Ii was used.  The resultant 
lower frequency phrases identified by this method will occur rarely in the 
text, but when they do occur, they will be in close physical (and thematic) 
proximity to the higher frequency phrases. 
 
V.  RESULTS 
 
V-A.  Phrase Frequency Analysis 
The Abstract of the highly cited vibrating sand-pile paper (Jaeger, 1992) is 
shown in Figure 1.   
 
FIGURE 1 – CITED PAPER ABSTRACT 
 
Granular materials display a variety of behaviors that are in many ways 
different from those of other substances. They cannot be easily classified as 
either solids or liquids. This has prompted the generation of analogies 
between the physics found in a simple sandpile and that found in 
complicated microscopic systems, such as flux motion in superconductors or 
spin glasses. Recently, the unusual behavior of granular systems has led to a 
number of new theories and to a new era of experimentation on granular 
systems. 
 
 178
This paper had ~300 citing papers listed in the SCI, as of mid-CY2000.  The 
highest frequency single, adjacent double, and adjacent triple word phrases 
from the aggregate citing papers aligned with the central themes of the cited 
paper can be represented by the following generic taxonomy: Theory/ 
modeling; Experiments/ measurements/ instruments/ variables; Structure/ 
Properties; Phenomena.  
 
There were hundreds of technical phrases in each taxonomy category, and 
the authors selected those judged representative of each category for the 
purposes of illustration.  Those representative phrases (Underlined) aligned 
with the central themes of the aggregate citing papers offer the following 
intra-discipline portrait of the citing aggregate.    These papers reflect a 
balanced theoretical/ modeling effort (Molecular Dynamics Simulations, 
Monte Carlo Simulations, Kinetic Theory) and experimental effort 
(Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Charge Coupled Device Camera) targeted at 
studying the motions of granular particles.   The papers focus on 
examination of the structure(s) and properties of vibrating sand-piles (Angle 
Of Repose, Coefficient Of Restitution), and the intrinsic phenomena of these 
collective systems (Collisions Between Particles, Fractional Brownian 
Motion), with emphasis on segregation (Size Segregation, Axial 
Segregation, Radial Segregation), relaxation (Relaxation Dynamics, 
Relaxation Time Tau), avalanching (Avalanch Durations, Avalanch Size), 
fluidization (Onset of Fluidization, Formation of Convection Cells), and 
collective behaviors (Collective Particle Motion, Self-Organized Criticality). 
 
While the citing paper phrases mainly reflected emphasis on studies of 
granular piles, the phenomenological results and insights on segregation, 
relaxation, fluidization, avalanching, and collective behavior were 
extrapolated to some extra-discipline applications.  These include (sample 
category abbreviated record Titles follow the phrases):  
 
Category Phrases Titles 
geological 
formations and 
processes 
(Earthquake*, Rock 
Avalanches, 
Carbonate Turbudite 
Deposition), 
* Sedimentary evolution of the early 
Paleocene deep-water Gulf of Biscay 
* A fragmentation-spreading model for 
long-runout rock avalanches 
soil mechanics (Soil Mechanics, 
Hillslope Gradient), 
*Evidence for nonlinear, diffusive sediment 
transport on hillslopes and implications for 
landscape morphology 
*Analysis of vertical projectile penetration 
 179
in granular soils 
industrial 
applications 
(Screw Feeder*, 
Industrial), 
*Precision dosing of powders by vibratory 
and screw feeders 
interacting 
object dynamics 
(Traffic Congestion, 
War Game*). 
 
*Study on crowded two-dimensional 
airspace - Self-organized criticality 
*Derivation and empirical validation of a 
refined traffic flow 
materials  
 
(Rheolog*, 
Untwinned Single 
Crystals, Chemical 
Shift Tensors), 
*Vortex avalanches at one thousandth the 
superconducting transition temperature 
*Mesoscale self-assembly of hexagonal 
plates using lateral capillary forces 
films  
 
(Molecular Fluids, 
Adsorbed Polymer 
Layers), 
*A model for the static friction behaviour of 
nanolubricated contacts 
*Spontaneous formation of ordered 
structures in thin films of metals  
multi-phase 
systems 
(Flow 
Immunosensors, 
Fluidized Bed*), 
 
*Advances in flow displacement 
immunoassay design 
*Rheophysical classification of 
concentrated suspensions and granular 
pastes 
*From bubbles to clusters in fluidized beds 
gas dynamics (Gas Flow, Shock 
Waves, Shock 
Front),  
*Statistics of shock waves in a two-
dimensional granular flow 
*Scale invariant correlations in a driven 
dissipative gas 
micro particles (Pollen Exine 
Sculpturing, 
Molecular,  Spinule)  
*The effects of genotype and ploidy level on 
pollen surface sculpturing in maize 
 
and microscale 
cooperative 
effects 
(Tokamak, Plasma*, 
Lattice Gas). 
 
*Sandpiles, silos and tokamak 
phenomenology: a brief review 
*Logarithmic relaxations in a random-field 
lattice gas subject to gravity 
 
To validate the text mining results, each of the ~300 citing paper Abstracts 
was read by the first two authors, and those Abstracts reflecting applications 
and extra-discipline impacts were identified.  All of the applications and 
extra-discipline papers identified from reading the Abstracts could be 
identified/ retrieved from examination of the anomalous text mining-derived 
phrases with a threshold frequency of two.  The applications taxonomy of 
 180
the previous section was validated using this Abstract reading and manual 
classification process, and judged to be a reasonable classification of the 
applications and extra-discipline impacts.  Identification of the applications 
and extra-discipline impacts most unrelated to the main themes of the cited 
paper was easiest because of the highly anomalous nature of their 
representative phrases.  Identification of the intra-discipline applications was 
the most difficult, since the phraseology used was similar to that of the cited 
paper themes. 
 
The importance of this result should be emphasized.  A complete citation 
impact study will typically involve multiple generations of citations.  For a 
citation impact study that involves large numbers of first-generation citing 
papers and/ or large numbers of succeeding generation citing papers, reading 
each citing paper Abstract to identify applications paper characteristics 
becomes infeasible. For example, the ~300 citing papers of the sand-pile 
paper were themselves cited by ~3600 papers.  If and when full-text 
becomes available for citation analysis, the time to read each paper will 
increase by an order of magnitude.  
 
Use of text mining capabilities, such as computational linguistics, allows 
only those applications and extra-discipline papers of interest to be 
identified, and the requisite information could then be obtained from reading 
the Abstracts.  In addition, the computational linguistics provides a structure 
and categorization of these myriad applications, allowing the larger context 
of application themes to be displayed and understood.  
 
The citing papers representing categories of development and disciplines 
aligned and non-aligned with those of the cited paper are shown in the 
matrix of Figure 2. 
  
FIGURE 2 – DEVELOPMENT CATEGORY AND CITED PAPER 
THEME ALIGNMENT OF CITING PAPERS 
 
TECH DEV 33          
TECH DEV 32     1     
TECH DEV 31          
APPL RES 23       1 1 1 
APPL RES 22     1   3  
APPL RES 21      1 1   
 181
BAS RES 13 1 2 2 2 2 3  1  
BAS RES 12  2 3 6 4 10 8 10 1 
BAS RES 11 3 23 28 27 43 43 30 33 4 
  1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 
     
TIME 
     
 CODE: MATRIX ELEMENT IS NUMBER OF 
PAPERS 
 
 
In Figure 2, the abscissa represents time. The ordinate, in the second column 
from the left, is a two-character tensor quantity.  The first number represents 
the level of development characterized by the citing paper (1=basic research; 
2=applied research; 3=advanced development/ applications), and the second 
number represents the degree of alignment between the main themes of the 
citing and cited papers (1=strong alignment; 2=partial alignment; 3=little 
alignment).  Each matrix element represents the number of citing papers in 
each of the nine categories. 
 
There are three interesting features on Figure 2.  First, the tail of total annual 
citation counts is very long, and shows little sign of abating.  This is one 
characteristic feature of a seminal paper. 
 
Second, the fraction of extra-discipline basic research citing papers to total 
citing papers ranges from about 15-25% annually, with no latency period 
evident.  This lag-free extra-disciplinary diffusion may have been due to the 
combination of intrinsic broad-based applicability of the subject matter and 
publication of the paper in a high-circulation science journal with very 
broad-based readership.  
 
Third, a four-year latency period exists prior to the emergence of the higher 
development category citing papers.  This correlates with the results from 
the bibliometrics component.  From the present study, it is not possible to 
differentiate the reasons for this important result.  The latency could have 
been due to the inability of the technology community to immediately 
recognize the potential applications of the science.    Or, it could have been 
due to the information remaining in the basic research journals, and not 
reaching the applications community.  Or, the time that an application needs 
to be developed in this discipline is of the order of four years. Thus, the 
basic science publication feature that may have contributed heavily to extra-
 182
discipline citations may also have limited higher development category 
citations for the latency period.  
 
Finally, the alignment of the citing journal theme to the main theme of the 
cited paper was estimated for all citing papers.  In essentially all cases, the 
citing paper theme could be subsumed within the citing journal theme.  
However, given the breadth of most journal themes, this result had minimal 
information content (e.g., citing paper X was published in a Physics journal 
vs. a Materials journal).   
 
In Davidse’s study of Physics papers citations (Davidse, 1997), a key metric 
used in cross-disciplinary citations/ impacts was the distinction between 
Physics and non-Physics papers.  It was implicitly assumed that the flow 
from Physics to non-Physics papers was analogous to the flow from basic to 
applied.   While it may be true for some cases, Figure 2 (and other 
unpublished studies) shows that most extra-discipline flows in the present 
study were from basic physics research to basic research in the other 
disciplines. Here, it is important to emphasize that a seminal idea gives new 
possible interpretations in many other disciplines. 
 
Davidse used journal themes (based on the SCI journal classification 
taxonomy) as a proxy for citing paper themes, with the level of resolution 
being at the gross discipline description, at best.  There are many multi-
discipline journals (e.g., Science, Nature, etc) that render a thematic 
distinction impossible.  Davidse’s approach required such a computerized 
proxy representation, since tens of thousands of citing papers were analyzed.   
 
In contrast, the present section’s approach of identifying impact themes 
through text mining allows a much more detailed and informative picture of 
the impact of research to be obtained.  It represents the difference between 
stating that a “Physics paper impacted Geology research” and a “paper 
focused on sand-pile avalanches for surface smoothing impacted analyses of 
steep hill-slope landslides”. 
 
V-B.  Phrase Clustering Analysis 
 
V-B-1.  High Level Clustering 
For illustrative purposes, a sample truncated co-occurrence matrix based on 
phrases from the ~300 citing Abstracts is shown on Figure 3.   
 
 183
FIGURE 3 
 
# 
Records 
1 
pa
rti
cl
es
 
gr
an
ul
ar
 
re
su
lts
 
sy
st
em
 
E
xp
er
im
e
gr
an
ul
ar
 
m
at
er
ia
ls
 
gr
ai
ns
 
Fl
ow
 
dy
na
m
ic
s 
m
ot
io
n 
si
m
ul
at
io
n
fu
nc
tio
n 
nu
m
be
r 
fo
rm
at
io
n 
se
gr
eg
at
io
n
45 particles 45 10 5 8 8 7 8 6 4 7 11 2 4 2 2
45 granular 10 45 5 4 8 4 8 8 4 6 3  4 5 1
40 results 5 5 40 12 2 5 8 4 1 4 10 4 3 2 3
39 system 8 4 12 39 4 1 9 2 9 6 10 3 6 3 2
37 experiments 8 8 2 4 3
7
10 6 12 6 9 3 1 3 6 4
37 granular 
materials 
7 4 5 1 1
0
37 6 7 3 6 3 1 5 8 6
37 grains 8 8 8 9 6 6 37 6 5 5 4 4 6 3 6
34 flow 6 8 4 2 1
2
7 6 34 5 7 2 4 2 5 4
33 dynamics 4 4 1 9 6 3 5 5 33 3 4 3 3 2 3
33 motion 7 6 4 6 9 6 5 7 3 33 3 3 4 4 1
28 simulations 11 3 10 10 3 3 4 2 4 3 28 2 2 1 4
25 function 2 4 3 1 1 4 4 3 3 2 25 3 1 2
21 number 4 4 3 6 3 5 6 2 3 4 2 3 21 1 1
20 formation 2 5 2 3 6 8 3 5 2 4 1 1 1 20 2
20 segregation 2 1 3 2 4 6 6 4 3 1 4 2 1 2 20
 
 
 
In the final data analysis, a clustering of the 153 highest frequency technical 
content phrases in the matrix rows was then performed using the Excel add-
in statistical package WINSTAT.  A particularly helpful output for each 
clustering run was the dendogram, a tree-like diagram showing the structural 
branches that define the clusters.  Figure 4 is one dendogram based on the 48 
highest frequency phrases (for illustration purposes only).  The abscissa 
contains the phrases that are clustered.  The ordinate is a distance metric.  
The smaller the distance at which phrases, or phrase groups, are clustered, 
the closer is the connection between the phrases. 
 
Thus, the first phrases combined are DISSIPATION and COLLISIONS, 
followed by VIBRATION and AMPLITUDE.  At some later time, the 
VIBRATION-AMPLITUDE combination is grouped with the GRAVITY-
GRANULAR MEDIA combination to form the next hierarchical level 
grouping, and so on.  For the 48 phrases selected, the top hierarchical level 
 184
consists of two clusters.  On Figure 4, one cluster is bounded by the phrases 
PARTICLES-GRANULAR MEDIA, and the other is bounded by the 
phrases GRANULAR-SYSTEMS. 
 
FIGURE 4 
 
 
 
 
 
Many agglomoration techniques were tested; the Average Neighbor method 
appeared to provide reasonably consistent good results.  Analyses were 
performed of the numerous cluster options that were produced.  The 
following is the top-level cluster description that represented the results of 
the phrase and word lists clustering best, as well as the factor matrix 
clustering from the TechOasis results. 
pa
rti
cl
es
si
m
ul
at
io
ns
M
ol
ec
ul
ar
 d
yn
am
ic
s
si
m
ul
at
io
n
re
su
lts
sy
st
em
pa
rti
cl
e
pr
op
er
tie
s
m
od
el
di
st
rib
ut
io
n
Ex
pe
rim
en
ta
l r
es
ul
ts
m
ot
io
n
fri
ct
io
n
gr
ai
ns
sh
ap
e
dy
na
m
ic
s
pr
es
en
ce
m
od
el
s
fu
nc
tio
n
tim
e
ve
lo
ci
ty
re
su
lt
tra
ns
iti
on
or
de
r
nu
m
be
r
co
llis
io
n
be
d
de
pe
nd
en
ce
vi
br
at
io
n
am
pl
itu
de
gr
av
ity
gr
an
ul
ar
 m
ed
ia
gr
an
ul
ar
ex
pe
rim
en
ts
flo
w
sa
nd
on
se
t
w
al
ls
di
ss
ip
at
io
n
co
llis
io
ns
gr
an
ul
ar
 m
at
er
ia
ls
fo
rm
at
io
n
co
nv
ec
tio
n
se
gr
eg
at
io
n
ph
en
om
en
on
ca
se
de
ns
ity
sy
st
em
s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
D
is
ta
nc
e
 185
 
The highest level categorization based on the highest frequency 153 phrases 
produced three distinct clusters: Structure/ Properties, Flow-Based 
Experiments, Modeling and Simulation.  In the description of each cluster 
that follows, phrases that appeared within the clusters will be capitalized. 
 
1) Structure/ Properties 
This cluster contained MIXTURES of LARGE GRAINS and SMALL 
GRAINS, with STRATIFICATION along ALTERNATING LAYERS 
based on SIZE SEGREGATION and grain SHAPE and GEOMETRICAL 
PROFILE.  The MIXTURE forms a PILE with an ANGLE of REPOSE.  
When the ANGLE of REPOSE is LARGER than a critical ANGLE, 
DYNAMICAL PROCESSES produce AVALANCHES, resulting in 
SURFACE FLOW within THIN LAYERS. 
 
2) Flow-Based Experiments 
This cluster contained EXPERIMENTS examining GRANULAR and 
SAND FLOW,  The dependence of ENERGY DISSIPATION, due to 
COLLISIONS, on PACKING DENSITY was a focal area.  The 
INFLUENCE of PIPE WALLS and PLATES on the SHEAR-driven 
VELOCITY and DENSITY PROFILES was studied, as well as ONSET of 
FLUIDIZATION and CONVECTIVE FLOW with its attendant 
FORMATION of CONVECTION CELLS. 
 
3) Modeling and Simulation 
This cluster contained MODELS and NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS based 
on EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS, OBSERVATIONS, MEASUREMENTS, 
and DATA.  The SIMULATION METHODS MODELED the 
CHARACTERISTICS of DYNAMIC EVOLUTION from INITIAL 
CONDITIONS to STEADY STATE.  A strong focal area was the 
CHARACTERISTICS of POWER SPECTRUM POWER LAW 
DISTRIBUTIONS, and their ROLE in the DYNAMIC EVOLUTION from 
INITIAL INSTABILITY to CRITICALITY.  Sound PROPAGATION, 
especially its relation to DEPTH and PRESSURE, as a function of TIME 
and VIBRATION FREQUENCY, AMPLITUDE, and ACCELERATION is 
modeled with the statistical mechanics concepts of GRANULAR 
TEMPERATURE through KINETIC THEORY.  Additionally, GRAVITY 
and VIBRATIONS are PHENOMENA used in the EQUATIONS to model 
the COMPACTION of GRANULAR MEDIA.  
 
 186
V-B-2.  Low Level Clustering 
Four types of results were obtained with the lower frequency phrases.  Many 
of the lower frequency phrases were closely associated with one higher 
frequency phrase only; most lower frequency phrases were closely 
associated with one of the three clusters only; a few lower frequency phrases 
were associated with more than one cluster; and only a majority of the lower 
frequency phrases that related to applications or other disciplines were 
uniquely related to a single cluster.  Sample relationships from each of these 
four types follow. 
 
a) Lower Frequency Phrases Unique to One Higher Frequency Phrase 
(High Frequency Phrase: Low Frequency Phrases) 
REPOSE: VIBRATIONAL ACCELERATIONAL AMPLITUDE; 
STRATIFICATION: FACETED GRAINS; FLOW: VERTICAL GLASS 
PIPE, KINEMATIC SIEVING; COLLISIONS: LONG-RANGE 
CORRELATIONS; MODEL: COUPLED NONLINEAR STOCHASTIC 
EQUATIONS, SELF-ORGANIZED CRITICALITY; SIMULATION: 
DISCRETE ELEMENT METHOD; RELAXATION: STRONG SPATIAL 
CLUSTERING. 
 
The phrases in this category, on average, tend to be longer and more 
detailed/ specific than the phrases in any of the other categories.  They also 
tend to be the lowest frequency phrases, and their length and detail 
characteristics are consonant with the very lowest frequency phrases. 
 
b) Lower Frequency Phrases Unique to One Cluster (Cluster High 
Frequency Phrases: Low Frequency Phrase) 
LARGE GRAINS, SMALL GRAINS, REPOSE, STRATIFICATION: 
ALTERNATING LAYERS; COLLISIONS, CONVECTION CELLS, 
DISSIPATION EXPERIMENTS, FLOW, PACKING, VELOCITY 
PROFILES: ONSET OF FLUIDIZATION; DYNAMICS, RELAXATION: 
CONFIGURATIONAL ENTROPY; MODEL, SIMULATIONS: MKDV 
EQUATION 
 
The low frequency phrases associated uniquely with the flow-based 
experiments cluster tended to be associated with the largest number of high 
frequency phrases, whereas the low frequency phrases associated uniquely 
with the modeling and simulation cluster tended to be associated with the 
smallest number of high frequency phrases.  This reflects the more closely-
knit nature of the flow-based experiments cluster relative to the more diverse 
 187
nature of the modeling and simulation cluster, and was confirmed by 
examining all the high frequency phrases in each cluster. 
 
c) Low Frequency Phrases Shared by All Three Clusters (High Frequency 
Phrases: Low Frequency Phrase) 
POWER LAW, EXPERIMENTS, AVALANCHE: AVALANCHE 
DURATIONS; SIMULATIONS, EXPERIMENTS, STRATIFICATION: 
CONTACT NETWORK; DYNAMICS, ONSET, AVALANCHE: TOP 
LAYER; MODEL, FLOW, STRATIFICATION: STATIC GRAINS 
 
As a general rule, the low frequency phrases in this category tend to be 
relatively generic, at least compared to phrases in the other three categories.  
 
D) Low Frequency Phrases from Applications or other Disciplines (High 
Frequency Phrase(s): Low Frequency Phrase) 
DENSITY WAVES: TRAFFIC FLOW; MODEL: AIR TRAFFIC; 
MODEL: CELL PELLETS; DYNAMICS, MODEL: DUNES; 
DYNAMICS, FLOW: IMMUNOSENSORS; MODEL, FLOW, 
AVALANCHES: GEOLOGICAL; MODEL, SIMULATION: WAR 
GAME; MODEL, DISSIPATION: VISCOELASTIC; GRANULAR 
TEMPERATURE: GAS FLUIDIZED BED; CONVECTION CELLS, 
EXPERIMENTS, FLOW, ONSET, VELOCITY PROFILES: TYPES OF 
RHEOLOGY 
 
The clustering for relating themes and concepts is exceptionally complex.  
The categorization taxonomies, and subsequent allocations of phrases among 
the categories, are functions of the agglomoration technique, association 
metrics, phrase extraction algorithm, and interpretation of the results.  In the 
present study, the highest level taxonomy was essentially invariant among 
these parameters, and was used for the examples.  Interestingly, it was not 
substantially different from the highest level taxonomy obtained by visual 
inspection of the highest frequency phrases, as reported earlier in this paper.  
To obtain maximum benefits from what clustering can offer, lower 
categorical hierarchical levels must be accessed.  More research is necessary 
to determine the most desirable combination of parameters to produce 
clusters at the lower hierarchical levels. 
 
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
 188
The first two objectives of this study were to demonstrate the feasibility of 
tracking the myriad impacts of research on other research, development, and 
applications, using the technical literature, and demonstrate the feasibility of 
identifying a broad range of research product user characteristics, using the 
technical literature.  Both of these objectives were accomplished, along with 
some interesting technical insights about vibrating sandpile dynamics and 
temporal characteristics of information diffusion from research to 
applications.  This wide range of results leads to the following conclusions. 
 
Exploitation of the other types of information contained in the SCI and 
associated with the citation process offers the potential for providing R&D 
sponsors information that can help guide future directions of their R&D.  In 
addition, the complete Citation Mining process described in the present 
paper has the potential to objectively document the breadth of impact of 
basic research on the R&D community.  The addition of text mining to 
citation bibliometrics will make feasible the large-scale multi-generation 
citation studies that are necessary to display the full impacts of research. 
 
Text mining is a requirement for making the total Citation Mining possible.  
Without text mining, either an overly general automated technique, such as 
journal classification, must be used to identify application areas, or tens or 
hundreds of thousands of Abstracts must be read.  Text mining can locate 
small numbers of extra-discipline phrases (small signals) from large 
numbers of intra-discipline phrases (large clutter), and allow only those 
Abstracts of specific interest to be selected and read. 
 
A substantial amount of human judgement and labor is required for all 
aspects of Citation Mining.  For the bibliometric component of citation 
mining reported in detail in (20), classifying the results in groupings where 
judgement is required (e.g., Abstract technical theme, or applications theme) 
necessitates substantial work.  For the text mining component described in 
detail in this paper, thousands of technical phrases must be examined.  
Judgements must be made as to their alignment with the main themes of the 
cited paper(s).  Some of the bibliometric components conceivably could be 
automated (e.g., all the SCI journals could be classified by technical theme 
beforehand, then the alignment of the cited journal theme to the citing 
journal theme could be generated automatically).  It is not clear how the 
selection of extra-discipline phrases could be automated, given the intense 
expert judgement required. 
 
 189
The third of the study objectives was to relate thematic characteristics of 
citing papers to their cited papers.  There was a strong relation of these 
thematic characteristics for the sandpile paper and its citing papers reported 
here, and an even stronger citing/ cited paper relationship for the applied 
photo-voltaic research papers reported in detail in reference (20).  This result 
has potential far-reaching implications for the corporate and national 
security intelligence communities.  Through the tracking of cited papers, one 
could theoretically infer the theme(s) of the citing papers, and vice versa.  
Very little has been reported in the literature on this broader field of trans-
citation analysis, especially using text mining as reported in the present 
paper, and the broader field is ripe for further research and exploitation.   
 
This study referred to, but did not examine details of, second or higher 
generation citations.  The authors believe they are valid measures or 
indicators of influence and impact, but the actual method of impact 
quantification remains an open question.  More research is required to 
understand the principles of allocating impact among a paper’s references. 
 
Finally, there is a very important message that emerges from the results of 
the present study relative to the sponsorship of basic research.  Over the past 
decade, the trend in industry and government has been toward requirements-
driven research (e.g., the term ‘strategic research’ is becoming used more 
widely in government agencies, and corporately-funded industrial research 
has strongly evolved into profit-center sponsored research).  While this may 
be beneficial to the sponsoring organization from a short-term tactical 
perspective, the long-term strategic perspective may suffer.  Would 
fundamental sand-pile research receive funding from Tokamak, air traffic 
control, or materials programs, even though sand-pile research could impact 
these or many other types of applications, as shown in this paper?  It is 
necessary to stress that sponsorship of some unfettered research must be 
protected, for the strategic long-term benefits on global technology and 
applications! 
 
VII.   REFERENCES FOR SECTION 9 
 
Averch, H., (1994) "Economic Approaches to the Evaluation of Research", 
Evaluation Review, 18:1, February, p. 77-88.  
 
Braun, T., et al., (1987), “Literature of Analytical Chemistry. A 
Scientometric Evaluation”, CRC Press. 
 190
 
Davidse, R. J., and Van Raan, A. F. J., (1997). “Out of Particles: Impact of 
CERN, DESY, and SLAC Research to Fields other than Physics”, 
Scientometrics, 40:2. P. 171-193. 
 
De Solla Price, D. J.,  (1986) “Little Science, Big Science and Beyond”, 
Columbia University Press. 
 
Del Río, J. A., Kostoff, R. N., García, E. O., Ramírez, A. M., and Humenik, 
J. A., (2000).  “Citation Mining: Citing Population Profiling using 
Bibliometrics and Text Mining”.  Centro de Investigación en Energía, 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. 
http://www.cie.unam.mx/W_Reportes. 
 
DOD, (1969) Project Hindsight, Office of the Director of Defense Research 
and Engineering, Wash., D. C., DTIC No. AD495905, October. 
 
DOE, (1983) "Health and Environmental Research: Summary of 
Accomplishments", Office of Energy Research, Office of Program Analysis, 
Report No. DOE/ER-0194, May; DOE, (1986) "Health and Environmental 
Research: Summary of Accomplishments", Office of Energy Research, 
Office of Program Analysis, Report No. DOE/ER-0275, August. 
 
Egghe, L., and Rousseau, R., (1990) “Introduction to Informetrics”, Elsevier. 
 
Herring, S. D., (1999). “The Value of Inter-disciplinarity: A Study Based on 
the Design of Internet Search Engines”, JASIS, 1 April, p. 358-365. 
 
IDA, (1991) "DARPA Technical Accomplishments", Volume I, IDA Paper 
P-2192, February 1990; Volume II, IDA Paper P-2429, April 1991; Volume 
III, IDA Paper P-2538, July 1991, Institute for Defense Analysis. 
 
IITRI, (1968) "Technology in Retrospect and Critical Events in Science", 
Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute Report, December. 
 
Jaeger, H. M., and Nagel, S. R. (1992).  “Physics of the Granular State”.  
Science.  256.  20 March, p. 1523-1531. 
 
 191
Kostoff, R. N., (1994) "Assessing Research Impact: US Government 
Retrospective and Quantitative Approaches", Science and Public Policy, 
21:1, February. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., (1997) “The Handbook of Research Impact Assessment”, 
DTIC Report Number ADA296021, Summer.   
 
Kostoff, R. N., Braun, T., Schubert, A., Toothman, D. R., and Humenik, J.  
(2000). "Fullerene Roadmaps Using Bibliometrics and Database 
Tomography".  Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science.  
40:1.  Jan-Feb.  p. 19-39. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., Green, K. A., Toothman, D. R. Humenik, J. A., (2000) 
“Database Tomography Applied to an Aircraft Science and Technology 
investment Strategy”, Journal of Aircraft, 37:4, p. 727-730. 
 
Losiewicz, P., Oard, D., and Kostoff, R. N. (2000). "Textual Data Mining to 
Support Science and Technology Management".  Journal of Intelligent 
Information Systems. 15:2, p. 99-119. 
 
Narin, F., (1989) "The Impact of Different Modes of Research Funding", in: 
Evered, David and Harnett, Sara, Eds., The Evaluation of Scientific 
Research, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK, p. 120-140. 
 
Narin, F., Olivastro, D., and Stevens, K. A., (1994) "Bibliometrics -Theory, 
Practice, and Problems", Evaluation Review, 18:1, February, p. 65-76.  
 
Steele, T. W., (2000). “The Impact of Interdisciplinary Research in the 
Environmental Science: A Forestry Case Study”, JASIS, 15 March, p. 
476-484. 
 
Tassey, G., (1999) “Lessons Learned About the Methodology of Economic 
Impact Studies: The NIST Experience,” Evaluation and Program Planning, 
22, p. 113—119.   
 192
Section 10.  Citation Analysis for Assessing Research Performer 
Quality. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N.  “Citation Analysis for Research Performer 
Quality”.  Scientometrics.  53:1.  49-71.  2002.) 
 
I. OVERVIEW 
 
BACKGROUND: Citation analysis for evaluative purposes typically 
requires normalization against some control group of similar papers.  
Selection of this control group is an open question. 
OBJECTIVES: Gain a better understanding of control group requirements 
for credible normalization. 
APPROACH: Performed citation analysis on prior publications of two 
proposing research units, to help estimate team research quality.  Compared 
citations of each unit’s publications to citations received by thematically and 
temporally similar papers. 
RESULTS: Identification of thematically similar papers was very complex 
and labor intensive, even with relatively few control papers selected. 
CONCLUSIONS: A credible citation analysis for determining performer or 
team quality should have the following components: 
*Multiple technical experts to average out individual bias and subjectivity 
*A process for comparing performer or team output papers with a 
normalization base of similar papers 
*A process for retrieving a substantial fraction of candidate normalization 
base papers  
*Manual evaluation of many candidate normalization base papers to obtain 
high thematic similarity and statistical representation 
 
II. INTRODUCTION 
 
In the evaluation of science and technology (S&T), whether ongoing or 
proposed programs, a key criterion is the track record of the proposer or 
performer.  Past analyses [DOE, 1982; Kostoff, 1997a] have shown that, 
typically, the criterion of Team Quality is the major determinant of program 
or project quality.  Many qualitative and quantitative approaches have been 
used for the purpose of determining Team Quality [Kostoff, 1997a].  None 
are viewed as adequate in a stand-alone mode, and present practice is to use 
multiple approaches to determine Team Quality [Martin, 1983; Kostoff, 
1997b]. 
 
 193
One of the more widely used of these approaches, especially applicable to 
research, is citation analysis.  For proposer quality assessment, citation 
analysis consists of counting citations to documents produced by the 
proposer’s research unit, then comparing this citation count to numbers of 
citations received by similar documents from other research units.  The 
assumption is then made that documents with higher relative numbers of 
citation counts have more impact than those with lower citation counts, and 
are of higher quality from the citation metric perspective.   
 
While this approach appears rather straight-forward and deceptively simple, 
it is intrinsically very complex.  This section will illuminate the 
complexities, and show that high quality S&T citation analysis requires 
technical experts performing very manually intensive comparisons with very 
subjective judgements.  It will show further that the automated assembly-line 
approaches to citation analysis, widely used by the decision aid community 
today, are highly uncertain at low-to-mid citation levels characteristic of 
most research. 
 
After a background description of the problem, the analytical techniques 
developed for the citation analysis will be presented.  Two illustrative 
examples of the use of citation analysis to support proposal review will be 
presented.  Because of the confidentiality agreements operable for proposal 
review, all information that identifies either the proposing organization or 
the potential science and technology sponsor will be removed.  The results 
of the analysis will then be presented, followed by summary and conclusions 
that emphasize the lessons learned from using these techniques.  Special 
emphasis will be placed on requirements for thematic similarity between the 
target documents and the external documents against which they are 
compared.  
 
III. BACKGROUND 
 
In the present context, citation is referencing, in a document, the work of 
another individual or group.  The work referenced can exist in many forms, 
although the most common use is reference of another document.  Citation 
analysis is the examination of the multiple dimensions and myriad facets of 
citations for the purpose of understanding the many impacts of the target 
documents of interest.  
 
 194
Citation counts resulting from citation analyses are usually classified as 
outputs, but they are neither outputs nor outcomes.  While they are closer to 
outputs than outcomes, since they can be used in relatively short range 
analyses and they do not impact the larger problems characteristic of 
outcomes, they are not under the direct control of the performer.   
 
Modern day interest in studying and developing the citation process 
accelerated after WW2 [e.g., Zachlin, 1948, Zirkle, 1954].  However, the 
origins of citation analysis as a widespread bibliometrics tool can be traced 
to the mid-1950s, with Garfield’s proposal for creating a citation index 
[Garfield, 1955].  As the Science Citation Index (SCI) was developed, along 
with companion citation indices, the computer revolution and associated 
information technology developed in parallel.  The combination of SCI, 
massive information storage, and rapid information retrieval laid the 
foundation for a multi-application S&T evaluation capability. 
 
The foundations of modern traditional citation analysis were established by 
Garfield [1955, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1970] and CHI, Inc [Narin, 1975, 
1976, 1984, 1994, 1996; Albert, 1991], and extended to co-citation analysis 
by Small [1973, 1974, 1977, 1981, 1985], Sullivan [1977, 1979, 1980], and 
Marshakova [1973, 1981, 1988]..  The practice of citation analysis has been 
extended further by groups at the Hungarian Library of Sciences [Schubert, 
1986, 1993, 1996; Zsindely, 1982] and the University at Leiden [Moed, 
1986; Nederhof, 1987; Braam, 1988, 1991; VanRaan, 1991, 1993, 1996; 
Davidse, 1997].  A broad summary of the status of citation analysis is 
contained in a recent festschrift to Eugene Garfield [Festschrift, 2000].   
 
Traditional citation analysis is presently used both at the micro and macro 
scales.  It is used at the micro level, especially in academia, to evaluate 
components of impact of a given published document, or the documents 
published by a given researcher or research group.  It is used at the macro 
level to evaluate technical discipline or national outputs.  Because of the 
large numbers of documents and subsequent citations that exist in macro 
level analyses, semi-automated techniques have been developed to handle 
the data efficiently.  As time has proceeded, these semi-automated 
techniques have diffused toward micro level application. 
 
Citation analysis has two components.  The first component is counting of 
citations to a document or group of documents, depending on the purpose of 
the analysis.  The second component is placing these citation counts in a 
 195
larger context through a comparison and normalization process, to provide 
meaning to the numbers of counts obtained.   
 
Many articles have been written about problems inherent in the traditional 
citation analysis process [e.g., Geisler, 2000; MacRoberts, 1989, 1996; 
Kostoff, 1998].  There are two main categories of problems: those associated 
with the counts of citations, and those associated with the comparisons of 
counts of citations.  The problems associated with counts of citations can be 
sub-divided further into problems associated with the quantity of the 
underlying data, and problems associated with the quality of the underlying 
data. 
 
III-A.  Problems with Citation Counts 
 
III-A-1.  Problems with Quantity of Underlying Data  
 
The main resource available for performing citation analysis today is the 
SCI.  The number of candidate articles to be used in a citation analysis is 
limited to the number of articles in the total SCI.  This total is limited by the 
following sequence of steps.   
 
a) There is approximately $500 billion-$800 billion/ year worth of S&T 
being performed globally today, depending on one’s definition of S&T.  
Only a small fraction of the S&T performed is documented.  While there are 
many reasons for this [Kostoff, 2000a], basically there are more 
disincentives to publishing than incentives. 
 
b) Of the S&T performed that eventually gets documented, only a very 
modest fraction is accessed by the SCI (or any single database).  There are 
tens of thousands each of internal and external technical reports, classified 
reports and papers, workshop and conference proceedings, journals, 
magazines, newspapers, and patents resulting from the S&T performed and 
published annually.  Yet, the SCI accesses only about 5600 journals 
presently.  While these accessed journals tend to be the highest quality peer-
reviewed research journals, they represent only a fraction of S&T that is 
documented. 
 
c) Of the documented S&T that is accessed by the SCI, only a fraction 
reaches the average analyst performing citation analysis.  The main reason is 
 196
the extremely poor information retrieval techniques actually used by the 
technical community [Kostoff, 2000b]. 
 
Thus, the citation counts derived from the records in the SCI under-represent 
the total referencing of prior work by the global technical community, and 
there is no evidence that this under-representation is homogeneous across 
disciplines or sub-disciplines. 
 
III-A-2.  Problems with Quality of Underlying Data 
 
The problems with citation data quality translate into problems with the 
citation selection process (i.e., the approach used by authors to select 
references for inclusion in their papers).  The issues related to the 
sociological and cultural aspects of how people cite have been raised by the 
references cited above, and will not be repeated here.  Suffice it to say that 
the combination of quantity and quality problems with citations places 
strong limits on the degree to which citations can be used as a stand-alone 
metric.  This is especially true for documents that receive mid and low level 
numbers of citations (i.e., the vast majority of documents published); the 
very highly cited documents (a very small fraction of all articles published) 
are in a class by themselves, and modest margins of error in interpreting 
their citation counts don’t affect overall conclusions about their impact.  
 
III-B.  Problems with Citation Comparisons 
 
Problems with citation count comparisons form the focus of this paper.  
Whether applied to micro or macro scale problems, citation count 
comparisons have received insufficient attention, and offer further severe 
constraints on the credibility of present day citation analyses.  There are two 
main types of potential citation count comparisons: comparison of counts to 
an absolute standard, and comparison of counts to a relative standard.  The 
former comparison is analogous, in the physical sciences, to comparing 
actual engine efficiencies to maximum engine efficiencies possible (Carnot 
efficiencies).  The latter comparison is analogous to an athletic competition, 
where one group’s performance is compared to another group’s 
performance.  One problem with the latter comparison is that the 
performance of a group is never related to its potential, only to the 
performance of another ‘similar’ group.  The latter comparison is used in 
essentially all citation analyses today.  This issue of comparison with 
 197
absolute or relative standards was examined in a 1997 paper [Kostoff, 
1997c], and will not be addressed further.   
 
Citation count comparisons are necessary because of the high variability of 
citation counts with different parameters.  Citation counts depend strongly 
on the specific technical discipline, or sub-discipline, being examined.  The 
funding and number of active researchers can vary strongly by sub-
discipline, and these numbers of researchers affect the numbers of citations 
directly.  The maturity of the sub-discipline affects the numbers of citations, 
since the basic research community is oriented more toward publishing than 
the applied research or technology development communities.  The breadth 
of the sub-discipline can affect citation counts, since more focused 
disciplines will concentrate citations into fewer key researchers.  The 
classification and proprietary levels can vary sharply by sub-discipline, and 
can strongly affect what gets published and therefore cited in open-literature 
publications.  The documentation and citation culture can vary strongly by 
sub-discipline.   Since citation counts can vary sharply across sub-
disciplines, absolute counts have little meaning, especially in the absence of 
absolute citation count performance standards. 
 
Thus, in order to provide meaning and context to citation counts for 
performance evaluation in traditional citation analysis, some type of citation 
count normalization is required.  The main normalization approaches used in 
traditional citation analyses are described in an excellent review article 
[Schubert, 1996].  They can be summarized as follows:  
 
1) Reference standards based on prior sub-field classification 
 
Journals are classified into a number of science sub-fields.  Since some 
journals are single discipline, and some multi-discipline, percentage weights 
are assigned to each journal indicating their connection with the different 
sub-fields.  According to Schubert [1996], the method works only at a higher 
(macro) statistical level; i.e., if the sample under study is large and mixed 
enough to support the validity of such a statistical approach.  Further 
according to Schubert [1996], for micro level analyses, it is sometimes 
unavoidable to use a classification scheme concerning not only the journals 
but every single paper.  Schubert proceeds to point out that such 
classification schemes are enclosed in some specialized databases, such as in 
the Physics Briefs, to classify each paper into one or more of ten first-level 
and many lower-level sub-fields of physics.  
 198
 
2) Journals as reference standards 
 
Primary journals in science are generally agreed to contain coherent sets of 
papers both in topics and professional standards.  According to Schubert 
[1996], it seems justified to regard the set of regular authors of a journal as 
reference standard for any single author (or team of authors), the set of 
institutions regularly publishing in the journals as reference standard of any 
single institution, the citation rate of the set of papers published in the 
journal (or of a properly selected subset) as reference standard of any single 
paper.  Also according to Schubert [1996], one may thus expect that any 
difference in productivity, citation rate or other scientometric indicators 
reflects differences in inherent qualities. 
 
3) Related records as reference standards 
 
Subject matter similarity between two documents is measured by the number 
of shared references.  According to Schubert [1996], bibliographic coupling 
appears to be one of the most selective and flexible techniques of reference 
standard selection, but “because of its high requirements in time and effort, 
its use can be suggested only in micro or meso-level”. 
 
It is the present author’s contention that none of the above normalization 
methods are adequate for precise normalization, since they do not provide 
sufficient resolution for distinguishing among the lower level sub-fields.  
Inability to distinguish precisely among sub-fields translates, in some cases, 
to substitution of far different magnitude numbers for the normalization 
base.  The next sub-section will show some of the effort required for more 
precise normalization comparisons.  
 
IV. ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES AND ISSUES 
 
IV-A.  First proposal 
 
The author was recently asked, by a potential sponsor, to evaluate an S&T 
proposal generated by organization XXXX.  While there were a number of 
criteria that had to be evaluated relative to technical quality and relevance of 
the proposal to the potential sponsor’s mission, one key criterion was the 
quality of the proposer’s research team.  It was decided to evaluate team 
quality through evaluation of the research team’s various outputs and 
 199
outcomes, using citation analysis and other metrics.  This section focuses on 
the citation analysis component used.. 
 
The proposal and accompanying material presented many different types of 
outputs from XXXX researchers.  Assessing the quality and impact of those 
outputs was complex, especially since they covered more than one research 
area.  The following procedure was used as a first-order estimate of quality/ 
near-term impact of XXXX’s output, and thereby of the research team. 
 
The citations of selected XXXX publications were compared against those 
of thematically similar non-XXXX publications (a control group of 
publications), using a pair-wise comparison approach.  Specifically, all 
XXXX publications for 1996 (38 documents), as identified in the Web 
version of the Science Citation Index (SCI), were compared with 
thematically similar non-XXXX publications from the SCI.   
 
[1996 was selected as a compromise year.  The author wanted to examine 
recent documents that reflected current management and staff of XXXX, but 
also wanted to insure that sufficient time had passed since publication such 
that citations had a reasonable chance to accumulate. Figures 1 and 2, titled 
Citing Papers Time Distribution, show the yearly and cumulative numbers of 
citing papers as a function of time, for 1996 and 1993, respectively.  For 
1996, the citing papers (for all the XXXX papers published in 1996) show a 
linearly increasing cumulative trend up to and including 2000.  For 1993, the 
citing papers (for all the XXXX papers published in 1993) show more of an 
S-curve trend.  While 1993 shows a leveling off of the citations, and would 
therefore have been a better year to select from that perspective, it was 
judged to be too far in the past to be relevant for assessing the quality of 
present XXXX staff and management.  Citations from 1996 should almost 
be ready to level off, if the 1993 distributions can be extrapolated to 1996, 
and therefore 1996 was selected.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 200
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ideally, the size of the control group for each paper should be statistically 
representative of the total thematically similar non-XXXX papers in the SCI, 
since the purpose of the citation analysis is to compare the citation 
performance of each proposer’s paper to the aggregate of the relevant 
performer community..  Practically, resource and time constraints placed 
CITING PAPERS TIME DISTRIBUTION
0
50
100
150
1 2 3 4 5
YEAR (1996=1)
FIGURE 1
N
U
M
B
ER
 O
F 
C
IT
IN
G
 P
A
PE
R
S
#CITING
PAPERS
CUMULATIVE
CITING PAPERS
CITING PAPERS TIME DISTRIBUTION 
0
50
100
150
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
YEAR (1993=1)
FIGURE 2
N
U
M
B
ER
 O
F 
C
IT
IN
G
 P
A
PE
R
S
#CITING
PAPERS
CUMULATIVE
CITING
PAPERS
 201
severe linits on the size of the control group.  Specifically, for each of the 38 
papers published in 1996 (hereafter referred to as the target papers), three 
non-XXXX papers thematically and temporally similar to the target papers 
were selected.   If 1996 papers with the requisite thematic characteristics 
could be identified, they were given first priority in the selection, to insure 
temporal normalization.  If 1996 papers could not be identified, then 1997 
papers were selected.  Thus, the results are conservative with respect to 
XXXX. 
 
Selection of papers in the SCI thematically similar to the target paper 
depends strongly on the study’s purpose and objectives, the mission of the 
performing organization, the degree of focus of the paper’s theme, the size 
of the research paper pool from which to choose, and the level of technical 
description in the paper’s SCI Abstract.  The relation to study purpose is 
especially important, and is often overlooked.  Specifically, is the purpose of 
the study to evaluate the ‘job right’ quality of the performer (i.e., is the 
specific task selected being performed with the latest tools and techniques to 
achieve the specific objectives?), or is the purpose of the study to evaluate 
the ‘right job’ quality of the performer (i.e., have the right task and right 
objectives been selected?).  If the focus is on ‘job right’ quality, then the 
thematically similar papers will be limited to a very narrow area of inquiry.  
If the focus is on ‘right job’ quality, then the focus of thematically related 
papers can be expanded greatly. 
 
For example, suppose that a researcher being evaluated was performing 
acoustic studies in the 100 KHZ small object detection regime.  If the 
performing organization’s mission in acoustics was limited to performing 
studies only in this regime, and if the quality determination was phrased as 
how well the researcher was performing relative to other researchers 
studying the 100 KHZ regime, then the thematically similar papers would all 
be focused narrowly around frequencies of 100 KHZ.  The study reduces to 
determining the most cited papers at 100 KHZ.  If, however, the 
organization’s mission in acoustics provided flexibility in selecting the 
frequency regime to study, and the organization chose to focus on the 100 
KHZ regime, then thematically related papers could include those in a 
broader range of frequency regimes.  The study reduces to determining the 
most cited paper in mid-high frequency acoustics.  The choice of journal as 
reference standard, described previously and referenced in Schubert [1996], 
relates strongly to the latter definition of organization mission, where 
essentially any paper in an acoustics specialty journal could serve as a 
 202
reference standard.  The practical implications of ‘job right’ vs ‘right job’ 
comparisons are that papers with substantially higher citation counts could 
be included in the normalization pool as the allowed definition of thematic 
similarity becomes broadened. 
 
Selection of papers thematically similar to the target paper was very 
difficult, time-consuming, and subjective.  This was especially true for the 
broad-based analyses.  The selection was more straightforward for the much 
more limited specific technology papers, since these more focused areas 
seemed to have many researchers working related problems.  The author 
believes that the subjectivity involved in selecting thematically similar 
papers is a major source of uncertainty of the results.  A rigorous study, in 
addition to having the rigorous information retrieval and statistical sampling 
processes mentioned in the next two paragraphs, requires the use of multiple 
evaluators for the same target papers to average out evaluator subjective 
bias.   
 
Many of the applied research papers combined analytical technique 
advancement with novel application advancement.  It was not always 
possible to have thematic similarity for both technique and application, 
especially in those research areas with relatively few performers, and 
typically a choice had to be made between technique and application for 
determining thematic similarity.   
 
Two important issues were i) determining the number of thematically similar 
candidate papers in the pool from which to choose, and then ii) determining 
the number of papers to select from the pool.  First, in a rigorous study, 
candidate thematically similar papers would be identified by the most 
rigorous processes available.  In the author’s information retrieval studies 
[Kostoff, 1997d, 2000b], a manually intensive iterative approach using 
computational linguistics and bibliometrics is used to identify the full scope 
of relevant literature papers for each specific topic studied.  For the present 
study, this would have required 38 such literature searches.  In the time 
available, even one such rigorous literature search was not feasible.  A very 
approximate approach was used. 
 
Second, the number of papers to select from the candidate pool should have 
the greatest thematic similarity, and be representative statistically.  Again, 
this would have required poring over hundreds, or thousands, of similar 
papers, and selecting a substantial number of the most representative 
 203
thematically.  Again, a small sampling approach was used because of time 
exigencies. 
 
The first selection step was to examine the Related Records field of the SCI 
for a given target paper.  This field contains papers that have at least one 
reference in common with the target paper, as stated previously [Schubert, 
1996].  Papers that share references tend to be similar thematically, but this 
is not always true, and the relation between thematic similarity and number 
of shared references is not always monotonic. 
 
Because of time constraints, a limited number (three) of thematically related 
papers was examined for each target paper.  If three records thematically 
similar to the target paper could be identified from the Related Records 
papers, the selection was completed for that target paper.  If three records 
could not be identified, then key words from the target paper’s Abstract/ 
Title/ Keyword fields were used to search the SCI for related records.  This 
approach was substantially more time consuming than the already time-
consuming Related Records approach. 
 
FIGURE 3 - CITATION AND FIGURE OF MERIT DATA   
A B C D E F G H I J K L 
REC# PAP SELF PAP1 PAP2 PAP3 AVER MED STD  
 CIT CIT CIT CIT CIT CIT FOM1 CITE
S 
FOM2 DEV FOM3 
     CIT  
1 4 1 3 3 23 9.667 0.293 3 0.571 11.55 -0.49 
2 2 1 9 7 21 12.33 0.14 9 0.182 7.572 -1.36 
3 0                
4 0  5 1 2 2.667 0 2 0 2.082 -1.28 
5 0  5 6 9 6.667 0 6 0 2.082 -3.2 
6 3 2 3 4 4 3.667 0.45 4 0.429 0.577 -1.15 
7 0  11 14 4 9.667 0 11 0 5.132 -1.88 
8 1 1 1 3 2 2 0.333 2 0.333 1 -1 
9 6 3 3 7 5 5 0.545 5 0.545 2 0.5 
10 5 0 2 5 16 7.667 0.395 5 0.5 7.371 -0.36 
11 5 3 5 2 14 7 0.417 5 0.5 6.245 -0.32 
12 2 2 3 3 2 2.667 0.429 3 0.4 0.577 -1.15 
13 1 0 4 4 5 4.333 0.188 4 0.2 0.577 -5.77 
14 5 2 6 4 9 6.333 0.441 6 0.455 2.517 -0.53 
15 7 4 15 5 12 10.67 0.396 12 0.368 5.132 -0.71 
16 5 5 3 7 1 3.667 0.577 3 0.625 3.055 0.436 
17 4 4 8 4 6 6 0.4 6 0.4 2 -1 
18 9 4 38 2 13 17.67 0.338 13 0.409 18.45 -0.47 
19 4 2 3 7 7 5.667 0.414 7 0.364 2.309 -0.72 
20 2 1 2 6 8 5.333 0.273 6 0.25 3.055 -1.09 
 204
21 0 0 2 5 16 7.667 0 5 0 7.371 -1.04 
22 1 1 13 8 9 10 0.091 9 0.1 2.646 -3.4 
23 24 20 5 2 7 4.667 0.837 5 0.828 2.517 7.682 
24 4 0 4 22 8 11.33 0.261 8 0.333 9.452 -0.78 
25 0                
26 0                
27 3 0 11 14 2 9 0.25 11 0.214 6.245 -0.96 
28 2 2 3 3 4 3.333 0.375 3 0.4 0.577 -2.31 
29 4 4 8 10 6 8 0.333 8 0.333 2 -2 
30 2 2 3 3 13 6.333 0.24 3 0.4 5.774 -0.75 
31 1 1 2 4 5 3.667 0.214 4 0.2 1.528 -1.75 
32 0                
33 6 6 13 26 3 14 0.3 13 0.316 11.53 -0.69 
34 0 2 2 4 3 0 3 0 1.414 -2.12 
35 3 1 2 5 16 7.667 0.281 5 0.375 7.371 -0.63 
36 0   2 7 1 3.333 0 2 0 3.215 -1.04 
37 2 1 5 22 4 10.33 0.162 5 0.286 10.12 -0.82 
38 4 1 5 3 14 7.333 0.353 5 0.444 5.859 -0.57 
       
SUM 115 74 197 200 252 AVER 0.297   0.324   -0.98 
 
Once thematically similar records were identified, the citations for each of 
the four records were tabulated.  Figures of merit were generated, and the 
citation performance of each target paper was compared with that of the 
three thematically related papers.  The results are shown in Figure 3.  
Starting from the left, column A is the number of the record, column B is the 
citations of the target paper, column C is the self-citations of the target 
paper, columns D, E, F are the citations of the thematically similar papers 
(the Abstracts of papers 3, 25, 26, 32 did not contain sufficient information 
for similar papers to be identified), column G is the average citations of the 
thematically similar papers, column I is the median citations of the 
thematically similar papers, and column K is the standard deviation of the 
citations of the thematically similar papers.  Columns H, J, L are figures of 
merit FOM1, FOM2, FOM3, respectively, defined as follows: 
 
FOM1=citations of target paper/ (citations of target paper plus average 
citations of related papers) 
 
FOM2=citations of target paper/ (citations of target paper plus median 
citations of related papers) 
 
FOM3=(citations of target paper minus average citations of related papers)/ 
standard deviations of related papers. 
 
 205
FOM1 and FOM2 have the desirable properties of ranging between zero and 
unity, as well as equaling 0.5 when the target paper citations equal those of 
the average or median citations of the related papers.   FOM3 removes the 
limitations of using absolute number values, and places the citation 
differences in the context of standard deviations. 
 
This section ends with a note about the four papers that could not be 
evaluated due to insufficient information contained within the Abstract.  
Ideally, with unlimited time and resources, the full text target and control 
group papers would be read in their entirety.  Practically, time is available 
for reading Abstracts only.  Unfortunately, in the non-medical technical 
literature, and some of the medical literature, there are no requirements on 
the technical content of Abstracts.  Consequently, many Abstracts contain 
very little technical detail, and they cannot be used in the citation process.  
This issue is addressed summarily in a letter to Science [Kostoff, 2001a], 
and in more detail in a letter to selected technical journal editors proposing 
the use of Structured Abstracts in all technical journals [Kostoff, 2001b].  
 
IV-B.  Second Proposal 
 
In early 1998, the author was asked to evaluate an S&T proposal for a different 
potential sponsor, generated by an organization (ZZZZ) different from the 
proposing organization (XXXX) of the first proposal.  One critical component 
again was evaluation of team quality.  This was a complex procedure for the 
second proposal, since most of the organization’s publication outputs were co-
authored with people from other organizations, and the author wanted to 
identify the quality of the contributions of researchers from organization ZZZZ 
only.  Again, citation analysis was one of several methods used to gauge team 
quality, and this section reports on the citation analysis component only. 
 
1.  Database Examined and Process Used 
 
One purpose of the study was to examine the citation impact on the technical 
community of the ZZZZ researchers who publish.  Another purpose was to 
assess some estimate of the ZZZZ researchers’ contribution to the published 
product.  Two studies were performed.  First, all the 1997 papers in the web 
version of the SCI that contained a ZZZZ author address were examined.  The 
position of the ZZZZ author in the author list for each paper was highlighted.  
Citations for this group of papers were not examined, because of the recent 
date. 
 206
 
Second, all the 1993 papers that contained a ZZZZ author address were 
examined.  1993 was selected for two reasons.  A four-year lag allows many 
(not all) citations to accumulate, and is sufficient to show differentiation in 
citation counts among papers.  Also, 1993 was the third year that paper 
abstracts were included in the SCI, allowing more than title information to be 
obtained about a paper if necessary.  Author position was highlighted again, 
and then the citations received by each paper with citations received by a non-
ZZZZ authored paper of similar theme were compared. 
 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
V-A.  First Proposal 
 
The results for the first proposal are as follows. 
 
Figures 4 and 5, titled Citation Distribution Function, show the numbers of 
papers N(X) with X cites for 1993 and 1996, respectively.  63% of the 1993 
target papers had either zero or one cites, and 37% of the 1996 target papers 
had either zero or one cites.  For 1996, the average number of citations per 
target paper was three, of which 2/3 were self-cites.  (No judgements are 
made about including or excluding self-cites.  To make such judgements 
rationally, each full-text paper would have to be read, and the technical 
rationale for self-citation other than author self-gratification would have to 
made.  Such a level of detail is beyond the scope of this study.)  For 1993, 
the average number of citations per target paper was about 2.5.  For 1996, 
the average number of citations per thematically related paper was about 
twice the number of target paper citations. 
 
 207
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITATION DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION 
(1993)
0
10
20
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
CITATIONS PER PAPER
FIGURE 4
N
U
M
B
ER
 O
F 
PA
PE
R
S
N(CITES)
 208
CITATION DISTRIBUTION  FUNCTION
(1996)
0
5
10
15
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
NUMBER OF CITES X
FIGURE 5
PA
PE
R
S 
W
IT
H
 C
IT
ES
 N
(X
)
N(CITES)
 
For 1996, the average value of FOM1 and FOM2 was about 0.3, and the 
average value of  FOM3 was about minus one standard deviation.   Thus, all 
three figures of merit gave essentially similar results.  FOM1 and FOM2 
were greater than 0.5 in less than ten percent of the target papers examined.  
In the best performing target paper, both in absolute citations and relative 
citations, 20 of the 24 citations were self-cites.  This particular paper had 
many authors, and many of these authors cited the target paper in later 
publications. 
 
Many of the research disciplines examined seem to have relatively few 
papers thematically related to the target paper.  In addition, the absolute 
levels of citations are low, relative to other disciplines the author has 
examined.  This suggests research into areas that have few performers, 
probably low funding, and therefore low citations.  
 
V-B.  Second Proposal 
 
1.  Results and Discussion 
 
 209
a.  1997 Database 
 
In the 1997 database, there were 43 papers in the SCI with a ZZZZ address for 
the research unit.  These papers had a total of 184 authors, with an average of 
4.29 authors per paper, a median of 3 authors per paper, and a mode of 3 
authors per paper.  A Coefficient of Author Position (CAP) was defined as a 
measure of the ZZZZ author's location in the total author list.  The definition 
of CAP was: 
 
CAP=(x-1)/(n-1) 
 
where x was the location of the ZZZZ author in the list, and n was the total 
number of authors in the list.  Thus, if there were three authors in the list, and 
the ZZZZ author was third, CAP would equal one.  If the ZZZZ author was 
first in this case, CAP would equal zero.  If the paper had only one author, 
CAP was set equal to zero.  Thus, the higher the value of CAP, the less was 
the relative contribution of the ZZZZ author.  
 
There are two assumptions here.  First, the ordinal positioning of any author in 
the list reflects his/ her relative contribution to the paper.   In the absence of 
large power differential relationships (e.g., advisor/ student), this is probably a 
very reasonable assumption.  In the presence of large power differential 
relationships, it may or may not be reasonable, but validation of the 
assumption would be next to impossible. 
 
Second, the ordinal positioning can be quantified for computational purposes.  
There appears to be nothing in the literature that supports or rejects this 
assumption.  For large numbers of papers undergoing citation analyses, 
anomolies will disappear, and quantification for estimation purposes may be 
reasonable.  However, because of the uncertainty of the validity of this 
assumption, supplementary approaches were used to estimate the contribution 
of organization ZZZZ’s researchers to overall paper quality.  In this particular 
case, there were no significant differences in final results among the different 
methods used. 
 
The total value of CAP summed over the 43 papers was 26.27, with an average 
value of 0.61, a median value of .92, and a mode of 1.  Most papers were 
multi-authored; there were only four papers with one author.  To summarize 
these results, the preponderance of papers that include an ZZZZ research unit 
author address have multiple authors, and the ZZZZ author is usually at the 
 210
end of this list.  The typical paper in this database had about three authors, with 
the ZZZZ author being last.   
 
b.  1993 Database 
 
i.  Author Position Study 
 
In the 1993 database, there were 44 papers in the SCI with an ZZZZ address.  
These papers had a total of 126 authors, with an average of 2.86 authors per 
paper, a median of 3 authors per paper, and a mode of 3 authors per paper.  
The total value of CAP summed over the 44 papers was 18.97, with an average 
value of .43, a median double value of 0/.5 (half the papers had a CAP of zero, 
the other half had a CAP of .5 or greater) and a mode of 0.  The typical paper 
in this database had about three authors, with the ZZZZ author being second.   
 
In comparison with the 1997 database results, the total number of papers is 
about the same.  The median and mode of authors per paper is the same, but 
the average has dropped by a third from 1997 papers to 1993 papers.  More 
importantly, the average CAP value dropped by a third from 1997 to 1993, the 
median CAP value dropped by a half, and the mode plummeted from one to 
zero.  Thus, in 1993, the ZZZZ authors were contributing significantly more to 
papers (as measured by their ordinal position in the authors list) than in 1997.  
 
ii.  Citation Comparison Study 
 
For the 1993 database, citations of pairs of similar theme papers were 
compared.  In particular, for a given paper with a ZZZZ author address in the 
list, a similar theme paper was selected from the Related Records field, and the 
number of citations received by each paper was transcribed and compared.  
The procedure used was to select the first 1993 paper from the Related 
Records field with a similar theme to the target paper (this procedure 
normalized publication date and theme), and compare each paper's citations.  
(In a very few cases, no 1993 papers could be found in the Related Records 
field, and a 1994 or 1992 paper of similar theme was used.  In a very few 
cases, no similar theme paper could be found for 1992 or 1994.)   
 
Then, the ratio of citations of the two papers was transcribed, and this ratio 
was placed in one of five bands: very high (VH), high (H), same (S), low (L), 
very low (VL).   
 
 211
'Very High', for example, meant that the ratio of citations received by the 
related paper to the citations received by the ZZZZ paper was very high, a 
subjective judgement made by observation.  'Same' meant that the numbers of 
citations received by the two papers were close, not necessarily identical.  
Typically, citations received by a few of the other related papers would be 
examined to ascertain the approximate range of citations, and then judgements 
about the significance of the differences in citation numbers would be made.  
Obviously, in a definitive or final study of this nature, there would need to be 
people involved who could judge if in fact themes were closely related, and 
there would need to be citation distribution studies of related papers to obtain a 
more quantitative basis for judging significance of differences. 
 
The population of the five bands was as follows: 12(VH); 9(H); 14(S); 4(L); 
1(VL), for a total of 40 pairs where the citations could be compared.  While 
the mode is in the S band, the median is in the H band.  Since half the papers 
in the database had a CAP of zero, all other things being equal one would 
expect six papers in the VH band to have a CAP of zero.  In actuality, nine 
papers in the VH band had a CAP of zero.  Thus, those papers with a VH 
figure of merit tended to have more ZZZZ lead authors than one would expect 
from the database overall average.   
 
There were seven prolific ZZZZ authors, each of whom participated in three or 
more papers.  The population of the five bands for these seven prolific authors 
was: 1(VH); 5(H); 9(S); 3(L); 0(VL).  Compared to the overall 1993 database, 
where 52.5% of the ZZZZ papers were in the VH or H bands, these seven 
authors had 33% of papers in the VH and H bands.  Also, for these seven 
authors, the average CAP was .6, the median CAP was 0.8, and the mode CAP 
was 1.  For the 1993 database, the parallel numbers were .43 (av), 0/.5 (med), 
0 (mode).  Thus, while the more prolific authors had better relative citeability 
than the database average, these authors were closer to the end of the author 
listing than the database average. 
 
iii.  Discussion 
 
The highlights of this author position study are: 
* The preponderance of 1997 papers that include a ZZZZ author address have 
multiple authors, and the ZZZZ author is usually at the end of this list.  The 
typical paper in this database had about three authors, with the ZZZZ author 
being last.   
 212
* In 1993, the ZZZZ authors were contributing significantly more to papers (as 
measured by their ordinal position in the authors list) than in 1997.  The 
typical paper in the 1993 database had about three authors, with the ZZZZ 
author being second. 
* Those papers with a VH figure of merit tended to have more ZZZZ lead 
authors than one would expect from the database overall average. 
* While the more prolific ZZZZ authors in 1993 had better relative citeability 
than the database average, these authors were closer to the end of the author 
listing than the database average. 
* More work needs to be done to place ordinal position quantification on a 
stronger scientific foundation. 
 
In about half the cases, papers with a ZZZZ author address were cited as 
well as, or better than, comparable non-ZZZZ address papers.  On the 
surface, it appears that papers with ZZZZ authors are having a reasonable 
impact on the technical community.  However, the contribution of the ZZZZ 
authors to these papers, especially those where the ZZZZ author is listed 
last, remains unknown.  It would have been useful to compare the number of 
authors for each paper in the pair; this might have shed some light on 
whether or not the ZZZZ papers are 'author heavy'.  This was not done 
because this issue was not recognized until now.  It would also be useful to 
ascertain why the ZZZZ authors dropped back in their ordinal position in the 
author list from 1993 to 1997.  
 
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
This section has provided two examples of the application of citation 
analysis to proposal evaluation.  A number of lessons were learned 
concerning requirements for high quality citation analysis.  These lessons are 
summarized as follows. 
 
A.  Since citation counts can vary sharply across sub-disciplines, absolute 
counts have little meaning, especially in the absence of absolute citation 
count performance standards.  In order to provide meaning and context of 
citation counts for performance evaluation in citation analysis, some type of 
citation count normalization is required. 
 
B.  Three types of reference standards are used traditionally for citation 
analysis: 1) Reference standards based on prior sub-field classification; 2) 
Journals as reference standards; 3) Related records as reference standards.  
 213
None of the above normalization methods are adequate for precise 
normalization, since they do not provide sufficient resolution for 
distinguishing among the lower level sub-fields.  Inability to distinguish 
precisely among sub-fields translates, in some cases, to substitution of far 
different magnitude numbers for the normalization base 
 
C.  Selection of papers in the SCI thematically similar to the target paper 
depends strongly on the study’s purpose and objectives, the mission of the 
performing organization, the degree of focus of the paper’s theme, the size 
of the research paper pool from which to choose, and the level of technical 
description in the paper’s SCI Abstract.  The relation to study purpose is 
especially important, and is often overlooked.  If the focus is on ‘job right’ 
quality, then the thematically similar papers will be limited to a very narrow 
area of inquiry.  If the focus is on ‘right job’ quality, then the focus of 
thematically related papers can be expanded greatly.  The practical 
implications of ‘job right’ vs ‘right job’ comparisons are that papers with 
substantially higher citation counts could be included in the normalization 
pool as the allowed definition of thematic similarity becomes broadened. 
 
D.  Selection of papers thematically similar to the target paper was very 
difficult, time-consuming, and subjective.  This was especially true for the 
broad-based analyses.  The selection was more straightforward for the much 
more limited specific technology papers, since these more focused areas 
seemed to have many researchers working related problems.  The 
subjectivity involved in selecting thematically similar papers is a major 
source of uncertainty of the results.  A rigorous study, in addition to having 
the rigorous information retrieval and statistical sampling processes 
mentioned in the next two paragraphs, requires the use of multiple 
evaluators for the same target papers to average out bias.   
 
E.  Many of the applied research target papers combined analytical 
technique advancement with novel application advancement.  It was not 
always possible to have thematic similarity for both technique and 
application, especially in those research areas with relatively few 
performers.  Typically, a choice had to be made between technique and 
application for determining thematic similarity.   
 
F.  Two important issues were i) determining the number of thematically 
similar candidate papers in the pool from which to choose, and then ii) 
determining the number of papers to select from the pool.  First, in a credible 
 214
study, candidate thematically similar papers would be identified by the most 
rigorous processes available, and such processes are presently very complex 
and time-consuming. Second, the number of papers to select from the 
candidate pool should have the greatest thematic similarity, and be 
representative statistically.  Such selection would have required poring over 
hundreds, or thousands, of similar papers, and selecting a substantial number 
of the most representative thematically.  
 
G. Contrary to much popular thinking, the technical expertise of the citation 
analyst can have a major impact on the quality of the results. The type of 
pair-wise comparison required for credible citation studies is a highly 
subjective process, requiring the selection of a thematically similar 
normalization base.  If the analyst understands the subject matter, the 
subjective judgements made will be reasonably accurate.  If the analyst 
is not a technical expert in the subject area, the results will contain a high 
degree of uncertainty.  Thus, in a rigorous citation analysis, multiple 
technical experts are necessary to average out individual bias and 
subjectivity, and much manually intensive effort is required for the 
normalization process.  
 
Operationally, the above results suggest that a credible citation analysis for 
determining performer or team quality should have the following 
components: 
*Multiple technical experts to average out individual bias and subjectivity 
*A process for comparing performer or team output papers with a 
normalization base of similar papers 
*A process for retrieving a substantial fraction of candidate normalization 
base papers  
*Manual evaluation of many candidate normalization base papers to obtain 
high thematic similarity and statistical representation  
 
Since the use of citation analysis as one metric for determining research 
performer or team quality is substantially under-utilized in government and 
industry at present, the addition of the above requirements to the citation 
analysis process would only serve to reduce its utilization further.  
Pragmatically, tradeoffs are required if citation analysis is to be used as an 
evaluative tool.  The degradation in citation analysis quality as the above 
conditions are relaxed needs to be studied further.  
 
VII. REFERENCES FOR SECTION 10 
 215
 
Albert, M.B.,  Avery, D.,  Narin F., Mcallister P., “Direct Validation Of 
Citation Counts As Indicators Of Industrially Important Patents” , Research 
Policy 20: (3) 251-259 , Jun 1991. 
 
Braam, R.R., Moed H.F., Vanraan A.F.J., “Mapping Of Science By 
Combined Co-Citation And Word Analysis .1. Structural Aspects” , Science 
Technology & Human Values 13: (1-2) 97-98 ,Win-Spr 1988. 
 
Braam, R.R., Moed, H.F., Vanraan A.F.J.,“Mapping Of Science By 
Combined Cocitation And Word Analysis .1. Structural Aspects”,  Journal 
Of The American Society For Information Science 42: (4) 233-251, May 
1991. 
 
Davidse, R. J., and VanRaan, A. F. J., “Out of Particles: Impact of CERN, 
DESY, and SLAC Research to Fields other than Physics”, Scientometrics, 
40:2. P. 171-193, 1997.  
 
Del Río, J. A., Kostoff, R. N., García, E. O., Ramírez, A. M., and Humenik, 
J. A., “Citation Mining Citing Population Profiling using Bibliometrics and 
Text Mining”.  Centro de Investigación en Energía, Universidad Nacional 
Autonoma de Mexico, 2001. http://www.cie.unam.mx/W_Reportes. 
 
DOE, "An Assessment of the Basic Energy Sciences Program", Office of 
Energy Research, Office of Program Analysis, Report No. DOE/ER-0123, 
March 1982. 
 
Festschrift, ASIST Monograph Series, Web Of Knowledge - A Festschrift In 
Honor Of Eugene Garfield, 2000.  
 
Garfield, E., “Citation Indexes For Science - New Dimension In 
Documentation Through Association Of Ideas”, Science, 122: (3159) 108-
111, 1955. 
 
Garfield , E., Sher , I. H., “New Factors In Evaluation Of Scientific 
Literature Through Citation Indexing”  American Documentation,  14: (3) , 
1963. 
 
 216
Garfield , E., “Science Citation Index-New Dimension In Indexing Unique 
Approach Underlies Versatile Bibliographic Systems For Communicating + 
Evaluating Information”, Science, 144: (361), 1964. 
 
Garfield , E., “Can Citation Indexing Be Automated”, Statistical Association 
Methods For Mechanized Documentation Symposium Proceedings 1964: 
(Nbs26) 189, 1965. 
 
Garfield E., “Patent Citation Indexing And Notions Of Novelty Similarity 
And Relevance”,  Journal Of Chemical Documentation 6: (2), 1966. 
 
Garfield., E., “Citation Indexing For Studying Science”, Nature 227: (5259) 
, 1970. 
 
Geisler, E., “The Metrics of Science and Technology”, Quorum Books, 
Westport, CT, 2000. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., "The Handbook of Research Impact Assessment," Seventh 
Edition, Summer 1997, DTIC Report Number ADA296021.  Also, available at 
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/kostoff/index.html, 1997a. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., "Peer Review: The Appropriate GPRA Metric for Research", 
Science, Volume 277, 1 August 1997b. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., "Citation Analysis Cross-Field Normalization: A New 
Paradigm", Scientometrics, 39:3, 1997c. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., Eberhart, H. J., and Toothman, D. R., "Database 
Tomography for Information Retrieval", Journal of Information Science, 
23:4, 1997d. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., "The Use and Misuse of Citation Analysis in Research 
Evaluation", Scientometrics, 43:1, September, 1998. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., “The Underpublishing of Science and Technology Results”, 
The Scientist, 1 May 2000a. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., "High Quality Information Retrieval for Improving the 
Conduct and Management of Research and Development", Proceedings: 
 217
Twelfth International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems, 
11-14 October 2000b. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., and Hartley, J., “Structured Abstracts For Technical 
Journals”, Science, 11 May 2001a. 
 
Kostoff, R. N., and Hartley, J., “Structured Abstracts For Technical Journal 
Articles, Letter to Technical Journal Editors, 14 May 2000b.  Letter 
available from author. 
 
MacRoberts, M.H., and MacRoberts, B.R., "Problems of Citation Analysis: A 
Critical Review," Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 
40:5, 1989. 
 
MacRoberts, M., and MacRoberts, B., "Problems of Citation Analysis", 
Scientometrics, 36:3, July-August, 1996. 
 
Marshakova.IV , “System Of Document Connections Based On 
References”, Nauchno-Tekhnicheskaya Informatsiya Seriya 2-
Informatsionnye Protsessy I Sistemy, (6) 3-8 1973 
 
Marshakova IV , “Citation Networks In Information-Science”, 
Scientometrics, 3: (1) 13-25 1981 
 
Marshakova IV , “On The Mapping Of Science”, 
Vestnik Akademii Nauk Sssr, (5) 70-82 1988 
 
Martin, B. and Irvine, J., "Assessing Basic Research: Some Partial Indicators 
of Scientific Progress in Radio-Astronomy," Research Policy, 12, 1983. 
 
Moed H.F., Vanraan A.F.J., “Observations And Hypotheses On The 
Phenomenon Of Multiple Citation To A Research Groups Oeuvre.”, 
Scientometrics 10: (1-2) 17-33 , July 1986. 
 
Narin. , F., Carpenter M.P., “National Publication And Citation 
Comparisons”,  Journal Of The American Society For Information Science 
26: (2) 80-93 , 1975. 
 
Narin, F., "Evaluative Bibliometrics: The Use of Publication and Citation 
Analysis in the Evaluation of Scientific Activity" (monograph), NSF C-637, 
 218
National Science Foundation, Contract NSF C-627, NTIS Accession No. 
PB252339/AS, March 31, 1976.   
 
Narin, F., Carpenter M.P., Woolf P., “Technological Performance 
Assessments Based On Patents And Patent Citations”, IEEE Transactions 
On Engineering Management 31: (4) 172-183 , 1984 
 
Narin, F., Olivastro, D., and Stevens, K. A., "Bibliometrics -Theory, Practice, 
and Problems", in: Kostoff, R. N., (ed.), Evaluation Review, Special Issue on 
Research Impact Assessment, 18:1, February 1994.  
 
Narin F., Hamilton K.S., “Bibliometric Performance Measures”, 
Scientometrics 36: (3) 293-310 , Jul-Aug 1996. 
 
Nederhof A.J., Vanraan A,F.J., “Citation Theory And The Ortega 
Hypothesis”, Scientometrics 12: (5-6) 325-328 , Nov 1987 
 
Schubert A., Glanzel W. , Braun T., “Relative Indicators Of Publication 
Output And Citation Impact Of European Physics Research: 1978-1980”, 
Czechoslovak Journal Of Physics 36: (1) 126-129 , 1986 
 
Schubert A., Braun T., ”Reference-Standards For Citation Based 
Assessments”, Scientometrics 26: (1) 21-35 , Jan 1993 
 
Schubert, A., and Braun, T., "Cross-Field Normalization of Scientometric 
Indicators", Scientometrics, 36:3, 1996. 
 
Small , H. G.  “Relationship Between Citation Indexing And Word Indexing 
- Study Of Co-Occurrences Of Title Words And Cited References”, 
Proceedings Of The American Society For Information Science 10: 217-218 
, 1973. 
 
Small , H., “Co-Citation In Scientific Literature - New Measure Of 
Relationship Between 2 Documents”, Current Contents (7) 7-10, 1974. 
 
Small , H. G., “Co-Citation Model Of A Scientific Specialty - Longitudinal-
Study Of Collagen Research”, Social Studies Of Science 7: (2) 139-166, 
1977. 
 
Small. , H., “The Relationship Of Information-Science To The Social-
 219
Sciences - A Co-Citation Analysis”, Information Processing & Management 
17: (1) 39-50, 1981. 
 
Small H., Sweeney E., Greenlee E., “Clustering The Science Citation Index 
Using Co-Citations .2. Mapping Science”, Scientometrics , 8, 1985. 
 
Sullivan D, White Dh, Barboni Ej,  “Co-Citation Analyses Of Science – 
Evaluation”, Social Studies Of Science, 7: (2) 223-240 1977 
 
Sullivan D, Koester D, White Dh, Kern R,  “Understanding Rapid 
Theoretical Change In Particle Physics - Month-By-Month Co-Citation 
Analysis,” Proceedings Of The American Society For Information Science, 
16: 276-285 1979 
 
Sullivan D, Koester D, White Dh, Kern R,  “Understanding Rapid 
Theoretical Change In Particle Physics - A Month-By-Month Co-Citation 
Analysis,” Scientometrics, 2: (4) 309-319 1980 
 
 Vanraan, A.F.J., “Fractal Geometry of Information Space As Represented 
By Co-Citation-Clustering” , Scientometrics 20: (3) 439-449 , Mar-Apr 
1991. 
  
Vanraan, A.F.J., Tijssen R.J.W., “The Neural Net Of Neural Network 
Research - An Exercise In Bibliometric Mapping” , Scientometrics 26: (1) 
169-192 , Jan 1993. 
 
Vanraan, A.F.J., “Advanced Bibliometric Methods As Quantitative Core Of 
Peer Review Based Evaluation And Foresight Exercises”, Scientometrics 36: 
(3) 397-420 , Jul-Aug, 1996. 
 
Zachlin, A. C., “On Literature Citation”, Science, 107: (2777) 292-293, 
1948. 
 
Zirkle, C., “Citation of Fraudulent Data”, Science, 120: (3109) 189-190, 
1954. 
 
Zsindely, S., Schubert A., Braun T., “Citation Patterns Of Editorial 
Gatekeepers In International Chemistry Jour
 220
Section 11.  Citation-Assisted Background 
(based on Kostoff, R.N., and Shlesinger, M. F.  “CAB-Citation-Assisted 
Background.”  Scientometrics.  62:2.  199-212.  2005.)    
OVERVIEW 
 
A chronically weak area in research papers, reports, and reviews is the 
complete identification of background documents that formed the building 
blocks for these papers.   A method for systematically determining these 
seminal references is presented.  Citation-Assisted Background (CAB) is 
based on the assumption that seminal documents tend to be highly cited.  
CAB is being applied presently to three applications studies (Anthrax, 
nanotechnology, high speed flow), and the results so far are much superior 
to those used by the first author for background development in any other 
study.  An example of the application of CAB to the field of Nonlinear 
Dynamics is outlined.  While CAB is a highly systematic approach for 
identifying seminal references, it is not a substitute for the judgment of the 
researchers, and serves as a supplement. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Research is a method of systematically exploring the unknown to acquire 
knowledge and understanding.  Efficient research requires awareness of all 
prior research and technology that could impact the research topic of 
interest, and builds upon these past advances to create discovery and new 
advances.  The importance of this awareness of prior art is recognized 
throughout the research community.  It is expressed in diverse ways, 
including requirements for Background sections in journal research articles, 
invited literature surveys in targeted research areas, and required 
descriptions of prior art in patent applications. 
 
For the most part, development of Background material for any of the above 
applications is relatively slow and labor intensive, and limited in scope.  
Background material development usually involves some combination of 
manually sifting through outputs of massive computer searches, manually 
tracking references through multiple generations, and searching ones own 
records for personal references.  The few studies that have been done on the 
adequacy of Background material in documents show that only a modest 
fraction of relevant material is included (MacRoberts and MacRoberts, 1989, 
 221
1996; Liu, 1993; Calne and Calne, 1992; Shadish et al, 1995; Moravcsik and 
Murugesan, 1975).   
 
In particular, an analysis of Medline papers on the haemodynamic response 
to orotracheal intubation showed that recognized deficiencies in research 
method were not acknowledged. The authors recommended that, when 
submitting work for publication, investigators should provide evidence of 
how they searched for previous work (Smith and Goodman, 1997). 
 
Another specific example was provided by MacRoberts and MacRoberts 
(1997).  Replicating their earlier work in a journal on genetics which 
indicated that only 30% of influences evident in text are reflected in a 
paper's references, the text of an issue of Sida was studied by the 
MacRoberts to extract influences of previous work evident therein. 
Influences they judged present in the text appeared in the references only 
29% of the time.  
 
Typically missing from standard Background section or review article 
development, as well as in the specific examples cited above, is a systematic 
approach for identifying the key documents and events that provided the 
groundwork for the research topic of interest.  The present section presents 
such a systematic approach for identifying the key documents, called 
Citation-Assisted Background (CAB).  The next sub-section describes the 
CAB concept, and provides an outline of its operation, with an illustrative 
example from the research area of Nonlinear Dynamics. 
 
CONCEPT DESCRIPTION 
 
The CAB concept identifies the key Background documents for a research 
area using citation analysis.  CAB rests on the assumption that a document 
that is a significant building block for a specific research area will typically 
have been referenced positively by a substantial number of people who are 
active researchers in that specific area.  Implementation of the CAB concept 
then requires the following steps: 
 
• The research area of interest must be defined clearly 
• The documents that define the area of interest must be identified and 
retrieved 
 222
• The references most frequently used in these documents must be 
identified and selected 
• These critical references must be analyzed, and integrated in a cohesive 
narrative manner to form a comprehensive Background section or 
separate literature survey  
 
These required steps are achieved in the following manner.   
 
1. The research topic of interest is defined clearly by the researchers who 
are documenting their study results.  For example, consider the research 
area of Nonlinear Dynamics.  In a recent text mining study of Nonlinear 
Dynamics (Kostoff et al, 2004), the research area was defined as “that 
class of motions in deterministic physical and mathematical systems 
whose time evolution has a sensitive dependence on initial conditions.” 
2. The topical definition is sharpened further by the development of a 
literature retrieval query.  In the text mining study mentioned above, the 
literature retrieval query was ((CHAO* AND (SYSTEM* OR 
DYNAMIC* OR PERIODIC* OR NONLINEAR OR BIFURCATION* 
OR MOTION* OR OSCILLAT* OR CONTROL* OR EQUATION* 
OR FEEDBACK* OR LYAPUNOV OR MAP* OR ORBIT* OR 
ALGORITHM* OR HAMILTONIAN OR LIMIT* OR QUANTUM OR 
REGIME* OR REGION* OR SERIES OR SIMULATION* OR 
THEORY OR COMMUNICATION* OR COMPLEX* OR 
CONVECTION OR CORRELATION* OR COUPLING OR CYCLE* 
OR DETERMINISTIC OR DIMENSION* OR DISTRIBUTION* OR 
DUFFING OR ENTROPY OR EQUILIBRIUM OR FLUCTUATION* 
OR FRACTAL* OR INITIAL CONDITION* OR INVARIANT* OR 
LASER* OR LOGISTIC OR LORENZ OR MAGNETIC FIELD* OR 
MECHANISM* OR MODES OR NETWORK* OR ONSET OR TIME 
OR FREQUENC* OR POPULATION* OR STABLE OR ADAPTIVE 
OR CIRCUIT* OR DISSIPAT* OR EVOLUTION OR 
EXPERIMENTAL OR GROWTH OR HARMONIC* OR 
HOMOCLINIC OR INSTABILIT* OR OPTICAL)) OR 
(BIFURCATION* AND (NONLINEAR OR HOMOCLINIC OR 
QUASIPERIODIC OR QUASI-PERIODIC OR DOUBLING OR 
DYNAMICAL SYSTEM* OR EVOLUTION OR INSTABILIT* OR  
SADDLE-NODE* OR MOTION* OR OSCILLAT* OR 
TRANSCRITICAL OR BISTABILITY OR LIMIT CYCLE* OR 
POINCARE OR LYAPUNOV OR ORBIT*)) OR (NONLINEAR AND 
(PERIODIC SOLUTION* OR OSCILLAT* OR MOTION* OR 
 223
HOMOCLINIC)) OR (DYNAMICAL SYSTEM* AND (NONLINEAR 
OR STOCHASTIC OR NON-LINEAR)) OR ATTRACTOR* OR 
PERIOD DOUBLING* OR CORRELATION DIMENSION* OR 
LYAPUNOV EXPONENT* OR PERIODIC ORBIT* OR NONLINEAR 
DYNAMICAL) NOT (CHAO OR CHAOBOR* OR CHAOTROP* OR 
CAROTID OR ARTERY OR STENOSIS OR PULMONARY OR 
VASCULAR OR ANEURYSM* OR ARTERIES OR VEIN* OR 
TUMOR* OR SURGERY) 
3. The query is entered into a database search engine, and documents 
relevant to the topic are retrieved.  In the text mining study mentioned 
above, 6160 documents were retrieved from the Web version of the 
Science Citation Index (SCI) for the year 2001.  The SCI was used 
because it is the only major research database to contain references, in a 
readily extractable format. 
4. These documents are combined to create a separate database, and all the 
references contained in these documents are extracted.  Identical 
references are combined, the number of occurrences of each reference is 
tabulated, and a table of references and their occurrence frequencies is 
constructed.  In the text mining study on Nonlinear Dynamics, 113176 
separate references were extracted and tabulated.  Table 1 contains the 
twenty highest frequency (most cited) references extracted from the 
Nonlinear Dynamics database.   
 
TABLE 1 – MOST HIGHLY CITED DOCUMENTS 
 
AUTHOR YEAR SOURCE VOL PAGE # CIT 
PECORA LM 1990  PHYS REV LETT  V64  P821 177 
GUCKENHEIMER J 1983  NONLINEAR OSCILLATIO   149 
OTT E 1990  PHYS REV LETT  V64  P1196 142 
LORENZ EN 1963  J ATMOS SCI  V20  P130 115 
CROSS MC 1993  REV MOD PHYS  V65  P851 105 
WOLF A 1985  PHYSICA D  V16  P285 103 
TAKENS F 1981  LECT NOTES MATH  V898  P366 97 
OTT E 1993  CHAOS DYNAMICAL SYST   97 
GRASSBERGER P 1983  PHYSICA D  V9  P189 94 
GUTZWILLER MC 1990  CHAOS CLASSICAL QUAN   88 
ROSENBLUM MG 1996  PHYS REV LETT  V76  P1804 77 
GRASSBERGER P 1983  PHYS REV LETT  V50  P346 76 
ECKMANN JP 1985  REV MOD PHYS  V57  P617 75 
THEILER J 1992  PHYSICA D  V58  P77 66 
NAYFEH AH 1979  NONLINEAR OSCILLATIO   62 
FUJISAKA H 1983  PROG THEOR PHYS  V69  P32 61 
WIGGINS S 1990  INTRO APPL NONLINEAR   61 
RULKOV NF 1995  PHYS REV E  V51  P980 59 
 224
PYRAGAS K 1992  PHYS LETT A  V170  P421 59 
LICHTENBERG AJ 1992  REGULAR CHAOTIC DYNA   58 
 
Two frequencies are computed for each reference, but only the first is shown 
in Table 1.  The frequency shown in the rightmost column is the number of 
times each reference was cited by the 6160 records in the retrieved database 
only.  This number reflects the importance of a given reference to the 
specific discipline of Nonlinear Dynamics.  The second frequency number 
(not shown) is the total number of citations the reference received from all 
sources, and reflects the importance of a given reference to all the fields of 
science that cited the reference.  This number is obtained from the citation 
field or citation window in the SCI.  In CAB, only the first frequency is 
used, since it is topic-specific.  Using the first discipline-specific frequency 
number obviates the need to normalize citation frequencies for different 
disciplines (due to different levels of activity in different disciplines), as 
would be the case if total citation frequencies were used to determine the 
ordering of the references. 
 
Before presenting a specific implementation algorithm for the Nonlinear 
Dynamics example, a few caveats will be discussed.  First, listing and 
selection of the most highly cited references are dependent on the 
comprehensiveness and balance of the total records retrieved.  Any 
imbalances (from skewed databases or incorrect queries) can influence the 
weightings of particular references, and result in some references exceeding 
the selection threshold where not warranted, and others falling below the 
threshold where not warranted.   
 
Second, it is important that the query used for record retrieval be extensive 
(Khan and Khor, 2004; Harter and Hert, 1997; Kantor, 1994), as was shown 
for the Nonlinear Dynamics example.  The query needs to be checked for 
precision and recall, which becomes complicated when assumptions of 
binary relevance and binary retrieval are relaxed (Della Mea and Mizzaro, 
2004).  There are a multitude of issues to be considered when evaluating 
queries and their impact on precision and recall.  A recent systems analytic 
approach to analyzing the information retrieval process concludes that, for 
completeness, the interaction of the Environment and the information 
retrieval system must be considered in query development (Kagolovsky and 
Moehr, 2004).  The first author’s experiences (with the four studies done so 
far with CAB, including the study reported in this paper) have shown that 
modest query changes may substitute some papers at the citation selection 
 225
threshold, but the truly seminal papers have citations of such magnitude that 
they are invulnerable to modest query changes.  For this reason, the cutoff 
threshold for citations has been, and should be, set slightly lower, to 
compensate for query uncertainties. 
 
Third, there may be situations where at least minimal citation representation 
is desired from each of the major technical thrust areas in the documents 
retrieved.  In this case, the retrieved documents could be clustered into the 
major technical thrust areas, and the CAB process could be performed 
additionally on the documents for each cluster.  The additional references 
identified with the cluster-level CAB process, albeit with lower citations 
than from the aggregated non-clustered CAB process, would then be added 
to the list obtained with the aggregated CAB process.  The first author has 
not found this cluster-level CAB process necessary for any of the four 
disciplines studied with CAB so far. 
 
Fourth, there may be errors in citation counts due to references errors, and 
the subsequent fragmenting of a reference’s occurrence frequency metric 
into smaller metric values.  Care needs to be taken in insuring that a given 
reference is not fissioned into multiple large fragments, that are not 
subsequently combined. 
 
How large would this fragmenting effect be?  There have been a number of 
published studies estimating these types of data entry errors on SCI citation 
results (Gosling et al, 2004; Fenton et al, 2000; Putterman et al, 1991).  
Essentially all the articles retrieved used the same approach.  They selected a 
sample of journal papers from a journal or journals, and compared the 
references against the originals.  In the words of one of the retrieved papers' 
authors: "To evaluate the reference accuracy in the Journal of Dermatology 
and the Korean Journal of Dermatology, we randomly selected 100 
references from each journal and checked them against the original articles." 
(Lee and Lee, 1999).  They generated metrics for citation errors, and 
presented the results statistically.  There was a range of results, but 
‘significant’ errors appeared to be in the range of about ten percent. 
 
The first author did a study in early 2003 (unpublished) examining the 
differences between numerical outputs in the Times Cited field in the 
Science Citation Index (SCI) and the Cited Reference Search capability in 
the SCI.  This difference reflected the error in entering reference data in the 
 226
SCI, and would directly lead to fragmenting of the reference occurrence 
frequency metrics. 
 
The SCI allows computation of citation counts for a paper by two different 
methods.  One approach is the Times Cited field associated with the paper of 
interest (Pi).  The other is the Cited Reference Search capability.  The Times 
Cited field essentially counts links between the SCI record of the Pi and the 
other SCI records that contain references to Pi in their Cited References 
field.  Any errors in how Pi is referenced in these other SCI records will 
nullify a link.  The Cited Reference Search capability lists all references for 
Pi, and groups them by similarity.  One group is those references that have 
been entered correctly, and have established the link to the Times Cited 
field. 
 
Citation counts for ten highly cited papers were computed for each method.  
The first author’s name, as it appeared in the SCI record of the actual paper, 
was the only variant used for the experiment.  The Times Cited count 
averaged about four percent less than the Cited Reference Search.  This 
appeared due to errors in entering the journal volume, page, or year.  Any 
errors in entering the first author’s name would exacerbate this under-
representation.  From observation, the greatest source of author name error 
appeared to be in the treatment of the middle initial (exclusion, if the middle 
initial appeared in the SCI record of the actual paper).  In the study above, 
not all the errors made in entering data could be identified, and therefore the 
four percent number is a lower bound on the differential. 
 
For statistical purposes in representing numbers of citations, the Times Cited 
field is adequate.  For a more accurate representation, the Cited Reference 
Search would be required.  Using a stem of the author’s name (followed by 
wildcards) to obtain estimates of the differences due to name entry errors is 
very time consuming, and does not fully obviate the problem, since it is not 
known how the error would have impacted any stem selected.  For almost 
any conceivable application, this additional level of complexity and time 
would not justify the probable slight increase in citation count accuracy. 
  
Fifth, the CAB approach is most accurate for recent references, and its 
accuracy drops as the references recede into the distant past.  This results 
from the tendency of authors to reference more recent documents and, given 
the restricted real estate in journals, not reference the original documents.   
To get better representation, and more accurate citation numbers, for early 
 227
historical documents, the more recent references need to be retrieved, 
collected into a database, and have their references analyzed in a similar 
manner (essentially examining generation of citations). 
 
As an example of what would be required for the early historical documents, 
assume 150 reference documents are selected for the primary Background 
study, and the retrieved database is for 2001.  Assume there is an average of 
twenty references per retrieved record for a total of 3000 references.  
Assume half of these references are in the SCI, for a total of 1500 
references.  All these 1500 references could be retrieved, could constitute the 
new database, the critical references in this database could be identified, and 
the process repeated ad infinitum.  Or, to make the numbers more 
manageable in terms of number of iterations required, an upper limit on 
publication date could be specified for each succeeding iteration.  Thus, for 
an initial retrieval of 2001 as in the example, the next retrieval could be for 
references prior to 1980, then the following retrieval would be for references 
prior to 1960.  However, for most literature surveys, this iterative approach 
would be un-necessary, since recent references tend to be of primary 
interest. 
 
Sixth, high citation frequencies are not unique to seminal documents only; 
different types of references can have high citation frequencies.  Documents 
that contain critical research advances, and were readily accessible in the 
open literature, tend to be cited highly, and represent the foundation of the 
CAB approach.  Application of CAB to three technical research areas so far 
(in addition to the present Nonlinear Dynamics study) shows that this type of 
document is predominant in the highly cited references list.  Books or review 
articles also appear on the highly cited references list.  These documents do 
not usually represent new advances, but rather are summaries of the state of 
the art (and its Background) at the time the document was written.  These 
types of documents are still quite useful as Background material.  Finally, 
documents that receive large numbers of citations highly critical of the 
document could be included in the list of highly cited documents.  In three 
studies so far, the first author has not identified such papers in the detailed 
development of the Background. 
 
Additionally, one of the three application studies concerns high speed 
compressible flow, a discipline in which the first author worked decades 
ago.  Using the CAB approach, the first author found that all the key 
historical documents with which he was familiar were identified, and all the 
 228
historical documents identified appeared to be important.  Thus, for that data 
point at least, the weaknesses identified above (imbalances, undervaluing 
early historical references, unwanted highly cited documents) did not 
materialize.  To insure that any critical documents were not missed because 
of imbalance problems, the threshold was set a little bit lower to be more 
inclusive. 
 
The converse problem to multiple types of highly cited references, some of 
which may not be the seminal documents desired, is influential references 
that do not have substantial citation frequencies.  If the authors of these 
references did not publish them in widely and readily accessible forums, or 
if they do not contain appropriate verbiage for optimal query accessibility, 
then they might not have received large numbers of citations.  Additionally, 
journal or book space tends to be limited, with limited space for references.  
In this zero-sum game for space, research authors tend to cite relatively 
recent records at the expense of the earlier historical records.  Also, 
extremely recent but influential references have not had the time to 
accumulate sufficient citations to be listed above the selection threshold on 
the citation frequency table.  Methods of including these influential records 
located at the wings of the temporal distribution will be described in the 
following implementation section.  Inclusion of the references that were not 
widely available when published is more problemmatical, and tends to rely 
on the Background developers’ personal knowledge of these documents, and 
their influence. 
 
CONCEPT IMPLEMENTATION 
 
To identify the total candidate references for the Background sub-section, a 
table similar in structure to Table 1, but containing all the references from 
the retrieved records, is constructed.  A threshold frequency for selection can 
be determined by arbitrary inspection (i.e., a Background section consisting 
of 150 key references is arbitrarily selected).  The first author has found a 
dynamic selection process more useful.  In this dynamic process, references 
are selected, analyzed, and grouped based on their order in the citation 
frequency table until the resulting Background is judged sufficiently 
complete by the Background developers.   
 
To insure that the influential documents at the wings of the temporal 
distribution are included, the following total process is used.  The reference 
 229
frequency table is ordered by inverse frequency, as above, and a high value 
of the selection frequency threshold is selected initially.  Then, the table is 
re-ordered chronologically.  The early historical documents with citation 
frequencies substantially larger than those of their contemporaries are 
selected, as are the extremely recent documents with citation frequencies 
substantially larger than those of their contemporaries.  By contemporaries, 
it is meant documents published in the same time frame, not limited to the 
same year.  Then, the dynamic selection process defined above is applied to 
the early historical references, the intermediate time references (those falling 
under the high frequency threshold), and the extremely recent references.   
 
Table 2 is an example of the final references that would have been selected 
for the Background section of the Nonlinear Dynamics study using CAB, 
had an extensive Background section been desired.  The first reference 
listed, Einstein’s 1917 paper, had many more citations than any papers 
published in the 1910s or 1920s.  In fact, there were half a dozen papers 
published between 1831 and 1931 that had four citations each, and these 
were the closest to Einstein’s paper.  This is a graphic example of how we 
interpret a paper’s having substantially more citations than its 
contemporaries.  
 
TABLE 2 – SEMINAL DOCUMENTS SELECTED FOR INCLUSION IN 
BACKGROUND 
 
AUTHOR YEAR SOURCE VOL PAGE # CIT 
EINSTEIN A 1917  VERHAND DEUT PHYS GE  V19  P82 13  
LAMB H 1932  HYDRODYNAMICS   14  
WIGNER E 1932  PHYS REV  V40  P749 11  
KOLMOGOROV AN 1937  B MGU A  V1  P1 10  
HUSIMI K 1940  P PHYS-MATH SOC JPN  V22  P264 10  
GABOR D 1946  J I ELEC ENG       3  V93  P429 11  
HODGKIN AL 1952  J PHYSIOL-LONDON  V117  P500 30  
TURING AM 1952  PHILOS T ROY SOC B  V237  P37 27  
CODDINGTON EA 1955  THEORY ORDINARY DIFF   15  
ANDERSON PW 1958  PHYS REV  V109  P1492 21  
FITZHUGH R 1961  BIOPHYS J  V1  P445 24  
CHANDRASEKHAR S 1961  HYDRODYNAMIC HYDROMA   23  
LORENZ EN 1963  J ATMOS SCI  V20  P130 115  
MELNIKOV VK 1963  T MOSCOW MATH SOC  V12  P1 23  
HENON M 1964  ASTRON J  V69  P73 18  
SMALE S 1967  B AM MATH SOC  V73  P747 19  
OSELEDEC VI 1968  T MOSCOW MATH SOC  V19  P197 25  
GUTZWILLER MC 1971  J MATH PHYS  V12  P343 42  
RUELLE D 1971  COMMUN MATH PHYS  V20  P167 23  
ZAKHAROV VE 1972  SOV PHYS JETP-USSR  V34  P62 21  
 230
NAYFEH AH 1973  PERTURBATION METHODS   24  
HENON M 1976  COMMUN MATH PHYS  V50  P69 41  
ROSSLER OE 1976  PHYS LETT A  V57  P397 39  
MAY RM 1976  NATURE  V261  P459 35  
BENETTIN G 1976  PHYS REV A  V14  P2338 27  
MACKEY MC 1977  SCIENCE  V197  P287 35  
NICOLIS G 1977  SELF ORG NONEQUILIBR   26  
FEIGENBAUM MJ 1978  J STAT PHYS  V19  P25 28  
NAYFEH AH 1979  NONLINEAR OSCILLATIO   62  
CHIRIKOV BV 1979  PHYS REP  V52  P263 43  
PACKARD NH 1980  PHYS REV LETT  V45  P712 54  
LANG R 1980  IEEE J QUANTUM ELECT  V16  P347 29  
WINFREE AT 1980  GEOMETRY BIOL TIME   25  
TAKENS F 1981  LECT NOTES MATH  V898  P366 97  
BRODY TA 1981  REV MOD PHYS  V53  P385 35  
HOPFIELD JJ 1982  P NATL ACAD SCI-BIOL  V79  P2554 37  
GUCKENHEIMER J 1983  NONLINEAR OSCILLATIO   149  
GRASSBERGER P 1983  PHYSICA D  V9  P189 94  
GRASSBERGER P 1983  PHYS REV LETT  V50  P346 76  
FUJISAKA H 1983  PROG THEOR PHYS  V69  P32 61  
GREBOGI C 1983  PHYSICA D  V7  P181 26  
BOHIGAS O 1984  PHYS REV LETT  V52  P1 54  
KURAMOTO Y 1984  CHEM OSCILLATIONS WA   49  
HELLER EJ 1984  PHYS REV LETT  V53  P1515 44  
AREF H 1984  J FLUID MECH  V143  P1 29  
WOLF A 1985  PHYSICA D  V16  P285 103  
ECKMANN JP 1985  REV MOD PHYS  V57  P617 75  
BERRY MV 1985  P ROY SOC LOND A MAT  V400  P229 35  
MILNOR J 1985  COMMUN MATH PHYS  V99  P177 28  
FRASER AM 1986  PHYS REV A  V33  P1134 49  
THEILER J 1986  PHYS REV A  V34  P2427 34  
BROOMHEAD DS 1986  PHYSICA D  V20  P217 26  
FARMER JD 1987  PHYS REV LETT  V59  P845 36  
SKARDA CA 1987  BEHAV BRAIN SCI  V10  P161 25  
TEMAM R 1988  INFINITE DIMENSIONAL   31  
PARKER TS 1989  PRACTICAL NUMERICAL   40  
OTTINO JM 1989  KINEMATICS MIXING ST   35  
CASDAGLI M 1989  PHYSICA D  V35  P335 32  
OSBORNE AR 1989  PHYSICA D  V35  P357 25  
PECORA LM 1990  PHYS REV LETT  V64  P821 177  
OTT E 1990  PHYS REV LETT  V64  P1196 142  
GUTZWILLER MC 1990  CHAOS CLASSICAL QUAN   88  
WIGGINS S 1990  INTRO APPL NONLINEAR   61  
SUGIHARA G 1990  NATURE  V344  P734 35  
KANEKO K 1990  PHYSICA D  V41  P137 30  
AIHARA K 1990  PHYS LETT A  V144  P333 30  
DITTO WL 1990  PHYS REV LETT  V65  P3211 29  
MEHTA ML 1991  RANDOM MATRICES   51  
SAUER T 1991  J STAT PHYS  V65  P579 48  
PECORA LM 1991  PHYS REV A  V44  P2374 29  
HUNT ER 1991  PHYS REV LETT  V67  P1953 28  
THEILER J 1992  PHYSICA D  V58  P77 66  
 231
PYRAGAS K 1992  PHYS LETT A  V170  P421 59  
LICHTENBERG AJ 1992  REGULAR CHAOTIC DYNA   58  
KENNEL MB 1992  PHYS REV A  V45  P3403 33  
KOCAREV L 1992  INT J BIFURCAT CHAOS  V2  P709 31  
PRESS WH 1992  NUMERICAL RECIPES C   29  
GARFINKEL A 1992  SCIENCE  V257  P1230 27  
MARCUS CM 1992  PHYS REV LETT  V69  P506 26  
ALEXANDER JC 1992  INT J BIFURCAT CHAOS  V2  P795 25  
CROSS MC 1993  REV MOD PHYS  V65  P851 105  
OTT E 1993  CHAOS DYNAMICAL SYST   97  
CUOMO KM 1993  PHYS REV LETT  V71  P65 57  
ABARBANEL HDI 1993  REV MOD PHYS  V65  P1331 54  
PLATT N 1993  PHYS REV LETT  V70  P279 38  
CUOMO KM 1993  IEEE T CIRCUITS-II  V40  P626 34  
WU CW 1993  INT J BIFURCAT CHAOS  V3  P1619 28  
HEAGY JF 1994  PHYS REV E  V50  P1874 40  
OTT E 1994  PHYS LETT A  V188  P39 40  
STROGATZ SH 1994  NONLINEAR DYNAMICS C   35  
ASHWIN P 1994  PHYS LETT A  V193  P126 33  
LASOTA A 1994  CHAOS FRACTALS NOISE   30  
HEAGY JF 1994  PHYS REV E  V49  P1140 30  
ROY R 1994  PHYS REV LETT  V72  P2009 28  
SCHIFF SJ 1994  NATURE  V370  P615 28  
RULKOV NF 1995  PHYS REV E  V51  P980 59  
NAYFEH AH 1995  APPL NONLINEAR DYNAM   46  
KOCAREV L 1995  PHYS REV LETT  V74  P5028 40  
KATOK A 1995  INTRO MODERN THEORY   27  
ROSENBLUM MG 1996  PHYS REV LETT  V76  P1804 77  
ABARBANEL HDI 1996  ANAL OBSERVED CHAOTI   45  
KOCAREV L 1996  PHYS REV LETT  V76  P1816 38  
LAI YC 1996  PHYS REV LETT  V77  P55 27  
ASHWIN P 1996  NONLINEARITY  V9  P703 27  
ZELEVINSKY V 1996  PHYS REP  V276  P85 26  
KANTZ H 1997  NONLINEAR TIME SERIE   54  
PIKOVSKY AS 1997  PHYSICA D  V104  P219 43  
PECORA LM 1997  CHAOS  V7  P520 40  
ROSENBLUM MG 1997  PHYS REV LETT  V78  P4193 39  
BEENAKKER CWJ 1997  REV MOD PHYS  V69  P731 25  
GAMMAITONI L 1998  REV MOD PHYS  V70  P223 52  
GUHR T 1998  PHYS REP  V299  P189 37  
VANWIGGEREN GD 1998  SCIENCE  V279  P1198 32  
GOEDGEBUER JP 1998  PHYS REV LETT  V80  P2249 29  
TASS P 1998  PHYS REV LETT  V81  P3291 29  
HEGGER R 1999  CHAOS  V9  P413 27  
FISCHER I 2000  PHYS REV A  V6201  P1801 16  
MATEOS JL 2000  PHYS REV LETT  V84  P258 15  
WANG W 2000  CHAOS  V10  P248 14  
VANAG VK 2000  NATURE  V406  P389 13  
 
These results were examined by the authors.  They judged that all papers in 
the table were relevant for a Background section, or review paper.  Some of 
 232
the earliest papers (e.g., Wigner or Anderson) are concerned with random 
systems and not with chaotic systems, but the methods they employed 
influenced how to view and contrast with chaotic systems mathematically.   
 
They also identified about 6% additional papers that he would have included 
in a Background section.  These papers tended to have relatively high total 
citations, but relatively low citations from the Nonlinear Dynamics papers in 
the present database.  Some of the papers omitted were straight plasma 
physics focused on nuclear fusion tokomak physics.  The system was 
naturally very Nonlinear so the work involved Nonlinear Dynamics, but the 
purpose of the paper was fusion and not advancing the field of Nonlinear 
Dynamics.  This could cause Nonlinear Dynamics authors not to reference 
these papers widely.  Their references come from the plasma community.  
Finally, some papers are highly cited, but then get replaced by better (or 
more easily read) papers by the same author.  The newer citations tend to 
cite the author's newer paper. 
 
The analysis and discussion above have focused on the contents of the 
Background; i.e., which documents should be included.  In some cases, the 
Abstracts of the seminal references have been retrieved and clustered, to 
produce a structure for the Background.  Thus, the CAB approach can be 
used to determine both the content and structure of the Background section.  
Again, CAB does not exclude content and structure determinations by the 
experts.  CAB can be viewed as the starting point for content and structure 
determination, upon which the experts can build with their own insights and 
experience. 
 
While the CAB approach is systematic, it is not automatic.  Judgment is 
required to determine when an adequate number of references has been 
selected for the Background, and further judgement is required to analyze, 
group, and link the references to form a cohesive Background section.  
Additionally, the highly influential references that were not highly cited due 
to insufficient dissemination should be included by the Background 
developers, if they know of such documents.  CAB is not meant to replace 
individual judgment or specification of Background material.  CAB is meant 
to augment individual judgment and reference selection, as reflected in its 
name of Citation-Assisted. 
 
 233
CONCLUSIONS 
 
A method for systematically determining seminal references for inclusion in 
literature surveys or Background sections of research documents has been 
described.  It is based on the assumption that seminal documents tend to be 
highly cited.  CAB is being applied presently to three applications studies, 
and the results so far are much superior to those used by the first author for 
background development in any other study. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 11 
 
Calne DB, Calne R.  Citation of original research.  Lancet.  340 (8813): 244-
244.  Jul 25 1992. 
Della Mea V, Mizzaro S.  Measuring retrieval effectiveness: A new proposal 
and a first experimental validation.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology.  55 (6): 530-543.  Apr 2004. 
Fenton JE, Brazier H, De Souza A, Hughes JP, Mcshane DP.  The accuracy 
of citation and quotation in otolaryngology/head and neck surgery journals.  
Clinical Otolaryngology.  25 (1): 40-44.  Feb 2000. 
Gosling CM, Cameron M, Gibbons PF.   Referencing and quotation 
accuracy in four manual therapy journals.  Manual Therapy.   9 (1): 36-40 
Feb 2004. 
Harter SP, Hert CA.  Evaluation of information retrieval systems: 
Approaches, issues, and methods.  Annual Review of Information Science 
and Technology.  32: 3-94 1997. 
Kagolovsky Y, Moehr JR.  A new look at information retrieval evaluation: 
Proposal for solutions.  Journal of Medical Systems.  28 (1): 103-116.  Feb 
2004. 
Kagolovsky Y, Moehr JR.  Evaluation of information retrieval.  Journal of 
Medical Systems.  In Press. 
Kantor PB.  Information-retrieval techniques.  Annual Review of 
Information Science and Technology.  29: 53-90.  1994. 
Khan MS, Khor S.  Enhanced Web document retrieval using automatic 
query expansion.   Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
And Technology.  55 (1): 29-40.  Jan 1 2004. 
Kostoff, R. N., Shlesinger, M., and Tshiteya, R.  “Nonlinear Dynamics 
Roadmaps using Bibliometrics and Database Tomography”.  International 
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos.  January 2004. 
Lee SY, Lee JS.  A survey of reference accuracy in two Asian dermatologic 
journals (the Journal of Dermatology and the Korean Journal of 
 234
Dermatology).  International Journal of Dermatology.  38 (5): 357-360.  
May 1999. 
Liu, M.X .  Progress In Documentation - The Complexities of Citation 
Practice – A Review of Citation Studies.  Journal of Documentation.  49 (4): 
370-408 Dec 1993 
Macroberts, M.H, Macroberts B.R.  Problems of Citation Analysis - A 
Critical-Review.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science.  
40 (5): 342-349.  1989. 
MacRoberts, M.H, MacRoberts, B.R  Citation content analysis of a botany 
journal.  Journal of the American Society for Information Science.  48 (3): 
274-275 Mar 1997 
MacRoberts, M.H,, MacRoberts, B.R.  Problems of citation analysis.  
Scientometrics.  36 (3): 435-444 Jul-Aug 1996. 
Moravcsik MJ, Murugesan P.  Some results on function and quality of 
citations.  Social Studies of Science.  5 (1): 86-92.  1975. 
Putterman C, Lossos IS.  Author, verify your references - or, the accuracy of 
references in Israeli medical journals.  Israel Journal of Medical Sciences.  
27 (2): 109-112.  Feb 1991. 
Shadish WR, Tolliver D, Gray M, Sengupta SK Author judgments about 
works they cite - 3 studies from psychology journals.  Social Studies of 
Science.  25 (3): 477-498.  Aug 1995. 
Smith, A.J, Goodman, N.W.  The hypertensive response to intubation. Do 
researchers acknowledge previous work?  Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia-
Journal Canadien D Anesthesie.  44 (1): 9-13 Jan 1997 
 235
Section 12.  The Difference between Highly and Poorly Cited Medical 
Articles in the Journal Lancet 
(based on Kostoff, R.N.  “The Difference between Highly and Poorly Cited 
Medical Articles in the Journal Lancet”.  Scientometrics.  72: 3.  513–520.  
2007) 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
Characteristics of highly and poorly cited research articles (with Abstracts) 
published in The Lancet over a three-year period were examined.  These 
characteristics included numerical (numbers of authors, references, citations, 
Abstract words, journal pages), organizational (first author country, 
institution type, institution name), and medical (medical condition, study 
approach, study type, sample size, study outcome).  Compared to the least 
cited articles, the most cited have three to five times the median number of 
authors per article, fifty to six hundred percent greater median number of 
references per article, 110 to 490 times the median number of citations per 
article, 2.5 to almost seven times the median number of Abstract words per 
article, and 2.5 to 3.5 times the median number of pages per article. 
 
The most cited articles’ medical themes emphasize breast cancer, diabetes, 
coronary circulation, and HIV immune system problems, focusing on large-
scale clinical trials of drugs.  The least cited articles’ themes essentially 
don’t address the above medical issues, especially from a clinical trials 
perspective, cover a much broader range of topics, and have much more 
emphasis on social and reproductive health issues.  Finally, for sample sizes 
of clinical trials specifically, those of the most cited articles ranged from a 
median of about 1500 to 2500, whereas those of the least cited articles 
ranged from 30 to 40. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Citation Analysis, Research Impact, The Lancet, Clinical Trials, Drugs, Text 
Mining; Bibliometrics,; Epidemiology; Meta-Analyses. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Medical researchers who publish want their papers to be highly cited.  Three 
necessary conditions for highly cited papers under control of the research 
 236
author(s) are high intrinsic quality, high research activity discipline, and 
high circulation journal (1-5) The present section examines other 
characteristics of highly cited medical papers, to ascertain unique attribute 
patterns in these papers.  It extends a comparative method used by the author 
in recent studies, whereby the attributes of the most cited papers are 
compared with those of the least cited papers (e.g., 6).  This contrast 
between most and least has been shown to delineate differences between the 
two groups dramatically, for single discipline studies.  It was desired to 
extend the technique to a more heterogeneous discipline (general medical 
studies), and use The Lancet, a British-based medical journal, as the test-
bed.  The Lancet is a well-regarded leading medical journal, and contains a 
substantial number of very highly cited papers. 
 
APPROACH 
 
A database of Lancet papers published in a narrow time window (for time 
normalization) and accessed through the Science Citation Index (SCI) was 
generated, and the detailed attributes (characteristics) of most and least cited 
papers were identified.  Specifically, all documents classified by the SCI as 
articles and published in Lancet from 1997-1999 were examined initially.  
The majority of records classified as Articles (~2/3) did not have Abstracts. 
The articles with Abstracts are viewed as complete research articles, and are 
analyzed in more detail.  Characteristics evaluated for each of the most and 
least cited articles are based on the author’s recent analyses of most and least 
cited articles in neuro-psychology (6) and desalination journals, and the 
anthrax discipline, with the exception that a wider range of characteristics 
was used for the present analysis.   
 
Two key issues in the approach are the selection of citations as a key metric, 
and the quantification of citations used to define ‘high’ and ‘low’.  Citations 
are used as a metric for research impact/ quality, and allocation of papers 
into high and low citation categories is a proxy for separation into high and 
low quality categories.  However, for clinical trials specifically, some 
caveats are required.  As Ioannidis states (7), in an analysis of highly cited 
clinical trials, “Of 49 highly cited original clinical research studies, 45 
claimed that the intervention was effective. Of these, 7 (16%) were 
contradicted by subsequent studies, 7 others (16%) had found effects that 
were stronger than those of subsequent studies, 20 (44%) were replicated, 
and 11 (24%) remained largely unchallenged.” 
 237
 
The second key issue is the quantitative determination of most and least 
cited.  If too few articles are selected (e.g., the top or bottom two or three, or 
1%), the statistics will be insufficient to allow for general conclusions.  If 
too many articles are selected (e.g., the top or bottom 40 or 50, or 20%), the 
gradations within each category will be too large for ‘most’ and ‘least’ to 
have meaning.  Based on previous studies, and on tests where the number/ 
fraction of articles in ‘most’ and ‘least’ categories were examined, the top 
and bottom 5% of articles with Abstracts were selected for each year, and 
their characteristics compared.  The number of articles in each category was 
kept constant at seventeen per year. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Tables 1 and 2 list detailed characteristics of the most cited  and the least 
cited research articles for 1998.  Tables 1A and 1B contain the bibliometrics, 
and Tables 2A and 2B contain the medical/ technical issues.  
 
 In Tables 1A and 1B, starting from the second from left column, the 
characteristics listed are number of authors, number of references, number of 
citations as shown in the Times Cited field in the Science Citation Index, 
number of Abstract words, number of pages, reprint author country, reprint 
author institution type, and reprint author institution name.  The reprint 
author is typically the first author.  In Tables 2A and 2B, starting from the 
second from left column, the characteristics listed are medical condition/ 
theme, approach, study type, and sample size.   
 
TABLE 1A – MOST CITED - BIBLIOMETRICS 
 
 1998 MOST CITED ARTICLES   
    #ABS  1ST AUTH 
1ST 
AUTH 1ST AUTH 
ART # #AUTH #REFS #CITES WORDS #PAGES COUNTRY 
INST 
TYPE INST NAME 
1 400 47 2799 529 17 ENGLAND HOSP RADCLIFFE 
2 10 33 1563 438 8 SWEDEN UNIV UPPSALA 
3 6 27 1232 606 17 ENGLAND HOSP RADCLIFFE 
4 11 27 1014 389 7 FRANCE HOSP PITIE SALPETRIERE 
5 13 20 895 423 12 ENGLAND HOSP RADCLIFFE 
6 188 30 782 239 6 USA HOSP CLEVELAND CLIN 
7 25 24 730 286 8 
NEW 
ZEALAND UNIV WELLINGTON 
8 326 19 650 579 13 ENGLAND HOSP RADCLIFFE 
9 9 36 548 277 4 USA HOSP BRIGHAM/ WOMENS 
 238
10 5 32 507 323 7 ITALY HOSP SALVATORE MAUGERI 
11 5 8 484 328 9 SCOTLAND HOSP WESTERN GEN 
12 4 25 480 166 3 AUSTRALIA HOSP ST. VINCENTS 
13 13 19 463 262 7 GERMANY UNIV HEIDELBERG 
14 119 39 447 296 7 CANADA HOSP LONDON HEALTH 
15 9 18 412 307 4 ENGLAND HOSP ROYAL MARSDEN 
16 8 20 408 341 5 ITALY HOSP INST ONCOLOGY 
17 5 33 407 288 5 USA HOSP BRIGHAM/WOMENS 
 
 
TABLE 1B – LEAST CITED - BIBLIOMETRICS 
 
 1998 LEAST CITED ARTICLES   
    #ABS  1ST AUTH 
1ST 
AUTH 1ST AUTH 
ART # #AUTH #REFS #CITES WORDS #PAGES COUNTRY 
INST 
TYPE INST NAME 
314 1 19 0 68 3 SCOTLAND UNIV  GLASGOW 
313 2 30 0 202 5 NETHERLANDS UNIV  UTRECHT 
312 2 37 0 80 5 CANADA UNIV  TORONTO 
311 2 35 2 111 3 USA HOSP TEXAS ARRYTHMIA 
310 1 13 4 124 4 ENGLAND UNIV  LONDON 
309 6 15 4 266 3 AUSTRIA HOSP WILHELMINENSPITAL 
308 3 4 5 198 1 ENGLAND HOSP CHARING CROSS 
307 1 15 5 143 5 ENGLAND FOUND GLOBAL FORUM 
306 2 16 5 127 4 NORWAY INST  DIAKONHJEMMETS 
305 2 6 6 154 3 USA UNIV  CORNELL 
304 8 13 6 213 3 AUSTRALIA GOVT ACHS 
303 3 27 6 297 5 SCOTLAND HOSP WESTERN GEN 
302 3 43 8 62 5 WALES UNIV  CARDIFF 
301 1 55 8 72 6 USA UNIV  ST. LOUIS 
300 10 0 9 88 2 ENGLAND FOUND AIDS CONSORTIUM 
299 6 12 9 175 3 ENGLAND UNIV  NOTTINGHAM 
298 3 13 9 314 3 FRANCE UNIV  REIMS 
 
TABLE 2A – MOST CITED – MEDICAL ISSUES 
 
 1998 MOST CITED ARTICLES    
 MEDICAL  STUDY SAMPLE  
ART # CONDITION/THEME APPROACH TYPE SIZE OUTCOME 
1 DIABETES DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE(3867) PARTIALLY FAVORABLE 
2 HYPERTENSION DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE(18790) FAVORABLE 
3 BREAST CANCER DRUGS 
META-
ANALYSIS LARGE(37000) PARTIALLY FAVORABLE 
4 HEPATITIS VIRUS DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE(832) FAVORABLE 
5 DIABETES DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE(2241) MODERATELY FAVORABLE 
6 CORONARY STENT DRUGS CLINICAL LARGE(2399) FAVORABLE 
 239
TRIAL 
7 ALLERGIES QUESTIONNAIRES EPIDEMIOLOGY 
LARGE 
(463801) FAVORABLE 
8 BREAST CANCER DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL 
LARGE 
(30000) MODERATELY FAVORABLE 
9 BREAST CANCER BLOOD ASSAYS 
CLINICAL 
ASSAY LARGE (1017) FAVORABLE 
10 MYOCARDIAL INFARCT HEART MONITOR 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (1284) FAVORABLE 
11 CAROTID STENOSIS SURGICAL 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (3024) MODERATELY FAVORABLE 
12 HIV-1 MECHANISM MODEL THEORETICAL N.A. HYPOTHESIS 
13 STROKE DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (800) MARGINALLY FAVORABLE 
14 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (533) FAVORABLE 
15 BREAST CANCER DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (2494) INCONCLUSIVE 
16 BREAST CANCER DRUGS 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL LARGE (5408) INCONCLUSIVE 
17 MYOCARDIAL INFARCT BLOOD ASSAYS 
CLINICAL 
ASSAY 
LARGE 
(14916) FAVORABLE 
 
 
TABLE 2B – LEAST CITED – MEDICAL ISSUES 
 
 1998 LEAST CITED ARTICLES    
 MEDICAL  STUDY SAMPLE  
ART # CONDITION/THEME APPROACH TYPE SIZE OUTCOME 
314 STROKE TREATMENT PROTOCOL ASSESSMENT N.A. N.A. 
313 STROKE TREATMENT PROTOCOL ASSESSMENT N.A. N.A. 
312 STROKE TREATMENT PROTOCOL ASSESSMENT N.A. N.A. 
311 ARRYTHMIA TREATMENT HYPOTHESIS THEORETICAL N.A. N.A. 
310 GLOBAL HEALTH EVALUATION  PROPOSE REFORMS N.A. N.A. 
309 TORTURE INJURIES BONE SCANS CLINICAL TRIAL SMALL(50) FAVORABLE 
308 PULMONARY EMBOLISM DRUGS CASE STUDY SMALL(1) UNFAVORABLE 
307 WHO' IMPACT EVALUATION  PROPOSE REFORMS N.A. N.A. 
306 SOCIAL IMPACT EVALUATION  PROPOSE REFORMS N.A. N.A. 
305 FOOD AID EVALUATION  ASSESSMENT N.A. N.A. 
304 PSITTACOSIS EPIDEMIOLOGY 
CLINICAL 
DIAGNOSTICS SMALL(16) FAVORABLE 
303 BRAIN TUMORS SURGICAL CLINICAL TRIAL SMALL(40) FAVORABLE 
302 DATA INTERPRETATION TEACHING PROTOCOLS N.A. N.A. 
301 ACID-BASE DISORDERS DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
CLINICAL 
DIAGNOSTICS N.A. N.A. 
300 HIV TREATMENT ACCESS PROPOSE REFORMS N.A. N.A. 
299 PLACENTAL PERFUSION DIAGNOSTIC TESTS CLINICAL TRIAL SMALL(15) FAVORABLE 
298 FERTILIZATION QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY SMALL(48) INCONCLUSIVE 
 
Table 3 summarizes the bibliometrics results for 1997-1999 for most and 
least cited articles, while Table 4 summarizes the medical issues results for 
the same records.  The numbers in parentheses after the text entries reflect 
the number of occurrences.  Only those entries with occurrences greater than 
one are shown. 
 240
 
TABLE 3 – 1997-1999 – MOST/ LEAST CITED – BIBLIOMETRICS - 
SUMMARY 
 
    #ABS  1ST AUTH 1ST AUTH 1ST AUTH 
ART # #AUTH #REFS #CITES WORDS #PAGES COUNTRY 
INST 
TYPE INST NAME 
1997 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
AVERAGE 46.59 30.82 692.1 358.8 7.059 W. EUR (10) UNIV (9) HARVARD (3) 
MEDIAN 9 29 660 336 7 
N. AMERICA 
(5) HOSP (5)  
STD DEV 75.96 10.68 220.2 96.33 2.703   INST (3)  
1997 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
AVERAGE 3.118 21.06 5.118 178.1 3.529 W. EUROPE (9) UNIV (7)  
MEDIAN 2 20 5 142 3 
N. AMERICA 
(5) HOSP (5)  
STD DEV 2.369 10.56 3.257 105 1.281  INST (3)  
1998 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
AVERAGE 68 26.88 813 357.5 8.176 WEST EUR(11) UNIV(3) RADCLIFFE(4) 
MEDIAN 10 27 548 323 7 N. AMERICA(4) HOSP(14) BRIGHAM/WOMENS(2) 
STD DEV 122.1 9.393 606.9 121.7 4.231 AUSTRALASIA(2)  
1998 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
AVERAGE 20.0 10.9 209.0 118.7 2.6 WEST EUR(12) UNIV(9)  
MEDIAN 2 15 5 143 3 N. AMER(4) HOSP(4)  
STD DEV 2.6 14.9 3.1 80.0 1.3   FOUND(2)  
1999 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
AVERAGE 32.83 19.21 342.5 207.3 4.506 WEST EUR (14) UNIV (9) UPPSALA (3) 
MEDIAN 11 29 489 258 7 
N. AMERICA 
(2) HOSP (6)  
STD. 
DEV. 40.29 8.276 323.4 110.8 2.352   INST (2)  
1999 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
AVERAGE 30.51 18.88 316.4 197.5 4.26 W. EUR. (10) UNIV (12) 
MEDIAN 4 5 1 38 2 
AUSTRALASIA 
(3) HOSP (2)  
STD. 
DEV. 37.72 7.65 309.9 107.1 2.323 
N. AMERICA 
(2) INST (3)  
 
 
TABLE 4 – 1997-1999 – MOST/ LEAST CITED – MEDICAL ISSUES - 
SUMMARY 
 
 MEDICAL  STUDY SAMPLE  
ART # CONDITION/THEME APPROACH TYPE SIZE OUTCOME 
1997 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
 CORONARY (6) DRUGS (8) CLIN TRIAL (8) LARGE FAVORABLE (12) 
 MORTALITY (3) DATA ANALYSIS (4) LAB TESTS (5) 
MEDIAN 
(1734) MODERATELY FAV (4) 
 BREAST CANCER (2) BIOPSY (2) EPIDEMIOL (4)  
  LAB TESTS (2)    
1997 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
 RADIOLOGY (4) OVERVIEW (5) OVERVIEW (6) LARGE (4) FAVORABLE (5) 
  LAB TESTS (3) ASSESSMENTS (2)  MEDIAN (755)  
 241
  ANALYSIS (2) EPIDEMIOLOGY (2) SMALL (2)  
  SURVEY (2)  MEDIAN (7)  
1998 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
 BREAST CANCER(5) DRUGS(11) 
CLINICAL 
TRIAL(12) LARGE(16) FAVORABLE(8) 
 DIABETES(2) BLOOD ASSAYS(2) 
CLINICAL 
ASSAYS(2) 
(MEDIAN 
3445) MODERATELY FAVOR(3)
 MYOCARDIAL INFARCT(2)   PARTIALLY FAVOR(2) 
1998 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
 SOCIAL HEALTH(4) EVALUATION(4)  ASSESSMENT(4) SMALL(6) N.A.(11) 
 STROKE(3) 
TREATMENT 
PROTOCOL(3) 
PROPOSE 
REFORM(4) (MEDIAN 28) FAVORABLE(4) 
  DIAGNOSTIC TESTS(2) CLINICAL TRIAL(3) UNFAVORABLE(1) 
   CLINICAL DIAGNOSTICS(2) INCONCLUSIVE(1) 
1999 SUMMARY - MOST CITED     
 CARDIOVASCULAR(6) DRUGS(9) CLIN TRIAL(14) LARGE(15) FAVORABLE(9) 
 HIV-1(5) ASSESSMENT(3)  MEDIAN(1000) INCONCLUSIVE(4) 
 HYPERTENSION(2)    MODERATELY FAV(3) 
1999 SUMMARY - LEAST CITED     
  LAB TEST (6) CASE STUDY (4) SMALL (7) FAVORABLE (9) 
  DATA ANALYSIS (4) LAB TEST (4) LARGE (3) 
MODERATELY FAVORABLE
(2) 
  EVALUATION (2) ASSESSMENT (4)  
  SURVEY (2) SURVEY (2)   
 
For all three years, there are substantial differences between the most and 
least cited articles in both the bibliometrics and medical/ technical issues.  
Compared to the least cited articles, the most cited article bibliometrics 
reflect, for the three years, approximately: 
 
• Fifteen to twenty times the average number of authors per article, and 
three to five times the median number of authors per article (see 
Reference 8 for a network-based depiction of numbers of authors vs 
numbers of citations); 
• Thirty three to three hundred percent greater average number of 
references per article, and fifty to six hundred percent  greater median 
number of references per article (see Reference 9 for relationshio of 
number of references to citations); 
• One hundred and forty to one thousand times the average number of 
citations per article, and 110 to 490 times the median number of 
citations per article; 
• Two to four times the average number of Abstract words per article, 
and 2.5 to almost seven times the median number of Abstract words 
per article; 
• Two and a half to 3.5 times the average number of pages per article, 
and 2.5 to 3.5 times the median number of pages per article. 
 242
• There are no significant regional distribution differences between the 
most and least cited articles (only those regions with more than one 
article are listed); 
• While the least cited articles tend to be predominately from 
universities, the most cited are mixed.  The significance of this result 
is muted, because many of the hospitals tended to be part of a 
university, thereby blurring the university/ hospital distinction; 
• Over the three year period, four institutions were represented three or 
more times in the most cited category (Radcliffe – 5; Uppsala – 4; 
Harvard – 3; Salpetriere – 3), while no institutions were represented 
three or more times in the least cited category. 
 
The most cited articles’ medical themes emphasize breast cancer, diabetes, 
coronary circulation, and HIV immune system problems, focusing on large 
scale clinical trials of drugs.  The 1997 most cited articles were skewed by 
three publications from a large scale epidemiological study (Burden of 
Disease), thereby reducing the dominant fraction of clinical drug trials that 
characterized the other two years.  The least cited articles’ themes essentially 
don’t address the above medical issues, especially from a clinical trials 
perspective, cover a much broader range of topics, and have much more 
emphasis on social and reproductive health issues.  Because of the different 
nature of the least cited articles’ studies relative to the most cited, many of 
the least cited articles’ outcomes were non-applicable in the same sense as 
that of a drug clinical trial outcome.  The favorability or unfavorability of 
results (assessed, but not included in tables) did not seem to be a major 
factor differentiating the most and least cited articles. 
 
Median sample sizes of the most cited articles tend to be large, ranging from 
1000 to 3500, while sample sizes of the least cited articles tend to be a 
couple of orders of magnitude smaller.  However, 1997 did contain four of 
the least cited articles with a median sample size of 755, but none of these 
samples were from clinical drug trials.  For sample sizes of clinical trials 
specifically, those of the most cited articles ranged from a median of about 
1500 to 2500, whereas those of the least cited articles ranged from 30 to 40.  
References 10-11 provide further evidence that higher citation rates are 
correlated with larger clinical trial sample sizes, but exceptions can be 
found. 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
 243
 
Medicine has many facets, including adequacy and affordability of health 
care, disease and injury prevention, public health education, lab research and 
clinical trials, theory and experiment, individual and global health issues, 
and epidemiology.  Out of all these possibilities that could be of substantial 
interest to the medical research community, the Lancet readership 
community has chosen to emphasize high citations to large-scale clinical 
drug trials on breast cancer, diabetes, coronary circulation, and immune 
system problems, reported by many authors in long well-referenced papers, 
for the time period chosen. 
 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 12. 
 
1.  Lehrl S.  The citation frequency for prominent researchers in German 
otorhinolaryngology over 10 years.  HNO.  53 (5): 415-422 2005.  
2.  Smith SD.  Is an article in a top journal a top article?  Financial 
Management.  33 (4): 133-149 2004.  
3. Lee KP, Schotland M, Bacchetti P, Bero LA.  Association of journal 
quality indicators with methodological quality of clinical research articles.  
JAMA-Journal of the American Medical Association.  287 (21): 2805-2808  
2002.  
4.  Kostoff, RN.  The use and misuse of citation analysis in research evaluation.  
Scientometrics.  43:1.  September 1998. 
5.  Callaham M, Wears RL, Weber E.  Journal prestige, publication bias, and other 
characteristics associated with citation of published studies in peer-reviewed 
journals.  JAMA-Journal of the American Medical Association 287 (21): 2847-
2850 2002 
6.  Kostoff RN, Buchtel H., Andrews J, Pfeil K.  The hidden structure of 
neuropsychology: text mining of the journal Cortex: 1991-2001.  Cortex.  41:2.  
103-115.  April  2005. 
7.  Ioannidis JPA.  Contradicted and initially stronger effects in highly cited 
clinical research.  JAMA-Journal of the American Medical Association 294 (2): 
218-228. 2005. 
8.  Borner K, Dall'Asta L, Ke WM, et al.  Studying the emerging global brain: 
Analyzing and visualizing the impact of co-authorship teams.  Complexity 10 (4): 
57-67 2005. 
9.  Schloegl C, Stock WG Impact and relevance of LIS journals: A 
scientometric analysis of international and German-language LIS journals - 
 244
Citation analysis versus reader survey.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology 55 (13): 1155-1168 2004.  
10.  Gluud LL, Sorensen TIA, Gotzsche PC, et al.  The journal impact factor 
as a predictor of trial quality and outcomes: Cohort study of hepatobiliary 
randomized clinical trials.  American Journal of Gastroenterology 100 (11): 
2431-2435 2005. 
11.  Easterbrook PJ, Berlin JA, Gopalan R, et al. Publication Bias In Clinical 
Research.  Lancet 337 (8746): 867-872 1991.   
 245
Section 13.  Citation Comparisons of the Journal Cortex. 
(based on Kostoff, R. N., Buchtel, H., Andrews, J., and Pfeil, K.  “The hidden 
structure of neuropsychology: Text Mining of the Journal Cortex: 1991-2001”.  
Cortex.  41:2.  103-115.  April  2005.) 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The purpose of this section is to compare citations among papers published 
in three related neuropsychology journals, Cortex, Neuropsychologia, and 
Brain.  
 
APPROACH 
 
The following experiment was run.  All articles published in Cortex, 
Neuropsychologia, and Brain in the years 1998-1999 were retrieved from 
SCI.  There were 110 Cortex articles, 278 Neuropsychologia articles, and 
341 Brain articles.  Then, the ten most cited articles from each retrieval (the 
citations from each paper used for the tabulation of most and least cited are 
those listed in the SCI Times Cited field, and are the total citations received 
by each paper from all other papers in the SCI) were extracted, as well as the 
ten least cited articles, and various characteristics compared.  The results are 
shown in Table 1 
 
RESULTS 
 
Table 1 – Comparison of most cited/ least cited papers, published 1998-
1999. 
 
 CORTEX NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA BRAIN 
 MOST LEAST MOST LEAST MOST LEAST 
 CITED CITED CITED CITED CITED CITED 
# AUTH       
Average 3.9 2.8 5.2 2.6 7.1 4.6 
Median 4 3 5 1 7.5 4.5 
# REFS       
Average 46.3 28 52.5 26.8 68.3 42.4 
Median 49 29.5 49 26 62.5 35 
# CITES       
Average 21 0.8 71.3 0 166.8 2.8 
median 18.5 1 67.5 0 157 3 
ORG       
Institution 5 4 2 4 8 2 
University 5 6 8 6 2 8 
COUNTRY 4 Italy 2 Italy 4 UK 5 USA 5 UK 3 Japan 
 246
 3 France 2 USA 4 USA 2 Italy 2 USA 1 USA 
 1 Austria 2 Germany 1 Italy 1 NZ 2 Canada 1 UK 
 1 Belgium 2 Japan 1 Canada 1 Neth 1 Germany 1 France 
 1 Germany 1 Neth  1 Australia  1 Italy 
  1 Australia    1 Canada 
      1 Germany 
      1 Neth 
TYPE       
Behavior 8 4   
Surgery   1 2 
Diagnostic-NI 2 5 7 
Diagnostic-INV     1 
 
 
CODE: TYPE 
BEHAV=CLINICAL BEHAVIOR STUDIES 
SURGERY=SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS 
DIAG-NI=NON-INVASIVE DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
DIAG-INV=INVASIVE DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
A number of interesting observations may be made from Table 7.  First, the 
most cited articles in Neuropsychologia are cited, on average, more than 
three times as often as the most cited articles in Cortex, and the most cited 
articles in Brain are cited, on average, more than twice as often as the most 
cited articles in Neuropsychologia. 
 
Second, the most cited papers have more authors than the least cited, in all 
three journals, and the effect is most pronounced in Neuropsychologia.  
Additionally, the average number of authors increases with the average 
number of citations, ranging from about four authors of the most cited 
Cortex papers to about seven authors of the most cited Brain papers.   
 
Third, the most cited papers have substantially more references than the least 
cited, in both journals, and the effect is most pronounced in 
Neuropsychologia.  Additionally, the average number of citations increases 
with the average number of references (an effect observed by the first author 
in recent unpublished text mining studies), ranging from about 46 references 
in the most cited Cortex papers to about 68 references in the most cited 
Brain papers.  
 
 247
Fourth, there is no clear overall trend in citations as a function of 
institutional representation.  The institution/ (institution + university) ratio 
(where institution in the table cells should be interpreted as any non-
university organization; e.g., research laboratory, clinic, hospital, company) 
for most cited papers starts at 0.5 for Cortex, drops to 0.2 for 
Neuropsychologia, and increases sharply to 0.8 for Brain.  This ratio for 
least cited papers starts at 0.4 for both Cortex and Neuropsychologia, and 
decreases to 0.2 for Brain.  Its most dramatic change is from 0.8 for the most 
cited Brain papers to 0.2 for the least cited Brain papers. 
 
Fifth, the most cited papers in Cortex are all from continental Western 
Europe, with heavy representation from Italy and France, while the least 
cited papers in Cortex represent four different continents.  The most cited 
papers in Neuropsychologia are, with the exception of Italy, from the UK 
and North America (with heavy representation from the UK and USA), 
while the least cited papers have more representation from Western Europe 
but none from the UK.  The most cited papers in Brain are from the major 
English-speaking countries, whereas the least cited are scattered around 
Western Europe, Asia, and North America.  
 
Sixth, there is a distinct shift in type of study (the bottom of Table 7) in 
proceeding from Cortex to Neuropsychologia to Brain.  Clinical behavioral 
studies, many of them essentially case studies, predominate the most cited 
Cortex papers.  There are only two papers characterized as Diagnostic-Non-
Invasive (e.g., PET, MRI, etc).  Neuropsychologia has more of a balance 
between Behavioral and Diagnostic-Non-Invasive in its ten most cited 
papers.  Brain shows a heavy emphasis on Diagnostic-Non-Invasive (7/10), 
two papers on surgical procedures, and one on Diagnostic-Invasive.   Based 
on reading Abstracts from each of these journals, the types as represented in 
the top ten most cited articles roughly approximate the types of papers 
published overall.  Thus, as citations increase in absolute amounts, the study 
type transitions from the clinically oriented behavioral focus to the correlates 
with more objective measurements.  Also, as the results from the most cited 
papers section showed, as the study type transitions from the clinically 
oriented behavioral focus (‘soft’ technology) to the more objective 
measurements (‘hard’ technology), the most cited papers tend to become 
more recent. 
 248
Section 14.  Biomedical Text Mining Bibliography 
Based on: analyses performed in late 2005; Kostoff, R.N.) 
 
This section contains a bibliography of articles emphasizing text mining.  
Because the fundamental principles of biomedical text mining are similar to 
those of science and technology text mining, the articles in the bibliography 
are not constrained to biomedical text mining, but encompass all of text 
mining.  While the bibliography contains some articles on Information 
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing, it does not cover the more 
general articles in these literatures.   
 
Before the 2005 and prior article citations are presented, some overall 
bibliometric quantities will be presented, to provide an overview of the text 
mining field’s infrastructure.  To obtain the bibliometrics, the text mining 
articles retrieved were subjected to bibliometric and phrase frequency 
analyses.  These bibliometric quantities are presented in frequency order, 
highest first.  In the first category presented (Important Phrases), the 
ordering is by number of words in phrase, then by frequency. 
 
QUERY USED TO RETRIEVE 2005 AND PRIOR TEXT MINING 
ARTICLES 
 
(search engine* OR relevance feedback OR document retrieval OR 
information filtering OR database tomography OR information retrieval OR 
(query SAME (TREC OR web OR retrieval performance OR relevant 
document* OR vector space model* OR document collection* OR term 
independence OR syntactic term mismatch* OR coordinated index concept* 
OR text OR texts OR (n gram* OR ngram*) OR information OR document* 
OR language OR boolean OR LSI)) OR ((text OR texts)  SAME (search* 
OR knowledge discovery OR retrieval OR queries OR information 
extraction OR mining)) OR (search* SAME (TREC OR bitext OR textual 
OR terms OR hypertext OR (fulltext OR full text OR freetext OR free text) 
OR hotbot OR LSI OR YAHOO OR relevance judgment* OR ALTAVISTA 
OR bibliographic OR boolean OR internet OR world wide web OR natural 
language OR keyword*)) OR (data mining SAME (document* OR term 
frequenc*)) OR (text mining) OR (document* SAME (LSI OR queries OR 
querying)) OR (documents SAME (search* OR boolean OR clustering) OR 
((free text OR freetext OR full text OR fulltext) SAME retrieval) OR (latent 
semantic indexing SAME (search* OR retrieval OR document*)) OR 
(queries SAME (textual OR internet OR TREC))  OR ((searches OR 
 249
searching) SAME (documents OR TREC)))) NOT (gene OR forest OR 
fuzzy sets OR fuzzy rules OR fuzzy systems OR fuzzy logic OR frames OR 
heuristics OR logic program* OR scheduling OR detection OR data set* OR 
signals OR spatial data OR simulations OR (rulebased OR rule based) OR 
rule induction OR time series OR temperature OR speech recognition OR 
transactions OR optical OR numerical OR multivariate OR molecular OR 
membership functions OR regression OR radio OR pruning OR polynomial 
OR planning OR petri OR itemset* OR configuration OR horn OR hiv OR 
audio OR atomic OR expert system* OR KBS OR operator OR (search 
SAME (evidence OR clinical OR sequence* OR video OR trial* OR 
treatment* OR patients OR protein* OR object* OR temporal OR folate OR 
drug* OR disease* OR depression OR data synthesis OR mortality OR 
injury OR morbidity OR medications OR image* OR hypertension OR 
cancer OR blood OR blast OR breast OR atrial OR acid OR caries OR 
chemical OR risk OR therapy OR motion OR tabu OR stroke OR pressure 
OR program OR multimedia OR randomized)) OR (rules SAME (database 
OR query)) OR (query SAME (object* OR linear OR pictorial OR algebra* 
OR amino OR DNA OR genome OR graphical OR temporal OR signature* 
OR video data OR visual OR sequences OR program OR protein*)) OR 
(queries SAME (linear OR algorithm*)) OR (program SAME (database OR 
sequence* OR protein*)) OR (network* SAME (model* OR video OR 
distributed)) OR (knowledge SAME objects) OR (image* SAME 
(information OR video OR data OR algorithm* OR feature* OR matching 
OR model OR content OR databases OR digital OR motion OR shape OR 
multimedia OR representation OR object* OR processing)) OR (fuzzy 
SAME data) OR (data SAME (folate OR depression OR disease* OR factors 
OR complexity OR genome OR glucose OR biological OR infection* OR 
acid OR articles OR costs OR attributes OR blood OR children OR surgery 
OR sexual OR shape OR therapy OR transmission OR warfarin OR calcium 
OR medline OR stroke OR pulmonary OR morbidity OR mortality OR 
neural OR learning OR pregnancy OR mutations OR object OR objects OR 
drug* OR human OR treatment* OR trial* OR patients))) 
 
UPDATE FOR DATA OBTAINED IN OCTOBER 2007 
(ABBREVIATED QUERY USED) 
 
PROLIFIC TEXT MINING AUTHORS 
 
Author Record Count % of 895 
KOSTOFF, RN 13 1.4525% 
 250
CHEN, HC 7 0.7821% 
KATOH, M 7 0.7821% 
CHAU, M 6 0.6704% 
DEGEMMIS, M 6 0.6704% 
LOPS, P 6 0.6704% 
BREMER, EG 5 0.5587% 
CHIEN, LF 5 0.5587% 
DESESA, C 5 0.5587% 
FUKETA, M 5 0.5587% 
HIRSCHMAN, L 5 0.5587% 
KARYPIS, G 5 0.5587% 
LEE, GG 5 0.5587% 
LI, S 5 0.5587% 
NATARAJAN, J 5 0.5587% 
SEMERARO, G 5 0.5587% 
TAN, SB 5 0.5587% 
VALENCIA, A 5 0.5587% 
ADEVA, JJG 4 0.4469% 
ATLAM, ES 4 0.4469% 
BLASCHKE, C 4 0.4469% 
BORK, P 4 0.4469% 
CHEN, H 4 0.4469% 
CHEN, X 4 0.4469% 
CHIANG, JH 4 0.4469% 
CORCHADO, JM 4 0.4469% 
DIAZ, F 4 0.4469% 
DUBITZKY, W 4 0.4469% 
FDEZ-RIVEROLA, F 4 0.4469% 
HACK, CJ 4 0.4469% 
HU, XH 4 0.4469% 
HU, ZZ 4 0.4469% 
IGLESIAS, EL 4 0.4469% 
KAMEL, MS 4 0.4469% 
KIMURA, F 4 0.4469% 
KRALLINGER, M 4 0.4469% 
LEE, CH 4 0.4469% 
LI, JZ 4 0.4469% 
LIU, Y 4 0.4469% 
MA, WY 4 0.4469% 
MALPOHL, G 4 0.4469% 
 251
MENDEZ, JR 4 0.4469% 
MONS, B 4 0.4469% 
MORITA, K 4 0.4469% 
OHYAMA, W 4 0.4469% 
PAL, SK 4 0.4469% 
RYU, KH 4 0.4469% 
SCHNEIDER, KM 4 0.4469% 
SMALHEISER, NR 4 0.4469% 
SRINIVASAN, P 4 0.4469% 
TANG, J 4 0.4469% 
TSHITEYA, R 4 0.4469% 
WAKABAYASHI, T 4 0.4469% 
WANG, C 4 0.4469% 
WANG, DL 4 0.4469% 
WEI, CP 4 0.4469% 
WU, CH 4 0.4469% 
XU, H 4 0.4469% 
XU, J 4 0.4469% 
YOON, Y 4 0.4469% 
YU, Y 4 0.4469% 
ZHANG, J 4 0.4469% 
ZHOU, ZH 4 0.4469% 
ABULAISH, M 3 0.3352% 
ANANIADOU, S 3 0.3352% 
AOE, JI 3 0.3352% 
BAO, YB 3 0.3352% 
BI, YX 3 0.3352% 
CARRASCO-OCHOA, JA 3 0.3352% 
CHEN, J 3 0.3352% 
CHEN, SM 3 0.3352% 
CHEN, WL 3 0.3352% 
CHEN, Y 3 0.3352% 
CHIANG, IJ 3 0.3352% 
COLOSIMO, M 3 0.3352% 
COMBARRO, EF 3 0.3352% 
CORREA, RF 3 0.3352% 
CORTES, HD 3 0.3352% 
DEL RIO, JA 3 0.3352% 
DENG, ZH 3 0.3352% 
DEY, L 3 0.3352% 
 252
DIAZ, I 3 0.3352% 
FELDMAN, R 3 0.3352% 
FREEMAN, RT 3 0.3352% 
FRIEDMAN, C 3 0.3352% 
GAO, W 3 0.3352% 
GARCIA-HERNANDEZ, RA 3 0.3352% 
HUANG, HK 3 0.3352% 
HWANG, JH 3 0.3352% 
JENSEN, LJ 3 0.3352% 
KATOH, Y 3 0.3352% 
KIM, HJ 3 0.3352% 
KIM, S 3 0.3352% 
KLOPOTEK, MA 3 0.3352% 
KORS, JA 3 0.3352% 
KOYTCHEFF, RG 3 0.3352% 
LAM, W 3 0.3352% 
LAU, CGY 3 0.3352% 
LEE, C 3 0.3352% 
LEE, JH 3 0.3352% 
LEE, YS 3 0.3352% 
LEWIS, DD 3 0.3352% 
LI, Q 3 0.3352% 
LI, XG 3 0.3352% 
LI, YF 3 0.3352% 
LIN, YM 3 0.3352% 
LIU, HF 3 0.3352% 
LUDERMIR, TB 3 0.3352% 
MARTIN-MERINO, M 3 0.3352% 
MARTINEZ-TRINIDAD, JF 3 0.3352% 
MONTANES, E 3 0.3352% 
MORGAN, AA 3 0.3352% 
MYAENG, SH 3 0.3352% 
NARAYANASWAMY, M 3 0.3352% 
PARK, J 3 0.3352% 
QIAN, TY 3 0.3352% 
QU, YL 3 0.3352% 
RANILLA, J 3 0.3352% 
RAVIKUMAR, KE 3 0.3352% 
RZHETSKY, A 3 0.3352% 
SEBASTIANI, F 3 0.3352% 
 253
SHANG, WQ 3 0.3352% 
SHATKAY, H 3 0.3352% 
SILVA, MJ 3 0.3352% 
TSUJII, J 3 0.3352% 
VIDAL, E 3 0.3352% 
VIJAY-SHANKER, K 3 0.3352% 
WANG, H 3 0.3352% 
WANG, SY 3 0.3352% 
WANG, YZ 3 0.3352% 
YEH, A 3 0.3352% 
YU, G 3 0.3352% 
ZHANG, M 3 0.3352% 
ZHU, HB 3 0.3352% 
ZHU, JB 3 0.3352% 
ZU, GW 3 0.3352% 
ZUO, WL 3 0.3352% 
ABE, K 2 0.2235% 
ABRAHAM, A 2 0.2235% 
ALIFERIS, CF 2 0.2235% 
ALMONAYYES, A 2 0.2235% 
AMANDI, A 2 0.2235% 
AOE, J 2 0.2235% 
APHINYANAPHONGS, Y 2 0.2235% 
ATXA, JMP 2 0.2235% 
BAJIC, VB 2 0.2235% 
BAKER, CJO 2 0.2235% 
BAO, YG 2 0.2235% 
BARAL, C 2 0.2235% 
BASILE, TMA 2 0.2235% 
BASILI, R 2 0.2235% 
BEITZEL, SM 2 0.2235% 
BELL, D 2 0.2235% 
BERENDT, B 2 0.2235% 
BERGER, H 2 0.2235% 
BERRAR, D 2 0.2235% 
BHIMAVARAPU, R 2 0.2235% 
BICHINDARITZ, I 2 0.2235% 
BITTNER, M 2 0.2235% 
BOBERG, J 2 0.2235% 
BORZEMSKI, L 2 0.2235% 
 254
BRATKO, A 2 0.2235% 
CALERA-RUBIO, J 2 0.2235% 
CARDOSO, N 2 0.2235% 
CHANG, HC 2 0.2235% 
CHAVES, M 2 0.2235% 
CHEN, DY 2 0.2235% 
CHEN, EH 2 0.2235% 
CHEN, XY 2 0.2235% 
CHEN, Z 2 0.2235% 
CHENG, T 2 0.2235% 
CHENG, TH 2 0.2235% 
CHOU, WC 2 0.2235% 
CHOWDHURY, A 2 0.2235% 
CHUA, TS 2 0.2235% 
CHUANG, SL 2 0.2235% 
CIESIELSKI, K 2 0.2235% 
CIVERA, J 2 0.2235% 
COHEN, AM 2 0.2235% 
COLLIER, N 2 0.2235% 
COLOMBE, JB 2 0.2235% 
CORMACK, GV 2 0.2235% 
CUI, XH 2 0.2235% 
CZERSKI, D 2 0.2235% 
DAI, HH 2 0.2235% 
DALAMAGAS, T 2 0.2235% 
DAVULCU, H 2 0.2235% 
DE MOOR, B 2 0.2235% 
DEBENHAM, J 2 0.2235% 
DEBNATH, S 2 0.2235% 
DI MAURO, N 2 0.2235% 
DOAN, S 2 0.2235% 
DOBRYNIN, V 2 0.2235% 
DONG, ZY 2 0.2235% 
DRAMINSKI, M 2 0.2235% 
ERHARDT, RAA 2 0.2235% 
ESULI, A 2 0.2235% 
FAGNI, T 2 0.2235% 
FAN, WG 2 0.2235% 
FENG, BQ 2 0.2235% 
FENG, JL 2 0.2235% 
 255
FERILLI, S 2 0.2235% 
FILIPIC, B 2 0.2235% 
FLESCA, S 2 0.2235% 
FRANK, E 2 0.2235% 
FRESKO, M 2 0.2235% 
FRIEDER, O 2 0.2235% 
GALUSHKA, M 2 0.2235% 
GHOSH, J 2 0.2235% 
GILES, CL 2 0.2235% 
GINTER, F 2 0.2235% 
GODOY, D 2 0.2235% 
GORDON, MD 2 0.2235% 
GUAN, JW 2 0.2235% 
GUO, GD 2 0.2235% 
GUO, J 2 0.2235% 
GUO, L 2 0.2235% 
GUO, Y 2 0.2235% 
HAFFNER, P 2 0.2235% 
HAN, H 2 0.2235% 
HE, QM 2 0.2235% 
HE, YL 2 0.2235% 
HERNANDEZ-REYES, E 2 0.2235% 
HERSH, WR 2 0.2235% 
HIDALGO, JMG 2 0.2235% 
HIRSCH, L 2 0.2235% 
HIRSCH, R 2 0.2235% 
HONAVAR, V 2 0.2235% 
HONG, K 2 0.2235% 
HORIGUCHI, S 2 0.2235% 
HOTHO, A 2 0.2235% 
HSIANG, J 2 0.2235% 
HSU, CC 2 0.2235% 
HSU, WL 2 0.2235% 
HU, HP 2 0.2235% 
HU, JS 2 0.2235% 
HU, YF 2 0.2235% 
HUANG, J 2 0.2235% 
HUANG, S 2 0.2235% 
HUANG, XC 2 0.2235% 
HUI, SC 2 0.2235% 
 256
HUNG, CM 2 0.2235% 
INESTA, JM 2 0.2235% 
IOSSIFOV, I 2 0.2235% 
ISHII, N 2 0.2235% 
IVANOVIC, M 2 0.2235% 
JARVINEN, J 2 0.2235% 
JENSEN, EC 2 0.2235% 
JIANG, MH 2 0.2235% 
JIN, Y 2 0.2235% 
JONES, R 2 0.2235% 
JOO, KH 2 0.2235% 
JUAN, A 2 0.2235% 
KADOYA, Y 2 0.2235% 
KAN, MY 2 0.2235% 
KANDEL, A 2 0.2235% 
KANG, BY 2 0.2235% 
KANG, DK 2 0.2235% 
KASHIJI, S 2 0.2235% 
KELL, DB 2 0.2235% 
KIM, SB 2 0.2235% 
KIRSCH, H 2 0.2235% 
KOHLER, J 2 0.2235% 
KOPPEL, M 2 0.2235% 
KUFLIK, T 2 0.2235% 
LAI, KK 2 0.2235% 
LAST, M 2 0.2235% 
LEE, D 2 0.2235% 
LEE, KH 2 0.2235% 
LEE, M 2 0.2235% 
LEE, WS 2 0.2235% 
LERTNATTEE, V 2 0.2235% 
LEVENE, M 2 0.2235% 
LEYDESDORFF, L 2 0.2235% 
LI, CH 2 0.2235% 
LI, QZ 2 0.2235% 
LI, RL 2 0.2235% 
LI, T 2 0.2235% 
LI, X 2 0.2235% 
LI, XX 2 0.2235% 
LI, ZH 2 0.2235% 
 257
LIANG, BY 2 0.2235% 
LIANG, CY 2 0.2235% 
LIAO, SS 2 0.2235% 
LIN, TY 2 0.2235% 
LISI, FA 2 0.2235% 
LIU, B 2 0.2235% 
LIU, H 2 0.2235% 
LIU, J 2 0.2235% 
LIU, RL 2 0.2235% 
LIU, SZ 2 0.2235% 
LIU, T 2 0.2235% 
LIU, TY 2 0.2235% 
LOH, HT 2 0.2235% 
LU, W 2 0.2235% 
LU, YC 2 0.2235% 
LUO, X 2 0.2235% 
LYNAM, TR 2 0.2235% 
MA, ZF 2 0.2235% 
MALIK, R 2 0.2235% 
MARCELLONI, F 2 0.2235% 
MARCOTTE, EM 2 0.2235% 
MARKATOU, M 2 0.2235% 
MARTIN, J 2 0.2235% 
MARTINS, B 2 0.2235% 
MATSUMOTO, Y 2 0.2235% 
MATSUO, Y 2 0.2235% 
MATWIN, S 2 0.2235% 
MENCZER, F 2 0.2235% 
MENG, B 2 0.2235% 
MILANESI, L 2 0.2235% 
MONTES-Y-GOMEZ, M 2 0.2235% 
MOONEY, RJ 2 0.2235% 
MORGAN, A 2 0.2235% 
MOSCHITTI, A 2 0.2235% 
MUNOZ, A 2 0.2235% 
MURAI, T 2 0.2235% 
MURATA, M 2 0.2235% 
NAM, T 2 0.2235% 
NAPOLI, A 2 0.2235% 
NENADIC, G 2 0.2235% 
 258
NG, MK 2 0.2235% 
NIE, JY 2 0.2235% 
OGIHARA, M 2 0.2235% 
OKUMURA, M 2 0.2235% 
PALAKAL, M 2 0.2235% 
PAN, H 2 0.2235% 
PANT, G 2 0.2235% 
PARK, JC 2 0.2235% 
PARK, SC 2 0.2235% 
PATHAK, P 2 0.2235% 
PATTERSON, D 2 0.2235% 
PENG, H 2 0.2235% 
PEREZ-SANCHO, C 2 0.2235% 
PFAHRINGER, B 2 0.2235% 
PHILIPPI, S 2 0.2235% 
PONS-PORRATA, A 2 0.2235% 
POTOK, TE 2 0.2235% 
QIN, JL 2 0.2235% 
QUARESMA, P 2 0.2235% 
RADOVANOVIC, M 2 0.2235% 
RAMAKRISHNAN, IV 2 0.2235% 
RAMANI, AK 2 0.2235% 
REBHOLZ-SCHUHMANN, D 2 0.2235% 
RIM, HC 2 0.2235% 
ROONEY, N 2 0.2235% 
ROSENFELD, B 2 0.2235% 
ROUSU, J 2 0.2235% 
RUCH, P 2 0.2235% 
RUEGG, A 2 0.2235% 
SAEEDI, M 2 0.2235% 
SALAKOSKI, T 2 0.2235% 
SCHUEMIE, MJ 2 0.2235% 
SELLIS, T 2 0.2235% 
SHAH, PK 2 0.2235% 
SHAWE-TAYLOR, J 2 0.2235% 
SHEN, H 2 0.2235% 
SHIN, K 2 0.2235% 
SIEBES, A 2 0.2235% 
SILVA, C 2 0.2235% 
SILVESCU, A 2 0.2235% 
 259
SINGH, P 2 0.2235% 
SMITH, A 2 0.2235% 
SMITH, C 2 0.2235% 
SONG, DW 2 0.2235% 
SONG, IY 2 0.2235% 
SPECHT, M 2 0.2235% 
STAMATATOS, E 2 0.2235% 
STANIMIROVIC, DB 2 0.2235% 
STATNIKOV, A 2 0.2235% 
SUMITOMO, T 2 0.2235% 
SUNG, TY 2 0.2235% 
SWANSON, DR 2 0.2235% 
TAKAGI, T 2 0.2235% 
TAKAHASHI, H 2 0.2235% 
TAKAHASHI, M 2 0.2235% 
TAKAHASHI, S 2 0.2235% 
TAKAMURA, H 2 0.2235% 
TAKEUCHI, K 2 0.2235% 
TAN, HZ 2 0.2235% 
TANAKA, K 2 0.2235% 
TANG, N 2 0.2235% 
TANG, SW 2 0.2235% 
TEZUKA, T 2 0.2235% 
THEERAMUNKONG, T 2 0.2235% 
TORII, M 2 0.2235% 
TORVIK, VI 2 0.2235% 
TOUSSAINT, Y 2 0.2235% 
TSUDA, K 2 0.2235% 
VELASQUEZ, JD 2 0.2235% 
VILLASENOR-PINEDA, L 2 0.2235% 
WAGNER, C 2 0.2235% 
WANG, JB 2 0.2235% 
WANG, JY 2 0.2235% 
WANG, K 2 0.2235% 
WANG, KH 2 0.2235% 
WANG, T 2 0.2235% 
WANG, W 2 0.2235% 
WANG, ZH 2 0.2235% 
WEEBER, M 2 0.2235% 
WEIKUM, G 2 0.2235% 
 260
WERNER, T 2 0.2235% 
WHITE, PS 2 0.2235% 
WIERZCHON, ST 2 0.2235% 
WILBUR, WJ 2 0.2235% 
WINKEL, KJ 2 0.2235% 
WINTERS, RS 2 0.2235% 
WITTE, R 2 0.2235% 
WREN, JD 2 0.2235% 
WU, LJ 2 0.2235% 
WU, SH 2 0.2235% 
WU, ZH 2 0.2235% 
XU, C 2 0.2235% 
XU, P 2 0.2235% 
XUE, GR 2 0.2235% 
YAMADA, T 2 0.2235% 
YAN, PL 2 0.2235% 
YANG, HC 2 0.2235% 
YANG, J 2 0.2235% 
YANG, ZY 2 0.2235% 
YAO, TS 2 0.2235% 
YEH, AS 2 0.2235% 
YIN, HJ 2 0.2235% 
YOO, I 2 0.2235% 
YU, H 2 0.2235% 
YU, L 2 0.2235% 
YU, PS 2 0.2235% 
YU, S 2 0.2235% 
ZAKI, MJ 2 0.2235% 
ZELIKOVITZ, S 2 0.2235% 
ZHANG, ML 2 0.2235% 
ZHANG, Q 2 0.2235% 
ZHANG, YH 2 0.2235% 
ZHAO, Y 2 0.2235% 
ZHONG, N 2 0.2235% 
ZHONG, S 2 0.2235% 
ZHOU, XZ 2 0.2235% 
ZHOU, YL 2 0.2235% 
ZHU, QS 2 0.2235% 
ZHUANG, L 2 0.2235% 
 
 261
PROLIFIC TEXT MINING COUNTRIES 
 
Country/Territory Record Count % of 895 
USA 227 25.3631% 
PEOPLES R CHINA 149 16.6480% 
JAPAN 74 8.2682% 
GERMANY 56 6.2570% 
SOUTH KOREA 54 6.0335% 
ENGLAND 49 5.4749% 
SPAIN 43 4.8045% 
TAIWAN 43 4.8045% 
CANADA 39 4.3575% 
ITALY 35 3.9106% 
AUSTRALIA 29 3.2402% 
SINGAPORE 22 2.4581% 
INDIA 20 2.2346% 
FRANCE 18 2.0112% 
ISRAEL 18 2.0112% 
NETHERLANDS 18 2.0112% 
GREECE 17 1.8994% 
POLAND 15 1.6760% 
SWITZERLAND 12 1.3408% 
NORTH IRELAND 11 1.2291% 
PORTUGAL 10 1.1173% 
MEXICO 9 1.0056% 
BRAZIL 8 0.8939% 
FINLAND 7 0.7821% 
TURKEY 7 0.7821% 
THAILAND 6 0.6704% 
NEW ZEALAND 5 0.5587% 
SLOVENIA 5 0.5587% 
BELGIUM 4 0.4469% 
AUSTRIA 3 0.3352% 
CHILE 3 0.3352% 
CZECH REPUBLIC 3 0.3352% 
HUNGARY 3 0.3352% 
IRELAND 3 0.3352% 
NORWAY 3 0.3352% 
RUSSIA 3 0.3352% 
SWEDEN 3 0.3352% 
 262
ARGENTINA 2 0.2235% 
CUBA 2 0.2235% 
EGYPT 2 0.2235% 
JORDAN 2 0.2235% 
KUWAIT 2 0.2235% 
SCOTLAND 2 0.2235% 
SERBIA 2 0.2235% 
U ARAB EMIRATES 2 0.2235% 
VIETNAM 2 0.2235% 
IRAN 1 0.1117% 
LITHUANIA 1 0.1117% 
MALAYSIA 1 0.1117% 
OMAN 1 0.1117% 
QATAR 1 0.1117% 
SLOVAKIA 1 0.1117% 
SOUTH AFRICA 1 0.1117% 
 
PROLIFIC TEXT MINING INSTITUTIONS 
 
Institution Name Record Count % of 895 
TSING HUA UNIV 21 2.3464% 
CHINESE ACAD SCI 17 1.8994% 
OFF NAVAL RES 13 1.4525% 
UNIV TOKYO 11 1.2291% 
UNIV BARI 10 1.1173% 
UNIV ILLINOIS 10 1.1173% 
UNIV ULSTER 10 1.1173% 
ACAD SINICA 9 1.0056% 
NANYANG TECHNOL UNIV 9 1.0056% 
NATL UNIV SINGAPORE 9 1.0056% 
UNIV ARIZONA 9 1.0056% 
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIV 8 0.8939% 
COLUMBIA UNIV 8 0.8939% 
UNIV MINNESOTA 8 0.8939% 
UNIV QUEENSLAND 8 0.8939% 
UNIV WATERLOO 8 0.8939% 
BEN GURION UNIV NEGEV 7 0.7821% 
CNR 7 0.7821% 
CSIC 7 0.7821% 
KOREA ADV INST SCI & TECHNOL 7 0.7821% 
 263
NATL CHENG KUNG UNIV 7 0.7821% 
NORTHEASTERN UNIV 7 0.7821% 
PEKING UNIV 7 0.7821% 
POLISH ACAD SCI 7 0.7821% 
UNIV HONG KONG 7 0.7821% 
UNIV KARLSRUHE 7 0.7821% 
UNIV MANCHESTER 7 0.7821% 
UNIV SALAMANCA 7 0.7821% 
ZHEJIANG UNIV 7 0.7821% 
BAR ILAN UNIV 6 0.6704% 
CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG 6 0.6704% 
DREXEL UNIV 6 0.6704% 
FUDAN UNIV 6 0.6704% 
HUAZHONG UNIV SCI & TECHNOL 6 0.6704% 
INDIAN INST TECHNOL 6 0.6704% 
INST INFOCOMM RES 6 0.6704% 
M&M MED BIOINFORMAT 6 0.6704% 
NATL CANC CTR 6 0.6704% 
NATL TAIWAN UNIV 6 0.6704% 
NATL TAIWAN UNIV SCI & TECHNOL 6 0.6704% 
POHANG UNIV SCI & TECHNOL 6 0.6704% 
SHANGHAI JIAO TONG UNIV 6 0.6704% 
UNIV CALIF DAVIS 6 0.6704% 
WUHAN UNIV 6 0.6704% 
CHONBUK NATL UNIV 5 0.5587% 
EUROPEAN MOL BIOL LAB 5 0.5587% 
GEORGETOWN UNIV 5 0.5587% 
HARBIN INST TECHNOL 5 0.5587% 
HONG KONG POLYTECH UNIV 5 0.5587% 
IBM CORP 5 0.5587% 
INDIANA UNIV 5 0.5587% 
KOREA UNIV 5 0.5587% 
MITRE CORP 5 0.5587% 
NATL RES COUNCIL CANADA 5 0.5587% 
PENN STATE UNIV 5 0.5587% 
RUTGERS STATE UNIV 5 0.5587% 
UNIV IOWA 5 0.5587% 
UNIV SYDNEY 5 0.5587% 
UNIV TEXAS 5 0.5587% 
UNIV TOKUSHIMA 5 0.5587% 
 264
UNIV VIGO 5 0.5587% 
UNIV WASHINGTON 5 0.5587% 
WROCLAW TECH UNIV 5 0.5587% 
ANNA UNIV 4 0.4469% 
BEIJING UNIV POSTS & TELECOMMUN 4 0.4469% 
CHUNGBUK NATL UNIV 4 0.4469% 
DDL OMNI ENGN LLC 4 0.4469% 
FLORIDA INT UNIV 4 0.4469% 
GEORGIA INST TECHNOL 4 0.4469% 
HARVARD UNIV 4 0.4469% 
HEBREW UNIV JERUSALEM 4 0.4469% 
IIT 4 0.4469% 
INDIAN STAT INST 4 0.4469% 
INFORMAT & COMMUN UNIV 4 0.4469% 
JILIN UNIV 4 0.4469% 
JOZEF STEFAN INST 4 0.4469% 
MAX DELBRUCK CTR MOL MED 4 0.4469% 
MICROSOFT RES ASIA 4 0.4469% 
MIE UNIV 4 0.4469% 
MIT 4 0.4469% 
NANJING UNIV 4 0.4469% 
NATL TECH UNIV ATHENS 4 0.4469% 
NATL TSING HUA UNIV 4 0.4469% 
NEW JERSEY INST TECHNOL 4 0.4469% 
NORTHWESTERN UNIV 4 0.4469% 
OSAKA UNIV 4 0.4469% 
S CHINA UNIV TECHNOL 4 0.4469% 
UNIV AMSTERDAM 4 0.4469% 
UNIV BASQUE COUNTRY 4 0.4469% 
UNIV BIELEFELD 4 0.4469% 
UNIV DELAWARE 4 0.4469% 
UNIV MICHIGAN 4 0.4469% 
UNIV OTTAWA 4 0.4469% 
UNIV PASSAU 4 0.4469% 
UNIV PENN 4 0.4469% 
UNIV POLITECN VALENCIA 4 0.4469% 
UNIV TECHNOL SYDNEY 4 0.4469% 
UNIV TSUKUBA 4 0.4469% 
UNIV VALLADOLID 4 0.4469% 
XIAN JIAOTONG UNIV 4 0.4469% 
 265
BEIJING JIAOTONG UNIV 3 0.3352% 
BIOALMA 3 0.3352% 
CHAOYANG UNIV TECHNOL 3 0.3352% 
CITY UNIV HONG KONG 3 0.3352% 
CNRS 3 0.3352% 
CONCORDIA UNIV 3 0.3352% 
ELECT & TELECOMMUN RES INST 3 0.3352% 
FUZHOU UNIV 3 0.3352% 
HARBIN ENGN UNIV 3 0.3352% 
HUMBOLDT UNIV 3 0.3352% 
INAOE 3 0.3352% 
IOWA STATE UNIV 3 0.3352% 
KATHOLIEKE UNIV LEUVEN 3 0.3352% 
KYOTO UNIV 3 0.3352% 
LEIDEN UNIV 3 0.3352% 
MONASH UNIV 3 0.3352% 
NARA INST SCI & TECHNOL 3 0.3352% 
NATL KAOHSIUNG UNIV APPL SCI 3 0.3352% 
NATL SUN YAT SEN UNIV 3 0.3352% 
OKAYAMA UNIV 3 0.3352% 
OREGON HLTH & SCI UNIV 3 0.3352% 
QUEENS UNIV 3 0.3352% 
QUEENS UNIV BELFAST 3 0.3352% 
SEOUL NATL UNIV 3 0.3352% 
SOGANG UNIV 3 0.3352% 
STANFORD UNIV 3 0.3352% 
TAIPEI MED UNIV 3 0.3352% 
TIANJIN UNIV 3 0.3352% 
UNAM 3 0.3352% 
UNIV CALIF BERKELEY 3 0.3352% 
UNIV CHICAGO 3 0.3352% 
UNIV COLL LONDON 3 0.3352% 
UNIV EUROPEA MADRID 3 0.3352% 
UNIV FED PERNAMBUCO 3 0.3352% 
UNIV FLORIDA 3 0.3352% 
UNIV HELSINKI 3 0.3352% 
UNIV LISBON 3 0.3352% 
UNIV MARYLAND 3 0.3352% 
UNIV MASSACHUSETTS 3 0.3352% 
UNIV NEW S WALES 3 0.3352% 
 266
UNIV OVIEDO 3 0.3352% 
UNIV PITTSBURGH 3 0.3352% 
UNIV SCI & TECHNOL CHINA 3 0.3352% 
UNIV SEOUL 3 0.3352% 
UNIV SO CALIF 3 0.3352% 
UNIV SOUTHAMPTON 3 0.3352% 
UNIV TENNESSEE 3 0.3352% 
UNIV TWENTE 3 0.3352% 
UNIV UTAH 3 0.3352% 
UNIV WAIKATO 3 0.3352% 
UNIV ZURICH 3 0.3352% 
VIRGINIA POLYTECH INST & STATE UNIV 3 0.3352% 
AICHI INST TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
AIST 2 0.2235% 
ARISTOTLE UNIV THESSALONIKI 2 0.2235% 
ARIZONA STATE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
AT&T LABS RES 2 0.2235% 
ATHENS UNIV ECON & BUSINESS 2 0.2235% 
BENTLEY COLL 2 0.2235% 
BIOALMA SL 2 0.2235% 
BOOZ ALLEN HAMILTON 2 0.2235% 
CHANG JUNG UNIV 2 0.2235% 
CHILDRENS HOSP PHILADELPHIA 2 0.2235% 
CHONGQING UNIV 2 0.2235% 
CHUNG ANG UNIV 2 0.2235% 
CUNY COLL STATEN ISL 2 0.2235% 
DALHOUSIE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
DAVID D LEWIS CONSULTING 2 0.2235% 
DEAKIN UNIV 2 0.2235% 
DONG A UNIV 2 0.2235% 
ERASMUS UNIV 2 0.2235% 
FLORIDA ATLANTIC UNIV 2 0.2235% 
FUJIAN NORMAL UNIV 2 0.2235% 
GYEONGIN NATL UNIV EDUC 2 0.2235% 
HOKKAIDO UNIV 2 0.2235% 
HUNAN UNIV 2 0.2235% 
HUNGARIAN ACAD SCI 2 0.2235% 
IDIAP RES INST 2 0.2235% 
INDIANA UNIV PURDUE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
INSERM 2 0.2235% 
 267
INST DEF ANAL 2 0.2235% 
JADAVPUR UNIV 2 0.2235% 
JAMIA MILLIA ISLAMIA 2 0.2235% 
JAPAN ADV INST SCI & TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
KUWAIT UNIV 2 0.2235% 
MAEBASHI INST TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
MING CHUAN UNIV 2 0.2235% 
MITSUI ASSET TRUST & BANKING CO LTD 2 0.2235% 
NATL CENT UNIV 2 0.2235% 
NATL CHIAO TUNG UNIV 2 0.2235% 
NATL CTR TEXT MIN 2 0.2235% 
NATL INST INFORMAT 2 0.2235% 
NATL LIB MED 2 0.2235% 
NATL TAIWAN NORMAL UNIV 2 0.2235% 
NATL UNIV DEF TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
NIPISSING UNIV 2 0.2235% 
NTT CORP 2 0.2235% 
OAK RIDGE NATL LAB 2 0.2235% 
OPEN UNIV 2 0.2235% 
POLITECN MILAN 2 0.2235% 
POZNAN TECH UNIV 2 0.2235% 
QUEENSLAND UNIV TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
RADBOUD UNIV NIJMEGEN 2 0.2235% 
RENSSELAER POLYTECH INST 2 0.2235% 
SAN JOSE STATE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SELCUK UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SHIMANE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SILPAKORN UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SIMON FRASER UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SINGAPORE MANAGEMENT UNIV 2 0.2235% 
ST PETERSBURG STATE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
SWISS FED INST TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
TEL AVIV UNIV 2 0.2235% 
TOHOKU UNIV 2 0.2235% 
TOKYO INST TECHNOL 2 0.2235% 
TOSHIBA SOLUT CORP 2 0.2235% 
TRANSLAT GENOM RES INST 2 0.2235% 
UMIST 2 0.2235% 
UNIV AEGEAN 2 0.2235% 
UNIV ALBERTA 2 0.2235% 
 268
UNIV ALICANTE 2 0.2235% 
UNIV CALABRIA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV CALIF LOS ANGELES 2 0.2235% 
UNIV CALIF SANTA BARBARA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV CARLOS III MADRID 2 0.2235% 
UNIV CINCINNATI 2 0.2235% 
UNIV DORTMUND 2 0.2235% 
UNIV DUBLIN TRINITY COLL 2 0.2235% 
UNIV ELECT SCI & TECHNOL CHINA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV EVORA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV HOSP GENEVA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV JAEN 2 0.2235% 
UNIV JAUME 1 2 0.2235% 
UNIV KASSEL 2 0.2235% 
UNIV LJUBLJANA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV LONDON 2 0.2235% 
UNIV LONDON ROYAL HOLLOWAY & BEDFORD NEW COLL 2
 0.2235% 
UNIV MED CTR ROTTERDAM 2 0.2235% 
UNIV MILAN 2 0.2235% 
UNIV MISSOURI 2 0.2235% 
UNIV MONTREAL 2 0.2235% 
UNIV MUNICH 2 0.2235% 
UNIV NEBRASKA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV NOVI SAD 2 0.2235% 
UNIV OKLAHOMA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV ORIENTE 2 0.2235% 
UNIV PADUA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV PATRAS 2 0.2235% 
UNIV PISA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV PORTO 2 0.2235% 
UNIV ROCHESTER 2 0.2235% 
UNIV ROMA TOR VERGATA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV S FLORIDA 2 0.2235% 
UNIV SAO PAULO 2 0.2235% 
UNIV SHEFFIELD 2 0.2235% 
UNIV SURREY 2 0.2235% 
UNIV TURKU 2 0.2235% 
UNIV UTRECHT 2 0.2235% 
UNIV WISCONSIN 2 0.2235% 
 269
VANDERBILT UNIV 2 0.2235% 
YALE UNIV 2 0.2235% 
YONSEI UNIV 2 0.2235% 
 
PROLIFIC TEXT MINING JOURNALS 
 
Source Title Record Count % of 895 
BMC BIOINFORMATICS 38 4.2458% 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 30 3.3520% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
 28 3.1285% 
BIOINFORMATICS 19 2.1229% 
EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 17 1.8994% 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 16 1.7877% 
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, 
PROCEEDINGS 13 1.4525% 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 13
 1.4525% 
KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 13 1.4525% 
JOURNAL OF MACHINE LEARNING RESEARCH 12 1.3408% 
ADVANCED DATA MINING AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS
 11 1.2291% 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 10 1.1173% 
BRIEFINGS IN BIOINFORMATICS 9 1.0056% 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 9 1.0056% 
ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 8
 0.8939% 
IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS 7
 0.7821% 
SOFT COMPUTING 7 0.7821% 
ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
APPLIED SOFT COMPUTING 6 0.6704% 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 6 0.6704% 
DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 6 0.6704% 
 270
DISCOVERY SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 6 0.6704% 
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 6 0.6704% 
JOURNAL OF UNIVERSAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 6 0.6704% 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 6
 0.6704% 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 6 0.6704% 
ACM TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 5
 0.5587% 
ADVANCES IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 5 0.5587% 
DATA WAREHOUSING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, 
PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
FRONTIERS OF WWW RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - APWEB 
2006, PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
INFORMATION SCIENCES 5 0.5587% 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
ASSOCIATION 5 0.5587% 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
TECHNOLOGICAL FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 5
 0.5587% 
TEXT, SPEECH AND DIALOGUE, PROCEEDINGS 5 0.5587% 
WEB TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - APWEB 
2005 5 0.5587% 
ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 4
 0.4469% 
ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING, 
PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
AI 2004: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
 271
AI 2005: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 4
 0.4469% 
COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS
 4 0.4469% 
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
CONTENT COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
DATA & KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING 4 0.4469% 
DATA INTEGRATION IN THE LIFE SCIENCES, PROCEEDINGS 4
 0.4469% 
FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 4
 0.4469% 
FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS
 4 0.4469% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE 
INTELLIGENCE 4 0.4469% 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY 4 0.4469% 
INNOVATIONS IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 4
 0.4469% 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS
 4 0.4469% 
INTELLIGENT CONTROL AND AUTOMATION 4 0.4469% 
INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED 
LEARNING - IDEAL 2006, PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INFORMATICS 4
 0.4469% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
TOOLS 4 0.4469% 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS 4 0.4469% 
MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2006, PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2005, PROCEEDINGS
 4 0.4469% 
NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING 4 0.4469% 
NEUROCOMPUTING 4 0.4469% 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
PROGRESS IN PATTERN RECOGNITION, IMAGE ANALYSIS AND 
APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 4 0.4469% 
ADVANCES IN DATA MINING 3 0.3352% 
 272
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2006, PT 1 3
 0.3352% 
ADVANCES IN WEB INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3
 0.3352% 
ADVANCES IN WEB MINING AND WEB USAGE ANALYSIS 3
 0.3352% 
COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS - ICCSA 2005, 
PT 2 3 0.3352% 
DATA MINING: THEORY, METHODOLOGY, TECHNIQUES, AND 
APPLICATIONS 3 0.3352% 
DIGITAL LIBRARIES: IMPLEMENTING STRATEGIES AND 
SHARING EXPERIENCES, PROCEEDINGS 3 0.3352% 
DIGITAL LIBRARIES: INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION AND 
CROSS-FERTILIZATION, PROCEEDINGS 3 0.3352% 
DOCUMENT ANALYSIS SYSTEMS VII, PROCEEDINGS 3
 0.3352% 
DRUG DISCOVERY TODAY 3 0.3352% 
FUNDAMENTA INFORMATICAE 3 0.3352% 
GRID AND COOPERATIVE COMPUTING GCC 2004, PROCEEDINGS
 3 0.3352% 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3 0.3352% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & 
DECISION MAKING 3 0.3352% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 3
 0.3352% 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 3
 0.3352% 
JOURNAL OF DATABASE MANAGEMENT 3 0.3352% 
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 3 0.3352% 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3
 0.3352% 
JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3
 0.3352% 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2005 3
 0.3352% 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN LIFE SCIENCE LITERATURE, 
PROCEEDINGS 3 0.3352% 
KNOWLEDGE SCIENCE, ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT 3
 0.3352% 
 273
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 4, PROCEEDINGS 3 0.3352% 
MACHINE LEARNING 3 0.3352% 
NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING, PT 3, PROCEEDINGS 3
 0.3352% 
NUCLEIC ACIDS RESEARCH 3 0.3352% 
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY 3 0.3352% 
PROGRESS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3
 0.3352% 
SEMANTIC WEB - ASWC 2006, PROCEEDINGS 3 0.3352% 
WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3
 0.3352% 
WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING - WISE 2005 3
 0.3352% 
ACTIVE MINING 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCED WEB AND NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES, AND 
APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT COMPUTING, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS
 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS VI, PROCEEDINGS
 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN MACHINE LEARNING AND CYBERNETICS 2
 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN NATURAL COMPUTATION, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS
 2 0.2235% 
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2006, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ANNUAL REVIEW OF INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 2 0.2235% 
APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 2 0.2235% 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: METHODOLOGY, SYSTEMS, AND 
APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS: FORMAL MODELS AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS - ICANN 2005, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 2
 0.2235% 
ASIST 2003: PROCEEDINGS OF THE 66TH ASIST ANNUAL 
MEETING, VOL 40, 2003 2 0.2235% 
COMPARATIVE AND FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS 2 0.2235% 
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY 2 0.2235% 
 274
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 2 0.2235% 
COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS - ICCSA 2006, 
PT 2 2 0.2235% 
CURRENT TOPICS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2 0.2235% 
DATABASES IN NETWORKED INFORMATION SYSTEMS, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING AND INTERNET TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
 2 0.2235% 
GENOME BIOLOGY 2 0.2235% 
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 2 0.2235% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS MAN AND CYBERNETICS 
PART A-SYSTEMS AND HUMANS 2 0.2235% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS MAN AND CYBERNETICS 
PART B-CYBERNETICS 2 0.2235% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE REASONING 2
 0.2235% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMPUTER MATHEMATICS 2
 0.2235% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY 2 0.2235% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PATTERN RECOGNITION AND 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2 0.2235% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SYSTEMS SCIENCE 2
 0.2235% 
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL SCIENCE 2 0.2235% 
JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION 2 0.2235% 
JOURNAL OF WEB SEMANTICS 2 0.2235% 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2006, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
KNOWLEDGE EXPLORATION IN LIFE SCIENCE INFORMATICS, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA MINING IN PATTERN 
RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2005, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ON THE MOVE TO MEANINGFUL INTERNET SYSTEMS 2005: OTM 
2005 WORKSHOPS, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
ONLINE INFORMATION REVIEW 2 0.2235% 
PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING: APPLICATIONS AND 
TECHNOLOGIES, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
 275
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS 2 0.2235% 
PATTERN RECOGNITION 2 0.2235% 
PLOS BIOLOGY 2 0.2235% 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 2 0.2235% 
RESEARCH AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY FOR DIGITAL 
LIBRARIES 2 0.2235% 
ROUGH SETS AND KNOWLEDGE TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS
 2 0.2235% 
ROUGH SETS, FUZZY SETS, DATA MINING, AND GRANULAR 
COMPUTING, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY AND METHODS 2 0.2235% 
STRING PROCESSING AND INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
TECHNOLOGY ANALYSIS & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 2
 0.2235% 
TECHNOMETRICS 2 0.2235% 
TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SYSTEMS BIOLOGY V
 2 0.2235% 
WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2006 WORKSHOPS, 
PROCEEDINGS 2 0.2235% 
WORLD WIDE WEB-INTERNET AND WEB INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 2 0.2235% 
ABSTRACTION, REFORMULATION AND APPROXIMATION, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ACCESSING MULTILINGUAL INFORMATION REPOSITORIES 1
 0.1117% 
ACM COMPUTING SURVEYS 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE - IBERAMIA 2004 1
 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN DATABASE TECHNOLOGY - EDBT 2006 1
 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT COMPUTING, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS
 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN NATURAL COMPUTATION, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS
 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2005, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
 276
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2005, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2006, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN XML INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 1 0.1117% 
ADVANCES IN XML INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND 
EVALUATION 1 0.1117% 
AI COMMUNICATIONS 1 0.1117% 
AI*IA2005: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ANALYTICAL BIOCHEMISTRY 1 0.1117% 
APPLIED SPECTROSCOPY 1 0.1117% 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND SIMULATION 1 0.1117% 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS: BIOLOGICAL INSPIRATIONS - 
ICANN 2005, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
AUDIO AND VIDEO BASED BIOMETRIC PERSON 
AUTHENTICATION, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
AUTOMATION IN CONSTRUCTION 1 0.1117% 
AUTONOMOUS INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS: AGENTS AND DATA 
MINING, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
BIOCHEMICAL SOCIETY TRANSACTIONS 1 0.1117% 
BIOLOGICAL AND MEDICAL DATA ANALYSIS, PROCEEDINGS
 1 0.1117% 
BIOSYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
BIOTECHNOLOGY ADVANCES 1 0.1117% 
BMC GENOMICS 1 0.1117% 
BONE 1 0.1117% 
BT TECHNOLOGY JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
CANCER BIOLOGY & THERAPY 1 0.1117% 
CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR LIFE SCIENCES 1 0.1117% 
CELLULAR IMMUNOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
CHINESE JOURNAL OF ELECTRONICS 1 0.1117% 
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 1 0.1117% 
COMPARATIVE BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY D-GENOMICS 
& PROTEOMICS 1 0.1117% 
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF MULTILINGUAL INFORMATION 
ACCESS SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
 277
COMPONENT-BASED SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, PROCEEDINGS
 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE - ICCS 2005, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE - ICCS 2006, PT 3, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCES - ISCIS 2005, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTER COMMUNICATIONS 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTER MUSIC MODELING AND RETRIEVAL 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTER NETWORKS 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTER SCIENCE - THEORY AND APPLICATIONS 1
 0.1117% 
COMPUTERS & EDUCATION 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTERS & GRAPHICS-UK 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTERS & OPERATIONS RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
COMPUTERS ENVIRONMENT AND URBAN SYSTEMS 1
 0.1117% 
COMPUTING AND INFORMATICS 1 0.1117% 
CONCEPTUAL MODELING - ER 2004, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
COOPERATIVE DESIGN, VISUALIZATION, AND ENGINEERING, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
COOPERATIVE INFORMATION AGENTS X, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN BIOTECHNOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN MICROBIOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
CURRENT NANOSCIENCE 1 0.1117% 
CURRENT OPINION IN CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
CURRENT TRENDS IN DATABASE TECHNOLOGY - EDBT 2004 
WORKSHOPS, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
CYBERNETICS AND SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1 0.1117% 
DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 1
 0.1117% 
DATABASE SYSTEMS FOR ADVANCED APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
 278
DYNAMICS OF CONTINUOUS DISCRETE AND IMPULSIVE 
SYSTEMS-SERIES B-APPLICATIONS & ALGORITHMS 1
 0.1117% 
E-COMMERCE AND WEB TECHNOLOGIES, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING IN JAPAN 1 0.1117% 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS 1
 0.1117% 
EMERGING TRENDS IN INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION 
SECURITY, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
ENERGY 1 0.1117% 
EURASIP JOURNAL ON APPLIED SIGNAL PROCESSING 1
 0.1117% 
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF HUMAN GENETICS 1 0.1117% 
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF OPERATIONAL RESEARCH 1
 0.1117% 
EXPERT SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
FASEB JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
FEBS JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
FEDERATION OVER THE WEB 1 0.1117% 
FLEXIBLE QUERY ANSWERING SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
FUTURE GENERATION COMPUTER SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
GENETIC ENGINEERING NEWS 1 0.1117% 
GENETIC PROGRAMMING, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
GENOME RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
GLIA 1 0.1117% 
GROUP DECISION AND NEGOTIATION 1 0.1117% 
HEPATOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
HUMAN MOLECULAR GENETICS 1 0.1117% 
HUMAN MUTATION 1 0.1117% 
HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION - INTERACT 2005, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
IEEE ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY MAGAZINE
 1 0.1117% 
 279
IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO SPEECH AND LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN 
BIOMEDICINE 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SPEECH AND AUDIO PROCESSING 1
 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS MAN AND CYBERNETICS 
PART C-APPLICATIONS AND REVIEWS 1 0.1117% 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER 
GRAPHICS 1 0.1117% 
IEEE-ACM TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY AND 
BIOINFORMATICS 1 0.1117% 
IEEE-ACM TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY AND 
BIOINFORMATIOCS 1 0.1117% 
IETE JOURNAL OF RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
INFORMATICA 1 0.1117% 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS FRONTIERS 1 0.1117% 
INNOVATIVE INTERNET COMMUNITY SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS 1 0.1117% 
INTELLIGENT TECHNIQUES FOR WEB PERSONALIZATION 1
 0.1117% 
INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
INTERACTING WITH COMPUTERS 1 0.1117% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOCHEMISTRY & CELL BIOLOGY
 1 0.1117% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER STUDIES
 1 0.1117% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 1
 0.1117% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH 1
 0.1117% 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
 1 0.1117% 
 280
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF WEB SERVICES RESEARCH 1
 0.1117% 
INTERNET RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
IRANIAN JOURNAL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
TRANSACTION B-ENGINEERING 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF AIRCRAFT 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH 1
 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT & FUZZY SYSTEMS 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF NANOPARTICLE RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF NETWORK AND COMPUTER APPLICATIONS 1
 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF NEW MUSIC RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 1
 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF PROTEOME RESEARCH 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE 1 0.1117% 
JOURNAL OF THE CHINESE INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERS 1
 0.1117% 
JOURNAL ON DATA SEMANTICS II 1 0.1117% 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY FROM XML DOCUMENTS, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING REVIEW 1 0.1117% 
KUWAIT JOURNAL OF SCIENCE & ENGINEERING 1 0.1117% 
LANGUAGE RESOURCES AND EVALUATION 1 0.1117% 
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE 1 0.1117% 
LIPIDS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 1 0.1117% 
LOCAL PATTERN DETECTION 1 0.1117% 
LOGIC JOURNAL OF THE IGPL 1 0.1117% 
LOGIC PROGRAMMING, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
MASSIVELY MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS I 1 0.1117% 
MECHANISMS OF AGEING AND DEVELOPMENT 1 0.1117% 
METHODS OF INFORMATION IN MEDICINE 1 0.1117% 
MICAI 2005: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 1
 0.1117% 
 281
MODELING DECISIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 1
 0.1117% 
MOLECULAR CARCINOGENESIS 1 0.1117% 
NATURE REVIEWS GENETICS 1 0.1117% 
NEC TECHNICAL JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
NETWORKING AND MOBILE COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
NEURAL COMPUTATION 1 0.1117% 
NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 1
 0.1117% 
NEURAL NETWORKS 1 0.1117% 
NEXT GENERATION INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES AND 
SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
OMEGA-INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
 1 0.1117% 
OMICS-A JOURNAL OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
ON THE CONVERGENCE OF BIO-INFORMATION-, 
ENVIRONMENTAL-, ENERGY-, SPACE- AND NANO-
TECHNOLOGIES, PTS 1 AND 2 1 0.1117% 
ONLINE 1 0.1117% 
PHYSIOLOGICAL GENOMICS 1 0.1117% 
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
PRICAI 2006: TRENDS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF SEMANTIC WEB REASONING
 1 0.1117% 
PRODUCT FOCUSED SOFTWARE PROCESS IMPROVEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
PROTEOMICS 1 0.1117% 
QSAR & COMBINATORIAL SCIENCE 1 0.1117% 
REASONING WEB 1 0.1117% 
REVISTA SIGNOS 1 0.1117% 
SADHANA-ACADEMY PROCEEDINGS IN ENGINEERING SCIENCES
 1 0.1117% 
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING ETHICS 1 0.1117% 
SCIENTOMETRICS 1 0.1117% 
SEMANTIC WEB - ISWC 2005, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
 282
SEMANTIC WEB: RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS
 1 0.1117% 
SOFTWARE-PRACTICE & EXPERIENCE 1 0.1117% 
SPATIAL INFORMATION THEORY, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
SPEECH COMMUNICATION 1 0.1117% 
SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER 1 0.1117% 
TECHNOLOGY IN CANCER RESEARCH & TREATMENT 1
 0.1117% 
THEORETICAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 1 0.1117% 
TOURISM MANAGEMENT 1 0.1117% 
TRENDS IN BIOTECHNOLOGY 1 0.1117% 
USER MODELING 2005, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
USER MODELING AND USER-ADAPTED INTERACTION 1
 0.1117% 
VLDB JOURNAL 1 0.1117% 
WEB AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES AND INTERNET -
RELATED SOCIAL ISSUES - HSI 2005 1 0.1117% 
WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING - WISE 2005 
WORKSHOPS, PROCEEDINGS 1 0.1117% 
 
 
IMPORTANT PHRASES RELATED TO TEXT MINING 
(2005 AND PRIOR YEARS) 
 
BIOINFORMATICS 
TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
TEXT MINING 
TEXT CLASSIFICATION 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
DOCUMENT CLUSTERING 
FEATURE SELECTION 
INFORMATION EXTRACTION 
DOCUMENT CLASSIFICATION 
DOCUMENT COLLECTIONS 
SEARCH ENGINES 
CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS 
SELF-ORGANIZING MAP 
HIERARCHICAL CLUSTERING 
TEXT CLASSIFIER 
TEXT CLUSTERING 
TEXT RETRIEVAL 
DOCUMENT CLUSTERS 
DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL 
 283
TERM CLUSTERING 
DOCUMENT CATEGORIZATION 
TERM SELECTION 
SELF-ORGANIZING MAPS 
DOCUMENT CLUSTER 
CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS 
FEATURE EXTRACTION 
RETRIEVED DOCUMENTS 
LITERATURE MINING 
RETRIEVE DOCUMENTS 
WEB MINING 
KEYWORD CLUSTERS 
LATENT SEMANTIC INDEXING 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
VECTOR SPACE MODEL 
SINGULAR VALUE DECOMPOSITION 
SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINE 
PRECISION AND RECALL 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS 
AUTOMATIC TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
DOCUMENT CLUSTERING ALGORITHM 
TEXT DATA MINING 
TEXTUAL DATA MINING 
WORD SENSE DISAMBIGUATION 
AUTOMATED TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
AUTOMATIC TEXT CLASSIFICATION 
TEXT CATEGORIZATION SYSTEM 
TEXT CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM 
AGGLOMERATIVE HIERARCHICAL 
CLUSTERING 
MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS 
HIERARCHICAL CLUSTERING ALGORITHM 
MULTILINGUAL TEXT CATEGORIZATION 
WEB DOCUMENT CLUSTERING 
AUTOMATIC DOCUMENT CLASSIFICATION 
DOCUMENT CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS 
EXTRACTING MULTI-WORD PHRASE 
MULTI-WORD PHRASE FREQUENCIES 
AUTOMATED TEXT CLASSIFICATION 
CLUSTERING OF DOCUMENTS 
HIERARCHICAL TEXT CLASSIFICATION 
INFORMATION EXTRACTION SYSTEMS 
INTERNET SEARCH ENGINES 
LATENT SEMANTIC STRUCTURE 
WEB SEARCH ENGINE 
TEXT CLASSIFIERS 
 
PROLIFIC AUTHORS CONTRIBUTING TO TEXT MINING 
 284
 
KOSTOFF--RN 
KATOH--M 
SWANSON--DR 
BERRY--MW  
SMALHEISER--NR  
LEE--CH 
MONTANES--E 
COMBARRO--EF 
DIAZ--I 
RANILLA--J 
BI--YX 
CHEN--HC 
GORDON--MD 
MA--FY 
SRINIVASAN--P 
YANG--HC 
ZHANG--J 
FELDMAN--R 
FUKETA--M 
LIU--F 
MERKL--D 
TOOTHMAN--DR 
WEISS--SM 
YANG--YM 
BUNKE--H 
DENG--ZH 
FERNANDEZ--J 
HSU--CC 
HUMENIK--JA 
KARYPIS--G 
KLOPOTEK--MA 
KOSTER--CHA 
LAM--W 
LAST--M 
LI--ML 
MONS--B 
MORITA--K 
RUIZ-SHULCLOPER--J 
SCHENKER--A 
SUN--MS 
TANG--SW 
THEERAMUNKONG--T 
WEEBER--M 
YIN--HJ 
ZHANG--M 
AOE--J 
ATLAM--ES 
 285
AUMANN--Y 
BELL--D 
CHEN--WL 
CHIANG--JH 
CHIEN--LF 
DE MOOR--B 
DEL RIO--JA 
EBERHART--HJ 
GELBUKH--A 
KADOYA--Y 
KAMEL--MS 
KANDEL--A 
KIM--HJ 
KORS--JA 
LEE--GG 
LERTNATTEE--V 
LIU--H 
LOPEZ-LOPEZ--A 
LUO--X 
MONTES-Y-GOMEZ--M 
PARK--H 
SCHNEIDER--KM 
SEBASTIANI--F 
WANG--DL 
WEI--CP 
WERMTER--S 
YAO--TS 
ZHANG--T 
ZHU--JB 
 
MOST CITED FIRST AUTHORS 
 
KATOH M 
SALTON G 
YANG Y 
KOSTOFF RN 
JOACHIMS T 
LEWIS DD 
SWANSON DR 
DUMAIS ST 
KOHONEN T 
DEERWESTER S 
SEBASTIANI F 
MCCALLUM A 
HEARST MA 
BERRY MW 
VANRIJSBERGEN CJ 
APTE C 
 286
COHEN WW 
VAPNIK VN 
FELDMAN R 
SMALHEISER NR 
NIGAM K 
AGRAWAL R 
CHEN HC 
QUINLAN JR 
MITCHELL TM 
PORTER MF 
ZAMIR O 
JAIN AK 
MERKL D 
NARIN F 
MLADENIC D 
SCHAPIRE RE 
CRAVEN M 
CHAKRABARTI S 
DHILLON IS 
LAM W 
YANG YM 
BAEZAYATES R 
RAUBER A 
SCHUTZE H 
VOORHEES EM 
LAGUS K 
CUTTING DR 
WILLETT P 
HONKELA T 
FREUND Y 
KASKI S 
BLASCHKE C 
FRIEDMAN C 
LANDAUER TK 
SAHAMI M 
WEISS SM 
DUDA RO 
ROCCHIO JJ 
KOLLER D 
KARYPIS G 
BRILL E 
BUCKLEY C 
HARMAN D 
RILOFF E 
HOFMANN T 
WITTEN IH 
GOLUB GH 
GORDON MD 
 287
LIN X 
WEEBER M 
FUHR N 
NG HT 
WIENER E 
SCHOLKOPF B 
ALLAN J 
BLUM A 
BOLEY D 
MANNING CD 
CRISTIANINI N 
HAN J 
KIRIKOSHI H 
RINDFLESCH TC 
ROBERTSON SE 
CORTES C 
CROFT WB 
FRAKES WB 
JENSSEN TK 
LANG K 
PUSTEJOVSKY J 
SAITOH T 
SINGHAL A 
ZHANG T 
DEMPSTER AP 
FELLBAUM C 
SMALL H 
BAKER LD 
BEZDEK JC 
FRITZKE B 
FURNAS GW 
HULL D 
SRINIVASAN P 
CALLON M 
COVER TM 
FUKUDA K 
RASMUSSEN E 
STEINBACH M 
DOMINGOS P 
GARFIELD E 
SLONIM N 
DAGAN I 
GUHA S 
HATZIVASSILOGLO.V 
MILLER GA 
STREHL A 
TANABE L 
WERMTER S 
 288
JONES KS 
SHATKAY H 
AGGARWAL CC 
KOLDA TG 
MCCALLUM AK 
RUIZ ME 
ZHAO Y 
 
JOURNALS CONTAINING TEXT MINING ARTICLES 
 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 
BIOINFORMATICS 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
MACHINE LEARNING 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
SCIENTOMETRICS 
ACM TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 
IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 
PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 
ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 
PATTERN RECOGNITION 
NEUROCOMPUTING 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 
INFORMATION SCIENCES 
BMC BIOINFORMATICS 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 
EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 
 289
KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS ASSOCIATION 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 
ADVANCED DATA MINING AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 
APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2004, PROCEEDINGS 
FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 
PERSPECTIVES IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 
ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY 
TECHNOLOGICAL FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 
DATA WAREHOUSING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 
DISCOVERY SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2005 
DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 
NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING 
DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND COMPUTER SCIENCES 
NEURAL NETWORKS 
FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
BRIEFINGS IN BIOINFORMATICS 
CONTENT COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 
WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, PROCEEDINGS 
JOURNAL OF MACHINE LEARNING RESEARCH 
JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 
COMPUTERS AND THE HUMANITIES 
GRID AND COOPERATIVE COMPUTING GCC 2004, PROCEEDINGS 
JOURNAL OF UNIVERSAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 
KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 
INNOVATIONS IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING, PROCEEDINGS 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE REASONING 
INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING - IDEAL 2002 
INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING 
ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 
 290
ADVANCED WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND APPLICATIONS 
COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
SIAM JOURNAL ON MATRIX ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS 
ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
 
PROLIFIC INSTITUTIONS CONTRIBUTING TO TEXT MINING 
 
OFF NAVAL RES 
IBM CORP 
TSING HUA UNIV 
UNIV CHICAGO 
SHANGHAI JIAO TONG UNIV 
M&M MED BIOINFORMAT 
NATL CANC CTR 
NATL UNIV SINGAPORE 
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIV 
UNIV ILLINOIS 
UNIV TOKYO 
UNIV TENNESSEE 
UNIV MINNESOTA 
CNR 
CHINESE ACAD SCI 
UNIV CALIF BERKELEY 
NORTHEASTERN UNIV 
UNIV OVIEDO 
NANYANG TECHNOL UNIV 
QUEENS UNIV BELFAST 
NATL INST INFORMAT 
UNIV IOWA 
PEKING UNIV 
UNIV MARYLAND 
UNIV ARIZONA 
BEN GURION UNIV NEGEV 
UNIV TEXAS 
UNIV TOKUSHIMA 
UNIV ULSTER 
SEOUL NATL UNIV 
PENN STATE UNIV 
NATL KAOHSIUNG UNIV APPL SCI 
NATL TAIWAN UNIV 
UNIV MICHIGAN 
ZHEJIANG UNIV 
RUTGERS STATE UNIV 
UNIV QUEENSLAND 
UNIV TSUKUBA 
BAR ILAN UNIV 
STANFORD UNIV 
UNIV N CAROLINA 
 291
CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG 
UNIV NIJMEGEN 
CHANG JUNG UNIV 
INDIAN INST TECHNOL 
FUDAN UNIV 
UNIV WATERLOO 
UNIV WAIKATO 
NOESIS INC 
UNIV KARLSRUHE 
UNIV POLITECN VALENCIA 
UNIV PITTSBURGH 
UNIV LONDON ROYAL HOLLOWAY & BEDFORD NEW 
COLL 
KATHOLIEKE UNIV LEUVEN 
HELSINKI UNIV TECHNOL 
UNIV S FLORIDA 
UNIV GRANADA 
KOREA ADV INST SCI & TECHNOL 
NAGOYA INST TECHNOL 
COLUMBIA UNIV 
POLISH ACAD SCI 
POHANG UNIV SCI & TECHNOL 
UNIV SO CALIF 
UNIV BERN 
UNIV CALIF LOS ANGELES 
UNIV COLL LONDON 
ATHENS UNIV ECON & BUSINESS 
NATL CHENG KUNG UNIV 
UNIV MASSACHUSETTS 
INST CYBERNET MATH & PHYS 
USN 
UNIV ORIENTE 
UNIV PASSAU 
MONASH UNIV 
KYOTO UNIV 
UNIV MANCHESTER 
ACAD SINICA 
XIAN JIAOTONG UNIV 
THAMMASAT UNIV 
TOKYO INST TECHNOL 
UNIV LEIPZIG 
UNIV WASHINGTON 
UNIV EDINBURGH 
GEORGE MASON UNIV 
NATL TAIWAN UNIV SCI & TECHNOL 
NATL SUN YAT SEN UNIV 
UNIV SUNDERLAND 
 
 292
PROLIFIC COUNTRIES CONTRIBUTING TO TEXT MINING 
 
USA 
PEOPLES R CHINA 
JAPAN 
GERMANY 
SPAIN 
SOUTH KOREA 
ENGLAND 
TAIWAN 
CANADA 
AUSTRALIA 
ITALY 
FRANCE 
SINGAPORE 
NETHERLANDS 
ISRAEL 
INDIA 
GREECE 
SWITZERLAND 
FINLAND 
SCOTLAND 
NORTH IRELAND 
MEXICO 
BELGIUM 
NEW ZEALAND 
THAILAND 
POLAND 
BRAZIL 
SWEDEN 
AUSTRIA 
HUNGARY 
CUBA 
PORTUGAL 
RUSSIA 
SLOVENIA 
TURKEY 
 
TEXT MINING BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
[Anon]. 2005. Feature selection improves text classification accuracy. IEEE 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 20 (6): 75-75.  
Abdullah, MT; Ahmad, F; Mahmod, R; Sembok, TMT. 2003. Application of 
latent semantic indexing on Malay-English cross language information 
retrieval. DIGITAL LIBRARIES: TECHNOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
 293
OF INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR GLOBAL ACCESS 2911: 663-
665.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Abulaish, M; Dey, L. 2005. An ontology-based pattern mining system for 
extracting information from biological texts. ROUGH SETS, FUZZY SETS, 
DATA MINING, AND GRANULAR COMPUTING, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 3642: 420-429.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Adak, S. 2002. e2eXpress: End-to-end bioinformatics and knowledge 
management system for microarrays. JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL 
SYSTEMS 10 (4): 285-302.  
Adami, G; Avesani, P; Sona, D. 2005. Clustering documents into a web 
directory for bootstrapping a supervised classification. DATA & 
KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING 54 (3): 301-325.  
Aggarwal, CC; Gates, SC; Yu, PS. 2004. On using partial supervision for 
text categorization. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING 16 (2): 245-255.  
Aggarwal, CC; Yu, PS. 1999. On text mining techniques for personalization. 
NEW DIRECTIONS IN ROUGH SETS, DATA MINING, AND 
GRANULAR-SOFT COMPUTING 1711: 12-18.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Agrawal, R; Ho, H; Jacquenet, F; Jacquenet, M. 2005. Mining information 
extraction rules from datasheets without linguistic parsing. INNOVATIONS 
IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 3533: 510-520.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Aguilar-Ruiz, JS; Rodriguez-Baena, DS; Cohen, PR; Riquelme, JC. 2003. 
Clustering main concepts from e-mails. CURRENT TOPICS IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 3040: 231-240.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
AGUIRRE, LA. 1994. TERM CLUSTERING AND THE ORDER 
SELECTION OF LINEAR CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS. JOURNAL OF 
THE FRANKLIN INSTITUTE-ENGINEERING AND APPLIED 
MATHEMATICS 331B (4): 403-415.  
AGUIRRE, LA; BILLINGS, SA. 1995. IMPROVED STRUCTURE 
SELECTION FOR NONLINEAR MODELS BASED ON TERM 
CLUSTERING. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CONTROL 62 (3): 
569-587.  
Ahmad, K; Vrusias, BL; Ledford, A. 2001. Choosing feature sets for 
training and testing self-organising maps: A case study. NEURAL 
COMPUTING & APPLICATIONS 10 (1): 56-66.  
 294
Ahonen, H; Heinonen, O; Klemettinen, M; Verkamo, AI. 1997. Mining in 
the phrasal frontier. PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1263: 343-350.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Aihara, K; Takasu, A. 2001. Category based customization approach for 
information retrieval. USER MODELING 2001, PROCEEDINGS 2109: 
207-209.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Aizawa, A. 2003. An information-theoretic perspective of tf-idf measures. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 39 (1): 45-65.  
Albert, S; Gaudan, S; Knigge, H; Raetsch, A; Delgado, A; Huhse, B; Kirsch, 
H; Albers, M; Rebholz-Schuhmann, D; Koegl, M. 2003. Computer-assisted 
generation of a protein-interaction database for nuclear receptors. 
MOLECULAR ENDOCRINOLOGY 17 (8): 1555-1567.  
Alexandrov, VN; Dimov, IT; Karaivanova, A; Tan, CJK. 2003. Parallel 
Monte Carlo algorithms for information retrieval. MATHEMATICS AND 
COMPUTERS IN SIMULATION 62 (3-6): 289-295.  
Alfonseca, E; Perez, D; Rodriguez, P. 2004. WELKIN: Automatic 
generation of adaptive hypermedia sites with NLP techniques. WEB 
ENGINEERING, PROCEEDINGS 3140: 617-618.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Allan, J; Leuski, A; Swan, R; Byrd, D. 2001. Evaluating combinations of 
ranked lists and visualizations of inter-document similarity. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 37 (3): 435-458.  
Almpanidis, G; Kotropoulos, C. 2005. Combining text and link analysis for 
focused crawling. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND DATA MINING, PT 
1, PROCEEDINGS 3686: 278-287.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Ampazis, N; Perantonis, SJ. 2004. LSISOM - A latent semantic indexing 
approach to Self-Organizing Maps of document collections. NEURAL 
PROCESSING LETTERS 19 (2): 157-173.  
Antal, P; Fannes, G; Timmerman, D; Moreau, Y; De Moor, B. 2004. Using 
literature and data to learn Bayesian networks as clinical models of ovarian 
tumors. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 30 (3): 257-281.  
Aphinyanaphongs, Y; Tsamardinos, I; Statnikov, A; Hardin, D; Aliferis, CF. 
2005. Text categorization models for high-quality article retrieval in internal 
medicine. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
ASSOCIATION 12 (2): 207-216.  
APTE, C; DAMERAU, F; WEISS, SM. 1994. AUTOMATED LEARNING 
OF DECISION RULES FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION. ACM 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 12 (3): 233-251.  
 295
Apte, CV; Hong, SJ; Natarajan, R; Pednault, EPD; Tipu, FA; Weiss, SM. 
2003. Data-intensive analytics for predicting modeling. IBM JOURNAL OF 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 47 (1): 17-23.  
Arevian, G; Wermter, S; Panchev, C. 2003. Symbolic state transducers and 
recurrent neural preference machines for text mining. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE REASONING 32 (2-3): 237-258.  
Arimura, H. 2002. Efficient text mining with optimized pattern discovery. 
COMBINATORIAL PATTERN MATCHING 2373: 17-19.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Atkinson-Abutridy, J. 2004. Semantically-driven explanatory text mining: 
Beyond keywords. ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE - 
IBERAMIA 2004 3315: 275-285.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Atkinson-Abutridy, J; Mellish, C; Aitken, S. 2003. A semantically guided 
and domain-independent evolutionary model for knowledge discovery from 
texts. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION 7 
(6): 546-560.  
Atkinson-Abutridy, J; Mellish, C; Aitken, S. 2004. Combining information 
extraction with genetic algorithms for text mining. IEEE INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS 19 (3): 22-30.  
Aumann, Y; Feldman, R; Ben Yehuda, Y; Landau, D; Liphstat, O; Schler, 
Y. 1999. Circle graphs: New visualization tools for text-mining. 
PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
1704: 277-282.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Azcarraga, AP; Yap, TN; Tan, J; Chua, TS. 2004. Evaluating keyword 
selection methods for WEBSOM text archives. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 16 (3): 380-383.  
Bajdik, CD; Kuo, B; Rusaw, S; Jones, S; Brooks-Wilson, A. 2005. CGMIM: 
Automated text-mining of Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) to 
identify genetically-associated cancers and candidate genes. BMC 
BIOINFORMATICS 6: art. no.-78.  
Bajic, VB; Veronika, M; Veladandi, PS; Meka, A; Heng, MW; Rajaraman, 
K; Pan, H; Swarup, S. 2005. Dragon plant biology explorer. A text-mining 
tool for integrating associations between genetic and biochemical entities 
with genome annotation and biochemical terms lists. PLANT 
PHYSIOLOGY 138 (4): 1914-1925.  
Banerjee, A; Ghosh, J. 2004. Frequency-sensitive competitive learning for 
scalable balanced clustering on high-dimensional hyperspheres. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS 15 (3): 702-719.  
 296
Bansal, N; Blum, A; Chawla, S. 2004. Correlation clustering. MACHINE 
LEARNING 56 (1-3): 89-113.  
Bao, JP; Shen, JY; Liu, HY; Liu, XD. 2006. A fast document copy detection 
model. SOFT COMPUTING 10 (1): 41-46.  
Bao, JP; Shen, JY; Liu, XD; Liu, HY; Zhang, XD. 2004. Finding plagiarism 
based on common semantic sequence model. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 3129: 640-645.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Bao, YG; Asai, D; Du, XY; Ishii, N. 2003. Partition for the rough set-based 
text classification. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 2762: 181-188.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Bao, YG; Asai, D; Du, XY; Yamada, K; Ishii, N. 2003. An effective rough 
set-based method for text classification. INTELLIGENT DATA 
ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING 2690: 545-552.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Bao, YG; Ishii, N. 2002. Combining multiple k-nearest neighbor classifiers 
for text classification by reducts. DISCOVERY SCIENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 2534: 340-347.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
BARTELL, BT; COTTRELL, GW; BELEW, RK. 1995. REPRESENTING 
DOCUMENTS USING AN EXPLICIT MODEL OF THEIR 
SIMILARITIES. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 46 (4): 254-271.  
Basili, R; Cammisa, M; Moschitti, A. 2005. A semantic kernel to exploit 
linguistic knowledge. AI*IA2005: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3673: 290-302.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Basili, R; DellaRocca, M; Pazienza, MT. 1997. Contextual word sense 
tuning and disambiguation. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 11 
(3): 235-262.  
Bayer, T; Kressel, U; Mogg-Schneider, H; Renz, I. 1998. Categorizing paper 
documents - A generic system for domain and language independent text 
categorization. COMPUTER VISION AND IMAGE UNDERSTANDING 
70 (3): 299-306.  
Begeja, L; Drucker, H; Gibbon, D; Haffner, P; Liu, Z; Renger, B; Shahraray, 
B. 2005. Semantic data mining of short utterances. IEEE TRANSACTIONS 
ON SPEECH AND AUDIO PROCESSING 13 (5): 672-680, Part 1.  
 297
Behme, W; Mucksch, H. 1999. Selection and classification of external 
information for the integration in a data warehouse. 
WIRTSCHAFTSINFORMATIK 41 (5): 443-+.  
Bel, N; Koster, CHA; Villegas, M. 2003. Cross-Lingual Text Categorization. 
RESEARCH AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY FOR DIGITAL 
LIBRARIES 2769: 126-139.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Belkin, M; Niyogi, P. 2004. Semi-supervised learning on Riemannian 
manifolds. MACHINE LEARNING 56 (1-3): 209-239.  
Bell, DA; Guan, JW; Bi, YX. 2005. On combining classifier mass functions 
for text categorization. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING 17 (10): 1307-1319.  
Bender, HJ. 2002. Natural intelligence in a machine translation system. 
MACHINE TRANSLATION: FROM RESEARCH TO REAL USERS 
2499: 224-228.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Bengel, J; Gauch, S; Mittur, E; Vijayaraghavan, R. 2004. ChatTrack: Chat 
room topic detection using classification. INTELLIGENCE AND 
SECURITY INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 3073: 266-277.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Benkhalifa, M; Mouradi, A; Bouyakhf, H. 2001. Integrating external 
knowledge to supplement training data in semi-supervised learning for text 
categorization. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 4 (2): 91-113.  
Benkhalifa, M; Mouradi, A; Bouyakhf, H. 2001. Integrating WordNet 
knowledge to supplement training data in semi-supervised agglomerative 
hierarchical clustering for text categorization. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 16 (8): 929-947.  
Bennett, PN; Dumais, ST; Horvitz, E. 2005. The combination of text 
classifiers using reliability indicators. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 8 (1): 
67-100.  
Berardi, M; Lapi, M; Leo, P; Loglisci, C. 2005. Mining generalized 
association rules on biomedical literature. INNOVATIONS IN APPLIED 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 3533: 500-509.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Berger, H; Merkl, D. 2004. A comparison of text-categorization methods 
applied to N-gram frequency statistics. AI 2004: ADVANCES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3339: 998-1003.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Bergman, CM; Carlson, JW; Celniker, SE. 2005. Drosophila DNase I 
footprint database: a systematic genome annotation of transcription factor 
 298
binding sites in the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster. BIOINFORMATICS 
21 (8): 1747-1749.  
Berry, MW; Dumais, ST; OBrien, GW. 1995. Using linear algebra for 
intelligent information retrieval. SIAM REVIEW 37 (4): 573-595.  
Berry, MW; Fierro, RD. 1996. Low-rank orthogonal decompositions for 
information retrieval applications. NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA 
WITH APPLICATIONS 3 (4): 301-327.  
Berry, MW; Pulatova, SA; Stewart, GW. 2005. Algorithm 844: Computing 
sparse reduced-rank approximations to sparse matrices. ACM 
TRANSACTIONS ON MATHEMATICAL SOFTWARE 31 (2): 252-269.  
Berry, MW; Young, PG. 1995. Using latent semantic indexing for 
multilanguage information retrieval. COMPUTERS AND THE 
HUMANITIES 29 (6): 413-429.  
Berryman, MJ; Allison, A; Abbott, D. 2003. Statistical techniques for text 
classification based on word recurrence intervals. FLUCTUATION AND 
NOISE LETTERS 3 (1): L1-L10.  
Betister, G; Furbach, U; Gross-Hardt, M; Thomas, B. 2003. Automatic 
classification for the identification of relationships in a meta-data repository. 
DISCOVERY SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 2843: 283-290.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Bi, YX; Anderson, T; McClean, S. 2004. Combining rules for text 
categorization using Dempster's rule of combination. INTELLIGENT 
DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING IDEAL 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3177: 457-463.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Bi, YX; Anderson, T; McClean, S. 2004. Multiple sets of rules for text 
categorization. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3261: 263-272.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Bi, YX; Bell, D; Guan, JW. 2004. Combining evidence from classifiers in 
text categorization. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 3215: 521-528.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Bi, YX; Bell, D; Wang, H; Gu, GG; Greer, K. 2004. Combining multiple 
classifiers using Dempster's rule of combination for text categorization. 
MODELING DECISIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 3131: 127-138.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
 299
Bi, YX; Bell, D; Wang, H; Guo, GD; Dubitzky, W. 2004. Classification 
decision combination for text categorization: An experimental study. 
DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3180: 222-231.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Biagioli, C; Francesconi, E; Spinosa, P; Taddei, M. 2004. XML documents 
within a legal domain: Standards and tools for the Italian legislative 
environment. DOCUMENT ANALYSIS SYSTEMS VI, PROCEEDINGS 
3163: 413-424.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Biemann, C; Quasthoff, U; Bohm, K; Wolff, C. 2003. Automatic discovery 
and aggregation of compound names for the use in knowledge 
representations. JOURNAL OF UNIVERSAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 9 
(6): 530-541.  
Bigi, B. 2003. Using Kullback-Leibler distance for text categorization. 
ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 305-319.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Blaschke, C; Hirschman, L; Yeh, A; Valencia, A. 2003. Critical assessment 
of information extraction systems in biology. COMPARATIVE AND 
FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS 4 (6): 674-677.  
Blei, DM; Ng, AY; Jordan, MI. 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. 
JOURNAL OF MACHINE LEARNING RESEARCH 3 (4-5): 993-1022.  
Blom, K; Ruhe, A. 2004. A Krylov subspace method for information 
retrieval. SIAM JOURNAL ON MATRIX ANALYSIS AND 
APPLICATIONS 26 (2): 566-582.  
Bogg, P. 2003. Pattern based approaches to pre-processing structured text: A 
newsfeed example. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE - ICCS 2003, PT IV, 
PROCEEDINGS 2660: 859-867.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Bohm, K; Heyer, G; Quasthoff, U; Wolff, C. 2002. Topic map generation 
using text mining. JOURNAL OF UNIVERSAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 8 
(6): 623-633.  
Bolioli, A; Mercatali, P; Romano, F. 2004. Formal models for a legislative 
grammar - Explicit text amendment. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT IN 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNMENT, PROCEEDINGS 3025: 194-211.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Bordogna, G; Pasi, G. 1996. A user-adaptive neural network supporting a 
rule-based relevance feedback. FUZZY SETS AND SYSTEMS 82 (2): 201-
211.  
 300
Borzemski, L; Lopatka, P. 2005. Complementing search engines with text 
mining. INNOVATIONS IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
3533: 743-745.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Bote, VPG; Anegon, FD; Solana, VH. 2002. Document organization using 
Kohonen's algorithm. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 
38 (1): 79-89.  
Boutell, MR; Luo, JB; Shen, XP; Brown, CM. 2004. Learning multi-label 
scene classification. PATTERN RECOGNITION 37 (9): 1757-1771.  
Bradford, RB. 2005. Efficient discovery of new information in large text 
databases. INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMATICS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3495: 374-380.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Bratko, A; Filipic, B. 2006. Exploiting structural information for semi-
structured document categorization. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 42 (3): 679-694.  
Braun, T; Schubert, A; Kostoff, RN. 2002. A chemistry field in search of 
applications statistical analysis of US fullerene patents. JOURNAL OF 
CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND COMPUTER SCIENCES 42 (5): 
1011-1015.  
Bremer, EG; Natarajan, J; Zhang, YH; DeSesa, C; Hack, CJ; Dubitzky, W. 
2004. Text mining of full text articles and creation of a knowledge base for 
analysis of microarray data. KNOWLEDGE EXPLORATION IN LIFE 
SCIENCE INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 3303: 84-95.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Buckeridge, AM; Sutcliffe, RFE. 2002. Using latent semantic indexing as a 
measure of conceptual association for noun compound disambiguation. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND COGNITIVE SCIENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 2464: 12-19.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Bunescu, R; Ge, RF; Kate, RJ; Marcotte, EM; Mooney, RJ; Ramani, AK; 
Wong, YW. 2005. Comparative experiments on learning information 
extractors for proteins and their interactions. ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 33 (2): 139-155.  
BURGIN, R. 1995. THE RETRIEVAL EFFECTIVENESS OF 5 
CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS AS A FUNCTION OF INDEXING 
EXHAUSTIVITY. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 46 (8): 562-572.  
Burstein, J; Marcu, D. 2003. A machine learning approach for identification 
of thesis and conclusion statements in student essays. COMPUTERS AND 
THE HUMANITIES 37 (4): 455-467.  
 301
Cai, D; He, XF; Han, JW. 2005. Document clustering using locality 
preserving indexing. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING 17 (12): 1624-1637.  
Cairns, P. 2004. Informalising formal mathematics: Searching the Mizar 
library with latent semantics. MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 3119: 58-72.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Caldas, CH; Soibelman, L. 2003. Automating hierarchical document 
classification for construction management information systems. 
AUTOMATION IN CONSTRUCTION 12 (4): 395-406.  
Caldas, CH; Soibelman, L; Han, JW. 2002. Automated classification of 
construction project documents. JOURNAL OF COMPUTING IN CIVIL 
ENGINEERING 16 (4): 234-243.  
Camon, E; Magrane, M; Barrell, D; Lee, V; Dimmer, E; Maslen, J; Binns, 
D; Harte, N; Lopez, R; Apweiler, R. 2004. The Gene Ontology Annotation 
(GOA) Database: sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene Ontology. 
NUCLEIC ACIDS RESEARCH 32: D262-D266, Sp. Iss. SI.  
CAN, F; OZKARAHAN, EA. 1990. CONCEPTS AND EFFECTIVENESS 
OF THE COVER-COEFFICIENT-BASED CLUSTERING 
METHODOLOGY FOR TEXT DATABASES. ACM TRANSACTIONS 
ON DATABASE SYSTEMS 15 (4): 483-517.  
Cardoso-Cachopo, A; Oliveira, AL. 2003. An empirical comparison of text 
categorization methods. STRING PROCESSING AND INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 2857: 183-196.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cascini, G; Fantechi, A; Spinicci, E. 2004. Natural language processing of 
patents and technical documentation. DOCUMENT ANALYSIS SYSTEMS 
VI, PROCEEDINGS 3163: 508-520.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Cascini, G; Rissone, P. 2004. Plastics design: integrating TRIZ creativity 
and semantic knowledge portals. JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN 
15 (4): 405-424.  
Casillas, A; de Lena, MTG; Martinez, R. 2003. Document clustering into an 
unknown number of clusters using a genetic algorithm. TEXT, SPEECH 
AND DIALOGUE, PROCEEDINGS 2807: 43-49.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Casillas, A; de Lena, MTG; Martinez, R. 2004. Sampling and feature 
selection in a genetic algorithm for document clustering. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
 302
PROCESSING 2945: 601-612.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Cesa-Bianchi, N; Conconi, A; Gentile, C. 2003. Learning probabilistic 
linear-threshold classifiers via selective sampling. LEARNING THEORY 
AND KERNEL MACHINES 2777: 373-387.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Chakrabarti, S; Roy, S; Soundalgekar, MV. 2003. Fast and accurate text 
classification via multiple linear discriminant projections. VLDB JOURNAL 
12 (2): 170-185.  
Chali, Y; Noureddine, S. 2005. Document clustering with grouping and 
chaining algorithms. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 
2005, PROCEEDINGS 3651: 280-291.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Chang, CH; Hsu, CC. 1998. Integrating query expansion and conceptual 
relevance feedback for personalized Web information retrieval. 
COMPUTER NETWORKS AND ISDN SYSTEMS 30 (1-7): 621-623.  
Chang, CH; Hsu, CC. 1999. Enabling concept-based relevance feedback for 
information retrieval on the WWW. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 11 (4): 595-609.  
Chang, HC; Hsu, CC. 2005. Using topic keyword clusters for automatic 
document clustering. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND 
SYSTEMS E88D (8): 1852-1860.  
Chang, HC; Hsu, CC; Chan, CK. 2004. Automatic document clustering 
based on keyword clusters using partitions of weighted diagraphs. 
COMPUTER SYSTEMS SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 19 (1): 27-37.  
Chapman, WW; Bridewell, W; Hanbury, P; Cooper, GF; Buchanan, BG. 
2001. A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings and diseases in 
discharge summaries. JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 34 
(5): 301-310.  
Chapman, WW; Christensen, LM; Wagner, MM; Haug, PJ; Ivanov, O; 
Dowling, JN; Olszewski, RT. 2005. Classifying free-text triage chief 
complaints into syndromic categories with natural language processing. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 33 (1): 31-40.  
Chau, R; Yeh, CH. 2003. Fuzzy methods for knowledge discovery from 
multilingual text. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 2773: 835-842.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Chau, RN; Yeh, CS; Smith, KA. 2005. A neural network model for 
hierarchical multilingual text categorization. ADVANCES IN NEURAL 
 303
NETWORKS - ISNN 2005, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3497: 238-245.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chau, RW; Yeh, CH. 2004. A multilingual text mining approach to web 
cross-lingual text retrieval. KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS 17 (5-6): 
219-227.  
Chen, B. 2006. Exploring the use of latent topical information for statistical 
Chinese spoken document retrieval. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 
27 (1): 9-18.  
Chen, CM. 1999. Visualising semantic spaces and author co-citation 
networks in digital libraries. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 35 (3): 401-420.  
Chen, CM; Lee, HM; Hwang, CW. 2005. A hierarchical neural network 
document classifier with linguistic feature selection. APPLIED 
INTELLIGENCE 23 (3): 277-294.  
Chen, CS; Hiscott, RN. 1999. Statistical analysis of facies clustering in 
submarine-fan turbidite successions. JOURNAL OF SEDIMENTARY 
RESEARCH 69 (2): 505-517, Part B.  
Chen, DY; Li, X. 2004. PLD: A distillation algorithm for misclassified 
documents. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 3129: 499-508.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, DY; Li, X; Dong, ZY; Chen, X. 2005. Effectiveness of document 
representation for classification. DATA WAREHOUSING AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 3589: 368-377.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, H; Sharp, BM. 2004. Content-rich biological network constructed by 
mining PubMed abstracts. BMC BIOINFORMATICS 5: art. no.-147.  
Chen, HC; Chau, M; Zeng, D. 2002. CI Spider: a tool for competitive 
intelligence on the Web. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 34 (1): 1-17.  
Chen, HC; Fan, HY; Chau, M; Zeng, D. 2003. Testing a Cancer Meta 
Spider. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER 
STUDIES 59 (5): 755-776.  
Chen, HH; Kuo, JJ; Su, TC. 2003. Clustering and visualization in a multi-
lingual multi-document summarization system. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 266-280.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, J; Yin, J; Zhang, J; Huang, J. 2005. Associative classification in text 
categorization. ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT COMPUTING, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3644: 1035-1044.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
 304
Chen, L; Huang, J; Gong, ZH. 2005. An anti-noise text categorization 
method based on support vector machines. ADVANCES IN WEB 
INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3528: 272-278.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, L; Tokuda, N; Nagai, A. 2003. A new differential LSI space-based 
probabilistic document classifier. INFORMATION PROCESSING 
LETTERS 88 (5): 203-212.  
Chen, LH; Chue, WL. 2005. Using Web structure and summarisation 
techniques for Web content mining. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 41 (5): 1225-1242.  
Chen, WL; Chang, XZ; Wang, HH; Zhu, JB; Yao, TS. 2005. Automatic 
word clustering for text categorization using global information. 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY 3411: 1-11.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, WL; Zhu, JB; Wu, HL; Yao, TS. 2004. Automatic learning features 
using bootstrapping for text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 2945: 571-
579.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chen, XY; Chen, Y; Li, RL; Hu, YF. 2005. An improvement of text 
association classification using rules weights. ADVANCED DATA 
MINING AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3584: 355-363.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Cheung, Z; Phan, KL; Mahidadia, A; Hoffmann, A. 2004. Feature extraction 
for learning to classify questions. AI 2004: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3339: 1069-1075.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Chiang, JH; Chen, YC. 2004. An intelligent news recommender agent for 
filtering and categorizing large volumes of text corpus. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 19 (3): 201-216.  
Chiang, JH; Yu, HC. 2003. MeKE: discovering the functions of gene 
products from biomedical literature via sentence alignment. 
BIOINFORMATICS 19 (11): 1417-1422.  
Chiang, JH; Yu, HC. 2005. Literature extraction of protein functions using 
sentence pattern mining. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING 17 (8): 1088-1098.  
Chiang, JH; Yu, HC; Hsu, HJ. 2004. GIS: a biomedical text-mining system 
for gene information discovery. BIOINFORMATICS 20 (1): 120-121.  
Chik, FCY; Luk, RWP; Chung, KFL. 2005. Text categorization based on 
subtopic clusters. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND 
 305
INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 203-214.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cho, SB; Lee, JH. 2003. Learning neural network ensemble for practical text 
classification. INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND 
AUTOMATED LEARNING 2690: 1032-1036.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Choi, B; Guo, Q. 2003. Applying semantic links for classifying Web pages. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2718: 
148-153.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Chouchoulas, A; Shen, Q. 1999. A rough set-based approach to text 
classification. NEW DIRECTIONS IN ROUGH SETS, DATA MINING, 
AND GRANULAR-SOFT COMPUTING 1711: 118-127.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Chouchoulas, A; Shen, Q. 2001. Rough set-aided keyword reduction for text 
categorization. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 15 (9): 843-873.  
Chowdhury, N; Saha, D. 2005. Unsupervised text classification using 
Kohonen's Self Organizing Network. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS 
AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 715-718.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chu, M; Del Buono, N; Lopez, L; Politi, T. 2005. On the low-rank 
approximation of data on the unit sphere. SIAM JOURNAL ON MATRIX 
ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS 27 (1): 46-60.  
Chuang, SL; Chien, LF. 2005. Taxonomy generation for text segments: A 
practical Web-based approach. ACM TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 23 (4): 363-396.  
Chuang, W; Parker, DS. 2001. Pyramidal digest: An efficient model for 
abstracting text databases. DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS 
APPLICATIONS 2113: 360-369.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Chuang, WT; Tiyyagura, A; Yang, J; Giuffrida, G. 2000. A fast algorithm 
for hierarchical text classification. DATA WAREHOUSING AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 1874: 409-418.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chung, S; McLeod, D. 2003. Dynamic topic mining from news stream data. 
ON THE MOVE TO MEANINGFUL INTERNET SYSTEMS 2003: 
COOPIS, DOA, AND ODBASE 2888: 653-670.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Chung, S; McLeod, D. 2005. Dynamic pattern mining: An incremental data 
clustering approach. JOURNAL ON DATA SEMANTICS II 3360: 85-112.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 306
Chung, YM; Lee, JY. 2001. A corpus-based approach to comparative 
evaluation of statistical term association measures. JOURNAL OF THE 
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 52 (4): 283-296.  
CHUTE, CG; YANG, Y. 1995. AN OVERVIEW OF STATISTICAL-
METHODS FOR THE CLASSIFICATION AND RETRIEVAL OF 
PATIENT EVENTS. METHODS OF INFORMATION IN MEDICINE 34 
(1-2): 104-110.  
Civera, J; Cubel, E; Juan, A; Vidal, E. 2005. Different approaches to 
bilingual text classification based on grammatical inference techniques. 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 3523: 630-637.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Cody, WF; Kreulen, JT; Krishna, V; Spangler, WS. 2002. The integration of 
business intelligence and knowledge management. IBM SYSTEMS 
JOURNAL 41 (4): 697-713.  
Cohen, AM; Hersh, WR; Dubay, C; Spackman, K. 2005. Using co-
occurrence network structure to extract synonymous gene and protein names 
from MEDLINE abstracts. BMC BIOINFORMATICS 6: art. no.-103.  
Cohen, G; Hilario, M; Pellegrini, C. 2004. One-class support vector 
machines with a conformal kernel. A case study in handling class imbalance. 
STRUCTURAL, SYNTACTIC, AND STATISTICAL PATTERN 
RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 3138: 850-858.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cohen, WW. 2000. WHIRL: A word-based information representation 
language. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 118 (1-2): 163-196.  
Cohen, WW; Singer, Y. 1999. Context-sensitive learning methods for text 
categorization. ACM TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
17 (2): 141-173.  
Collier, N; Takeuchi, K. 2004. Comparison of character-level and part of 
speech features for name recognition in biomedical texts. JOURNAL OF 
BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 37 (6): 423-435.  
Collier, N; Takeuchi, K; Kawazoe, A; Mullen, T; Wattarujeekrit, T. 2003. A 
framework for integrating deep and shallow semantic structures in text 
mining. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 2773: 824-834.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Collins-Thompson, K; Callan, J. 2005. Predicting reading difficulty with 
statistical language models. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY 
 307
FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (13): 1448-
1462.  
Combarro, EF; Montanes, E; Diaz, I; Ranilla, J; Mones, R. 2005. 
Introducing a family of linear measures for feature selection in text 
categorization. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA 
ENGINEERING 17 (9): 1223-1232.  
Combarro, EF; Montanes, E; Ranilla, J; Fernandez, J. 2003. A comparison 
of the performance of SVM and ARNI on Text Categorization with new 
filtering measures on an unbalanced collection. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL 
NETS PROBLEM SOLVING METHODS, PT II 2687: 742-749.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cong, G; Lee, WS; Wu, HR; Liu, B. 2004. Semi-supervised text 
classification using partitioned EM. DATABASE SYSTEMS FOR 
ADVANCED APPLICATIONS 2973: 482-493.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cordon, O; Herrera-Viedma, E; Lopez-Pujalte, C; Luque, M; Zarco, C. 
2003. A review on the application of evolutionary computation to 
information retrieval. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE 
REASONING 34 (2-3): 241-264.  
Corney, DPA; Buxton, BF; Langdon, WB; Jones, DT. 2004. BioRAT: 
extracting biological information from full-length papers. 
BIOINFORMATICS 20 (17): 3206-3213.  
Corral, A. 2004. Long-term clustering, scaling, and universality in the 
temporal occurrence of earthquakes. PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 92 
(10): art. no.-108501.  
Correa, RF; Ludermir, TB. 2004. Dimensionality reduction by semantic 
mapping in text categorization. NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING 
3316: 1032-1037.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Correa, RF; Ludermir, TB. 2004. Web documents categorization using 
neural networks. NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING 3316: 758-
762.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Coutinho, DP; Figueiredo, MAT. 2005. Information theoretic text 
classification using the Ziv-Merhav method. PATTERN RECOGNITION 
AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3523: 355-362.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Crasto, CJ; Marenco, LN; Migliore, M; Mao, BQ; Nadkarni, PM; Miller, P; 
Shepherd, GM. 2003. Text mining neuroscience journal articles to populate 
neuroscience databases. NEUROINFORMATICS 1 (3): 215-237.  
 308
Craven, M; DiPasquo, D; Freitag, D; McCallum, A; Mitchell, T; Nigam, K; 
Slattery, S. 2000. Learning to construct knowledge bases from the World 
Wide Web. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 118 (1-2): 69-113.  
Craven, M; Slattery, S. 2001. Relational learning with statistical predicate 
invention: Better models for hypertext. MACHINE LEARNING 43 (1-2): 
97-119. 
Cristianini, N; Scholkopf, B. 2002. Support vector machines and kernel 
methods - The new generation of learning machines. AI MAGAZINE 23 
(3): 31-41.  
Cristianini, N; Shawe-Taylor, J; Lodhi, H. 2002. Latent semantic kernels. 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 18 (2-3): 127-
152.  
Cumbo, C; Iiritano, S; Rullo, P. 2004. OLEX - A reasoning-based text 
classifier. LOGICS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
3229: 722-725.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Cumbo, C; Iiritano, S; Rullo, P. 2004. Reasoning-based knowledge 
extraction for text classification. DISCOVERY SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
3245: 380-387.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Damerau, FJ; Zhang, T; Weiss, SM; Indurkhya, N. 2004. Text categorization 
for a comprehensive time-dependent benchmark. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 40 (2): 209-221.  
Danger, R; Berlanga, R; Ruiz-Shulcloper, J. 2004. CRISOL: An approach 
for automatically populating Semantic Web from unstructured text 
collections. DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3180: 243-252.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Danger, R; Ruiz-Shulcloper, J; Berlanga, R. 2003. Text mining using the 
hierarchical syntactical structure of documents. CURRENT TOPICS IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 3040: 556-565.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Dasigi, V; Mann, RC; Protopopescu, VA. 2001. Information fusion for text 
classification - an experimental comparison. PATTERN RECOGNITION 34 
(12): 2413-2425.  
Davies, NJ; Weeks, R; Revett, MC. 1996. Information agents for the World 
Wide Web. BT TECHNOLOGY JOURNAL 14 (4): 105-114.  
de Bruijn, B; Martin, J. 2002. Getting to the (c)ore of knowledge: mining 
biomedical literature. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL 
INFORMATICS 67 (1-3): 7-18.  
De Bruijn, B; Martin, J; Wolting, C; Donaldson, I. 2001. Extracting 
sentences to justify categorization. ASIST 2001: PROCEEDINGS OF THE 
 309
64TH ASIST ANNUAL MEETING, VOL 38, 2001 38: 450-457.  
PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASIST ANNUAL MEETING  
de Campos, LM; Fernandez-Luna, JM; Huete, JF. 2004. Clustering terms in 
the Bayesian network retrieval model: a new approach with two term-layers. 
APPLIED SOFT COMPUTING 4 (2): 149-158.  
De Comite, F; Gilleron, R; Tommasi, M. 2003. Learning multi-label 
alternating decision trees from texts and data. MACHINE LEARNING 
AND DATA MINING IN PATTERN RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 
2734: 35-49.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
De Moor, B; Marchal, K; Mathys, J; Moreau, Y. 2003. Bioinformatics: 
Organisms from Venus, technology from Jupiter, algorithms from Mars. 
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF CONTROL 9 (2-3): 237-278.  
de Oliveira, JPM; Loh, S; Wives, LK; Scarinci, RG; Musa, D; Silva, L; 
Zambenedetti, C. 2004. Applying text mining on electronic messages for 
competitive intelligence. E-COMMERCE AND WEB TECHNOLOGIES 
3182: 277-286.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
De Pasquale, JF; Meunier, JG. 2003. Categorisation techniques in computer-
assisted reading and analysis of texts (CARAT) in the humanities. 
COMPUTERS AND THE HUMANITIES 37 (1): 111-118.  
Debenham, J. 2004. Interacting with electronic institutions. DATABASE 
AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3180: 181-
190.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Debenham, J; Simoff, S. 2005. Intelligent environments for next-generation 
e-markets. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3681: 751-757.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Debnath, S; Mitra, P; Pal, N; Giles, CL. 2005. Automatic identification of 
informative sections of Web pages. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 17 (9): 1233-1246.  
Debole, F; Sebastiani, F. 2005. An analysis of the relative hardness of 
Reuters-21578 subsets. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (6): 584-596.  
DEERWESTER, S; DUMAIS, S; LANDAUER, T; FURNAS, G; BECK, L. 
1988. IMPROVING INFORMATION-RETRIEVAL WITH LATENT 
SEMANTIC INDEXING. PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASIS ANNUAL 
MEETING 25: 36-40.  
Degemmis, M; Lops, P; Ferilli, S; Di Mauro, N; Basile, TMA; Semeraro, G. 
2005. Learning user profiles from text in e-commerce. ADVANCED DATA 
MINING AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3584: 370-381.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
 310
Delgado, M; Martin-Bautista, MJ; Sanchez, D; Serrano, JM; Vila, MA. 
2002. Association rule extraction for text mining. FLEXIBLE QUERY 
ANSWERING SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 2522: 154-162.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Demaine, ED; Immorlica, N. 2003. Correlation clustering with partial 
information. APPROXIMATION, RANDOMIZATION, AND 
COMBINATORIAL OPTIMIZATION 2764: 1-13.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Deng, ZH; Tang, SW. 2005. A non-VSM kNN algorithm for text 
classification. ADVANCED DATA MINING AND APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3584: 339-346.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Deng, ZH; Tang, SW; Yang, DQ; Zhang, M; Li, LY; Xie, KQ. 2004. A 
comparative study on feature weight in text categorization. ADVANCED 
WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND APPLICATIONS 3007: 588-597.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Deng, ZH; Tang, SW; Yang, DQ; Zhang, M; Wu, XB; Yang, M. 2002. A 
linear text classification algorithm based on category relevance factors. 
DIGITAL LIBRARIES: PEOPLE, KNOWLEDGE, AND TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 2555: 88-98.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Deng, ZH; Tang, SW; Zhang, M. 2005. An efficient text categorization 
algorithm based on category memberships. FUZZY SYSTEMS AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3613: 374-382.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Desai, M; Spink, A. 2005. An algorithm to cluster documents based on 
relevance. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 41 (5): 
1035-1049.  
Dhillon, IS; Modha, DS. 2000. A data-clustering algorithm on distributed 
memory multiprocessors. LARGE-SCALE PARALLEL DATA MINING 
1759: 245-260.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Dhillon, IS; Modha, DS. 2001. Concept decompositions for large sparse text 
data using clustering. MACHINE LEARNING 42 (1-2): 143-175.  
Diao, YL; Lu, HJ; Wu, DK. 2000. A comparative study of classification 
based personal E-mail filtering. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA 
MINING, PROCEEDINGS 1805: 408-419.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Diaz, I; Ranilla, J; Montanes, E; Fernandez, J; Combarro, EF. 2004. 
Improving performance of text categorization by combining filtering and 
 311
support vector machines. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 55 (7): 579-592.  
Diederich, J; Kindermann, O; Leopold, E; Paass, G. 2003. Authorship 
attribution with support vector machines. APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 19 
(1-2): 109-123.  
DILLON, M; CAPLAN, P. 1980. TECHNIQUE FOR EVALUATING 
AUTOMATIC TERM CLUSTERING. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN 
SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE 31 (2): 89-96.  
Ding, CHQ. 2005. A probabilistic model for Latent Semantic Indexing. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (6): 597-608.  
Ding, J; Berleant, D. 2005. MedKit: a helper toolkit for automatic mining of 
MEDLINE/PubMed citations. BIOINFORMATICS 21 (5): 694-695.  
Dobrokhotov, PB; Goutte, C; Veuthey, AL; Gaussier, E. 2005. Assisting 
medical annotation in Swiss-Prot using statistical classifiers. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INFORMATICS 74 (2-4): 
317-324.  
Dobrynin, V; Patterson, D; Rooney, N. 2004. Contextual document 
clustering. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, 
PROCEEDINGS 2997: 167-180.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Domedel-Puig, N; Wernisch, L. 2005. Applying GIFT, a gene interactions 
finder in text, to fly literature. BIOINFORMATICS 21 (17): 3582-3583.  
Dorsey, RJ; Umhoefer, PJ; Falk, PD. 1997. Earthquake clustering inferred 
from Pliocene Gilbert-type fan deltas in the Loreto basin, Baja California 
Sur, Mexico. GEOLOGY 25 (8): 679-682.  
Dransfield, E; Morrot, G; Martin, JF; Ngapo, TM. 2004. The application of a 
text clustering statistical analysis to aid the interpretation of focus group 
interviews. FOOD QUALITY AND PREFERENCE 15 (5): 477-488.  
Dringus, LP; Ellis, T. 2005. Using data mining as a strategy for assessing 
asynchronous discussion forums. COMPUTERS & EDUCATION 45 (1): 
141-160.  
Dubhashi, D; Laura, L; Panconesi, A. 2003. Analysis and experimental 
evaluation of a simple algorithm for collaborative filtering in planted 
partition models. FST TCS 2003: FOUNDATIONS OF SOFTWARE 
TECHNOLOGY AND THEORETICAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 2914: 
168-182.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Dubois, V; Quafafou, M. 2002. Incremental and dynamic text mining - 
Graph structure discovery and visualization. FOUNDATIONS OF 
 312
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 2366: 265-273.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Dumais, S. 2003. Data-driven approaches to information access. 
COGNITIVE SCIENCE 27 (3): 491-524.  
Durbin, SD; Warner, D; Richter, HN; Gedeon, Z. 2002. Information self-
service with a knowledge base that learns. AI MAGAZINE 23 (4): 41-49.  
Efron, M. 2005. Eigenvalue-based model selection during latent semantic 
indexing. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (9): 969-988.  
Eichmann, D; Srinivasan, P. 2002. Adaptive filtering of newswire stories 
using two-level clustering. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 5 (2-3): 209-237.  
Elmas, T; Ozkasap, O. 2004. Distributed document sharing with text 
classification over content-addressable network. CONTENT COMPUTING, 
PROCEEDINGS 3309: 70-81.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Eom, JH; Zhang, BT. 2004. PubMiner: Machine learning-based text mining 
system for biomedical information mining. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: 
METHODOLOGY, SYSTEMS, AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 
3192: 216-225.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Epshteyn, A; DeJong, G. 2005. Rotational prior knowledge for SVMs. 
MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2005, PROCEEDINGS 3720: 108-119.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Estabrooks, A; Jo, TH; Japkowicz, N. 2004. A multiple resampling method 
for learning from imbalanced data sets. COMPUTATIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE 20 (1): 18-36.  
Esteban, AD. 2001. Integrating multilingual text classification tasks and user 
modeling in personalized newspaper services. USER MODELING 2001, 
PROCEEDINGS 2109: 268-270.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Fan, KC; Wang, LS; Tu, YT. 1998. Classification of machine-printed and 
handwritten texts using character block layout variance. PATTERN 
RECOGNITION 31 (9): 1275-1284.  
Fan, WG; Gordon, MD; Pathak, P. 2004. A generic ranking function 
discovery framework by genetic programming for information retrieval. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 40 (4): 587-602.  
Fan, WG; Gordon, MD; Pathak, P. 2004. Discovery of context-specific 
ranking functions for effective information retrieval using genetic 
programming. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA 
ENGINEERING 16 (4): 523-527.  
 313
Fan, WG; Gordon, MD; Pathak, P. 2005. Genetic programming-based 
discovery of ranking functions for effective Web search. JOURNAL OF 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 21 (4): 37-56.  
Fan, XH; Sun, MS; Choi, K; Zhang, Q. 2005. Classifying Chinese texts in 
two steps. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2005, 
PROCEEDINGS 3651: 302-313.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Fatima, SS; Krishnan, R. 2001. Stylistic variation as a basis for genre-based 
text classification. IETE JOURNAL OF RESEARCH 47 (1-2): 59-63.  
Feldman, R; Aumann, Y; Fresko, M; Liphstat, O; Rosenfeld, B; Schler, Y. 
1999. Text mining via information extraction. PRINCIPLES OF DATA 
MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1704: 165-173.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Feldman, R; Aumann, Y; Zilberstein, A; Ben-Yehuda, Y. 1998. Trend 
graphs: Visualizing the evolution of concept relationships in large document 
collections. PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY 1510: 38-46.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Feldman, R; Dagan, I; Hirsh, H. 1998. Mining text using keyword 
distributions. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
10 (3): 281-300.  
Feldman, R; Fresko, M; Kinar, Y; Lindell, Y; Liphstat, O; Rajman, M; 
Schler, Y; Zamir, O. 1998. Text mining at the term level. PRINCIPLES OF 
DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1510: 65-73.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Feng, JL; Liu, HJ; Feng, YC. 2005. Sentential association based text 
classification systems. WEB TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT - APWEB 2005 3399: 1037-1040.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Fernandez, J; Montanes, E; Diaz, I; Ranilla, J; Combarro, EF. 2004. Text 
categorization by a machine-learning-based term selection. DATABASE 
AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3180: 253-
262.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Fierro, RD; Jiang, EP. 2005. Lanczos and the Riemannian SVD in 
information retrieval applications. NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA 
WITH APPLICATIONS 12 (4): 355-372.  
Fine, S; Gilad-Bachrach, R; Shamir, E. 2002. Query by committee, linear 
separation and random walks. THEORETICAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 
284 (1): 25-51.  
 314
Fisher, M; Everson, R. 2003. When are links useful? Experiments in text 
classification.. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 41-
56.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Flesca, S; Manco, G; Masciari, E; Pontieri, L; Pugliese, A. 2005. Fast 
detection of XML structural similarity. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 17 (2): 160-175.  
FOLTZ, PW; DUMAIS, ST. 1992. PERSONALIZED INFORMATION 
DELIVERY - AN ANALYSIS OF INFORMATION FILTERING 
METHODS. COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 35 (12): 51-60.  
Forman, G. 2005. Counting positives accurately despite inaccurate 
classification. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2005, PROCEEDINGS 
3720: 564-575.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Forman, G; Cohen, I. 2004. Learning from little: Comparison of classifiers 
given little training. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: 
PKDD 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3202: 161-172.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Fragoudis, D; Meretakis, D; Likothanassis, S. 2005. Best terms: an efficient 
feature-selection algorithm for text categorization. KNOWLEDGE AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 8 (1): 16-33.  
Frasconi, P; Soda, G; Vullo, A. 2002. Hidden markov models for text 
categorization in multi-page documents. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 18 (2-3): 195-217.  
Freeman, R; Yin, HJ. 2002. Self-organising maps for hierarchical tree view 
document clustering using contextual information. INTELLIGENT DATA 
ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING - IDEAL 2002 2412: 
123-128.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Freeman, RT; Yin, HJ. 2004. Adaptive topological tree structure for 
document organisation and visualisation. NEURAL NETWORKS 17 (8-9): 
1255-1271.  
Freeman, RT; Yin, HJ. 2005. Tree view self-organisation of web content. 
NEUROCOMPUTING 63: 415-446.  
Freeman, RT; Yin, HJ. 2005. Web content management by self-
organization. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS 16 (5): 
1256-1268.  
Friedman, C; Liu, HF; Shagina, L. 2003. A vocabulary development and 
visualization tool based on natural language processing and the mining of 
textual patient reports. JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 36 
(3): 189-201.  
Fu, P; Zhang, DY; Ma, ZF; Dong, H. 2005. SVM-based semantic text 
categorization for large scale web information organization. ADVANCES 
 315
IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2005, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3496: 
931-936.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Fu, XH; Ma, ZF; Feng, BQ. 2004. Kernel-based semantic text categorization 
for large scale web information organization. GRID AND COOPERATIVE 
COMPUTING GCC 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3251: 389-396.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Fujino, R; Arimura, H; Arikawa, S. 2000. Discovering unordered and 
ordered phrase association patterns for text mining. KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 1805: 281-293.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Fuketa, M; Atlam, ES; Hanafusa, H; Morita, K; Kashiji, S; Mahmoud, R; 
Aoe, J. 2005. A new technique of determining speaker's intention for 
sentences in conversation. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 4, 
PROCEEDINGS 3684: 612-618.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Fuketa, M; Kadoya, Y; Atlam, E; Kunikata, T; Morita, K; Kashiji, S; Aoe, 
JI. 2005. A method of extracting and evaluating good and bad reputations 
for natural language expressions. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & DECISION MAKING 4 (2): 177-196.  
Fuketa, M; Lee, S; Tsuji, T; Okada, M; Aoe, J. 2000. A document 
classification method by using field association words. INFORMATION 
SCIENCES 126 (1-4): 57-70.  
Fukuoka, K; Nakano, T; Inuzuka, N. 2005. Organising documents based on 
standard-example split test. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3681: 787-793.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Furnkranz, J. 1999. Exploiting structural information for text classification 
on the WWW. ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS, 
PROCEEDINGS 1642: 487-497.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Galavotti, L; Sebastiani, F; Simi, M. 2000. Experiments on the use of feature 
selection and negative evidence in automated text categorization. 
RESEARCH AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY FOR DIGITAL 
LIBRARIES, PROCEEDINGS 1923: 59-68.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Gao, B; Liu, TY; Feng, G; Qin, T; Cheng, QS; Ma, WY. 2005. Hierarchical 
taxonomy preparation for text categorization using consistent bipartite 
 316
spectral graph copartitioning. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE 
AND DATA ENGINEERING 17 (9): 1263-1273.  
Gao, J; Zhang, J. 2004. Text retrieval using sparsified concept 
decomposition matrix. COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION 
SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3314: 523-529.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Gao, J; Zhang, J. 2005. Clustered SVD strategies in latent semantic 
indexing. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 41 (5): 
1051-1063.  
Gaussier, E; Goutte, C; Popat, K; Chen, F. 2002. A hierarchical model for 
clustering and categorising documents. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION 
REFTRIEVAL 2291: 229-247.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Ge, Y; Li, XG; Bao, YB; Wang, DL. 2005. Evaluating document-to-
document relevance based on document language model: Modeling, 
implementation and performance evaluation. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 593-
603.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Gelbukh, A; Sidorov, G; Guzman-Arenas, A. 1999. Use of a weighted topic 
hierarchy for document classification. TEXT, SPEECH AND DIALOGUE 
1692: 133-138.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Geng, YB; Zhu, GM; Qiu, JR; Fan, JL; Zhang, JC. 2004. An experimental 
study of boosting model classifiers for Chinese text categorization. 
DIGITAL LIBRARIES: INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION AND 
CROSS-FERTILIZATION, PROCEEDINGS 3334: 270-279.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Gentili, GL; Marinilli, M; Micarelli, A; Sciarrone, F. 2001. Text 
categorization in an intelligent agent for filtering information on the Web. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PATTERN RECOGNITION AND 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 15 (3): 527-549.  
Gerstenberger, MC; Wiemer, S; Jones, LM; Reasenberg, PA. 2005. Real-
time forecasts of tomorrow's earthquakes in California. NATURE 435 
(7040): 328-331. 
Ghani, R. 2004. Mining the web to add semantics to retail data mining. 
WEB MINING: FROM WEB TO SEMANTIC WEB 3209: 43-56.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Ghose, S; Jung, JG; Jo, GS. 2004. Collaborative detection of spam in peer-
to-peer paradigm based on multi-agent systems. GRID AND 
COOPERATIVE COMPUTING GCC 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3251: 971-
974.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 317
Gilardoni, F; Curcin, V; Karunanayake, K; Norgaard, J; Guo, Y. 2005. 
Integrated Informatics in life and materials sciences: An oxymoron?. QSAR 
& COMBINATORIAL SCIENCE 24 (1): 120-130. 
Giorgetti, D; Sebastiani, F. 2003. Automating survey coding by multiclass 
text categorization techniques. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY 
FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 54 (14): 1269-
1277.  
Girgis, MR; Aly, AA. 2003. A feature selection and classification technique 
for text categorization. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
COOPERATIVE INFORMATION SYSTEMS 12 (4): 441-454.  
Glenisson, P; Coessens, B; Van Vooren, S; Mathys, J; Moreau, Y; De Moor, 
B. 2004. TXTGate: profiling gene groups with text-based information. 
GENOME BIOLOGY 5 (6): art. no.-R43.  
Glenisson, P; Glanzel, W; Janssens, F; De Moor, B. 2005. Combining full 
text and bibliometric information in mapping scientific disciplines. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 41 (6): 1548-1572.  
Godbole, S; Harpale, A; Sarawagi, S; Chakrabarti, S. 2004. Document 
classification through interactive supervision of document and term labels. 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3202: 185-196.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Godbole, S; Harpale, A; Sarawagi, S; Chakrabarti, S. 2004. HIClass: Hyper-
interactive text classification by interactive supervision of document and 
term labels. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3202: 546-548.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Godbole, S; Sarawagi, S. 2004. Discriminative methods for multi-labeled 
classification. ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA 
MINING, PROCEEDINGS 3056: 22-30.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Goldman, JA; Chu, WW; Parker, DS; Goldman, RM. 1999. Term domain 
distribution analysis: A data mining tool for text databases. METHODS OF 
INFORMATION IN MEDICINE 38 (2): 96-101.  
Gomez, JM; Cortizo, JC; Puertas, E; Ruiz, M. 2004. Concept indexing for 
automated text categorization. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3136: 195-206.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Goncalves, T; Quaresma, P. 2004. Using IR techniques to improve 
automated text classification. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
 318
AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3136: 374-379.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
GORDON, MD. 1991. USER-BASED DOCUMENT CLUSTERING BY 
REDESCRIBING SUBJECT DESCRIPTIONS WITH A GENETIC 
ALGORITHM. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 42 (5): 311-322.  
Gordon, MD; Dumais, S. 1998. Using latent semantic indexing for literature 
based discovery. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 49 (8): 674-685.  
Gordon, MD; Lindsay, RK. 1996. Toward discovery support systems: A 
replication, re-examination, and extension of Swanson's work on literature-
based discovery of a connection between Raynaud's and fish oil. JOURNAL 
OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE 47 (2): 
116-128.  
Goren-Bar, D; Kuflik, T. 2005. Supporting user-subjective categorization 
with self-organizing maps and learning vector quantization. JOURNAL OF 
THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 56 (4): 345-355.  
Goren-Bar, D; Kuflik, T; Lev, D; Shoval, P. 2001. Automating personal 
categorization using artificial neural networks. USER MODELING 2001, 
PROCEEDINGS 2109: 188-198.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Greene, D; Cunningham, P. 2005. Producing accurate interpretable clusters 
from high-dimensional data. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN 
DATABASES: PKDD 2005 3721: 486-494.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Guerrero-Bote, VP; Lopez-Pujalte, C; de Moya-Anegon, F; Herrero-Solana, 
V. 2003. Comparison of neural models for document clustering. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE REASONING 34 (2-
3): 287-305.  
Gulla, JA; Brasethvik, T; Kaada, H. 2004. A flexible workbench for 
document analysis and text mining. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 3136: 336-347.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Guo, D; Berry, MW; Thompson, BB; Bailin, S. 2003. Knowledge-enhanced 
latent semantic indexing. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 6 (2): 225-250.  
Guo, GD; Wang, H; Bell, D; Bi, YX; Greer, K. 2004. An kNN model-based 
approach and its application in text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 2945: 559-
570.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 319
Guthrie, L; Liu, W; Xia, YQ. 2005. Text classification with tournament 
methods. TEXT, SPEECH AND DIALOGUE, PROCEEDINGS 3658: 77-
84.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Gutwin, C; Paynter, G; Witten, I; Nevill-Manning, C; Frank, E. 1999. 
Improving browsing in digital libraries with keyphrase indexes. DECISION 
SUPPORT SYSTEMS 27 (1-2): 81-104.  
Gweon, G; Rose, CP; Wittwer, J; Nueckles, M. 2005. Supporting efficient 
and reliable content analysis using automatic text processing technology. 
HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION - INTERACT 2005, 
PROCEEDINGS 3585: 1112-1115.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Haddad, H. 2003. French noun phrase indexing and mining for an 
information retrieval system. STRING PROCESSING AND 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 2857: 277-286.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hadjarian, A; Bala, J; Pachowicz, P. 2001. Text categorization through 
multistrategy learning and visualization. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 2004: 437-
443.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hakenberg, J; Schmeier, S; Kowald, A; Klipp, E; Leser, U. 2004. Finding 
kinetic parameters using text mining. OMICS-A JOURNAL OF 
INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY 8 (2): 131-152.  
Halkidi, M; Nguyen, B; Varlamis, I; Vazirgiannis, M. 2003. THESUS: 
Organizing Web document collections based on link semantics. VLDB 
JOURNAL 12 (4): 320-332.  
Hamilton, RJ. 2004. Material appropriate processing and elaboration: The 
impact of balanced and complementary types of processing on learning 
concepts from text. BRITISH JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 74: 221-237, Part 2.  
Hammouda, KM; Kamel, MS. 2004. Efficient phrase-based document 
indexing for web document clustering. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 16 (10): 1279-1296.  
Hammouda, KM; Matute, DN; Kamel, MS. 2005. CorePhrase: Keyphrase 
extraction for document clustering. MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA 
MINING IN PATTERN RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 3587: 265-274.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Han, L; Yuan, XB; Tang, QY; Kustra, R. 2004. An efficient method to 
estimate labelled sample size for transductive LDA(QDA/MDA) based on 
Bayes risk. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3201: 
274-285.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 320
Han, XX; Zu, GW; Ohyama, W; Wakabayashi, T; Kimura, F. 2004. 
Accuracy improvement of automatic text classification based on feature 
transformation and multi-classifier combination. CONTENT COMPUTING, 
PROCEEDINGS 3309: 463-468.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Hare, JS; Lewis, PH. 2005. On image retrieval using salient regions with 
vector-spaces and latent semantics. IMAGE AND VIDEO RETRIEVAL, 
PROCEEDINGS 3568: 540-549.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Hatzivassiloglou, V; Weng, WB. 2002. Learning anchor verbs for biological 
interaction patterns from published text articles. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INFORMATICS 67 (1-3): 19-32.  
He, J; Tan, AH; Tan, CL. 2003. On machine learning methods for Chinese 
document categorization. APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 18 (3): 311-322.  
He, Q. 1999. Knowledge discovery through co-word analysis. LIBRARY 
TRENDS 48 (1): 133-159.  
He, QM; Qiu, L; Zhao, GT; Wang, SK. 2004. Text categorization based on 
domain ontology. WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3306: 319-324.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
He, X; Zha, HY; Ding, CHQ; Simon, HD. 2002. Web document clustering 
using hyperlink structures. COMPUTATIONAL STATISTICS & DATA 
ANALYSIS 41 (1): 19-45.  
He, Y; Hui, SC; Fong, ACM. 2002. Mining a Web citation database for 
document clustering. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 16 (4): 
283-302.  
Heeren, F; Sihn, W. 2002. Message analysis for the recommendation of 
contact persons within defined subject fields. DEVELOPMENTS IN 
APPLIED ARTIFICAIL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 2358: 660-
669.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Hein, M; Lal, TN; Bousquet, O. 2004. Hilbertian metrics on probability 
measures and their application in SVM's. PATTERN RECOGNITION 3175: 
270-277.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Heinze, DT; Morsch, ML; Holbrook, J. 2001. Mining free-text medical 
records. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
ASSOCIATION: 254-258, Suppl. S.  
Helmstetter, A; Kagan, YY; Jackson, DD. 2005. Importance of small 
earthquakes for stress transfers and earthquake triggering. JOURNAL OF 
GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH-SOLID EARTH 110 (B5): art. no.-B05S08.  
 321
Hidalgo, JMG; Garcia, FC; Sanz, EP. 2005. Named entity recognition for 
Web content filtering. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 286-297.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hidalgo, JMG; Rodriguez, MD; Perez, JCC. 2005. The role of word sense 
disambiguation in automated text categorization. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 
298-309.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Higuchi, K. 2004. Computer assisted quantitative analysis of newspaper 
articles. SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY AND METHODS 19 (2): 161-176.  
Higuchi, K. 2004. Quantitative analysis of textual data: Differentiation and 
coordination of two approaches. SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY AND 
METHODS 19 (1): 101-115.  
Hirsch, L; Saeedi, M; Hirsch, R. 2005. Evolving rules for document 
classification. GENETIC PROGRAMMING, PROCEEDINGS 3447: 85-95.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hirsch, L; Saeedi, M; Hirsch, R. 2005. Evolving text classification rules 
with genetic programming. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 19 
(7): 659-676.  
Ho, TB; Nguyen, NB. 2002. Nonhierarchical document clustering based on 
a tolerance rough set model. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 17 (2): 199-212.  
Hoenkamp, E. 2003. Unitary operators on the document space. JOURNAL 
OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 54 (4): 314-320.  
Homayouni, R; Heinrich, K; Wei, L; Berry, MW. 2005. Gene clustering by 
Latent Semantic Indexing of MEDLINE abstracts. BIOINFORMATICS 21 
(1): 104-115.  
Hong, SJ; Weiss, SM. 2001. Advances in predictive models for data mining. 
PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 22 (1): 55-61, Sp. Iss. SI.  
Horng, JT; Yeh, CC. 2000. Applying genetic algorithms to query 
optimization in document retrieval. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 36 (5): 737-759.  
Horng, YJ; Chen, SM; Chang, YC; Lee, CH. 2005. A new method for fuzzy 
information retrieval based on fuzzy hierarchical clustering and fuzzy 
inference techniques. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS 13 
(2): 216-228.  
Hotho, A; Maedche, A; Staab, S; Studer, R. 2001. SEAL-II - The soft spot 
between richly structured and unstructured knowledge. JOURNAL OF 
UNIVERSAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 7 (7): 566-590.  
 322
Hotho, A; Staab, S; Stumme, G. 2003. Explaining text clustering results 
using semantic structures. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: 
PKDD 2003, PROCEEDINGS 2838: 217-228.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
How, BC; Kiong, WT. 2005. An examination of feature selection 
frameworks in text categorization. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 3689: 558-564.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Howland, P; Jeon, M; Park, H. 2003. Structure preserving dimension 
reduction for clustered text data based on the generalized singular value 
decomposition. SIAM JOURNAL ON MATRIX ANALYSIS AND 
APPLICATIONS 25 (1): 165-179.  
Howland, P; Park, H. 2004. Generalizing discriminant analysis using the 
generalized singular value decomposition. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 26 (8): 995-
1006.  
Hristovski, D; Peterlin, B; Mitchell, JA; Humphrey, SM. 2005. Using 
literature-based discovery to identify disease candidate genes. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INFORMATICS 74 (2-4): 
289-298.  
Hu, Y; Duan, JY; Chen, XM; Pei, BZ; Lu, RZ. 2005. A new method for 
sentiment classification in text retrieval. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2005, PROCEEDINGS 3651: 1-9.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Hu, YH; Hines, LM; Weng, HF; Zuo, DM; Rivera, M; Richardson, A; 
LaBaer, J. 2003. Analysis of genomic and proteomic data using advanced 
literature mining. JOURNAL OF PROTEOME RESEARCH 2 (4): 405-412.  
Hu, ZZ; Mani, I; Hermoso, V; Liu, HF; Wu, CH. 2004. IProLINK: an 
integrated protein resource for literature mining. COMPUTATIONAL 
BIOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY 28 (5-6): 409-416.  
Huang, CC; Chuang, SL; Chien, LF. 2005. Categorizing unknown text 
segments for information extraction using a search result mining approach. 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 576-586.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Huang, S; Xue, GR; Zhang, BY; Chen, Z; Yu, Y; Ma, WY. 2004. Multi-type 
features based Web document clustering. WEB INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3306: 253-265.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Huang, TM; Kecman, V. 2004. Semi-supervised learning from unbalanced 
labeled data - An improvement. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
 323
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 3215: 802-808.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Huang, W; Nakamori, Y; Wang, SY; Ma, TJ. 2004. Mining medline for new 
possible relations of concepts. COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION 
SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3314: 794-799.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Huang, XC; Chen, J; Yan, PL; Luo, X. 2005. Word segmentation and POS 
tagging for Chinese keyphrase extraction. ADVANCED DATA MINING 
AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3584: 364-369.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Huang, XC; Wu, M; Xia, DL; Yan, PL. 2005. Difference-similitude matrix 
in text classification. FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3614: 21-30, Part 2.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Hubert, G. 2005. A voting method for XML retrieval. ADVANCES IN 
XML INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 3493: 183-195.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hudomalj, E; Vidmar, G. 2003. OLAP and bibliographic databases. 
SCIENTOMETRICS 58 (3): 609-622.  
Hung, CL; Wermter, S; Smith, P. 2004. Hybrid neural document clustering 
using guided self-organization and wordnet. IEEE INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS 19 (2): 68-77.  
Hung, CL; Wermter, S; Smith, P. 2004. Predictive top-down knowledge 
improves neural exploratory bottom-up clustering. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 2997: 154-166.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hung, CM; Chien, LF. 2005. Text classification using Web corpora and EM 
algorithms. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY 3411: 12-23.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Husbands, P; Simon, H; Ding, C. 2005. Term norm distribution and its 
effects on Latent Semantic Indexing. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 41 (4): 777-787.  
Hussin, MF; Kamel, MS; Nagi, MH. 2004. An efficient two-level SOMART 
document clustering through dimensionality reduction. NEURAL 
INFORMATION PROCESSING 3316: 158-165.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hwang, BY; Lee, BJ. 2004. An efficient e-mail monitoring system for 
detecting proprietary information outflow using broad concept learning. 
 324
METAINFORMATICS 3002: 72-78.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Hwang, JH; Ryu, KH. 2004. A new XML clustering for structural retrieval. 
CONCEPTUAL MODELING - ER 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3288: 377-387.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hwang, JH; Ryu, KH. 2005. A new sequential mining approach to XML 
document clustering. WEB TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT - APWEB 2005 3399: 266-276.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Hwang, JH; Ryu, KH. 2005. Clustering and retrieval of XML documents by 
structure. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS - 
ICCSA 2005, PT 2 3480: 925-935.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Im, Y; Song, J; Park, D. 2005. Fuzzy post-clustering algorithm for web 
search engine. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 3689: 709-714.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Inoue, K; Urahama, K. 2001. Fuzzy clustering based on cooccurrence matrix 
and its application to data retrieval. ELECTRONICS AND 
COMMUNICATIONS IN JAPAN PART II-ELECTRONICS 84 (8): 10-19.  
Itert, L; Duch, W; Pestian, J. 2005. Medical document categorization using a 
Priori Knowledge. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS: BIOLOGICAL 
INSPIRATIONS - ICANN 2005, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3696: 641-646.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
JACOBS, PS; RAU, LF. 1993. INNOVATIONS IN TEXT 
INTERPRETATION. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 63 (1-2): 143-191.  
Jacquenet, FO; Largeron, C. 2004. Discovering unexpected information for 
technology watch. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 
2004, PROCEEDINGS 3202: 219-230.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Jebara, T; Kondor, R. 2003. Bhattacharyya and expected likelihood kernels. 
LEARNING THEORY AND KERNEL MACHINES 2777: 57-71.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Jeong, OR; Cho, DS. 2004. A personalized recommendation agent system 
for e-mail document classification. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND 
ITS APPLICATIONS - ICCSA 2004, PT 3 3045: 558-565.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Jiang, EP; Berry, MW. 2000. Solving total least-squares problems in 
information retrieval. LINEAR ALGEBRA AND ITS APPLICATIONS 316 
(1-3): 137-156.  
 325
Jing, LP; Ng, MK; Xu, J; Huang, JZ. 2005. Subspace clustering of text 
documents with feature weighting K-means algorithm. ADVANCES IN 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 
3518: 802-812.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Jing, LP; Ng, MK; Xu, J; Huang, JZX. 2005. On the performance of feature 
weighting K-means for text subspace clustering. ADVANCES IN WEB-
AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 3739: 502-512.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Johnson, DE; Oles, FJ; Zhang, T; Goetz, T. 2002. A decision-tree-based 
symbolic rule induction system for text categorization. IBM SYSTEMS 
JOURNAL 41 (3): 428-437.  
Jones, S; Paynter, GW. 2002. Automatic extraction of document keyphrases 
for use in digital libraries: Evaluation and applications. JOURNAL OF THE 
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 53 (8): 653-677.  
Joo, KH; Lee, WS. 2005. An incremental document clustering for the large 
document database. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 3689: 374-387.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Jorgensen, P. 2005. Incorporating context in text analysis by interactive 
activation with competition artificial neural networks. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 41 (5): 1081-1099.  
Juan, A; Vidal, E. 2002. On the use of Bernoulli mixture models for text 
classification. PATTERN RECOGNITION 35 (12): 2705-2710.  
Jung, SY; Hong, JH; Kim, TS. 2005. A statistical model for user preference. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 
17 (6): 834-843.  
Kaban, A; Girolami, MA. 2002. Fast extraction of semantic features from a 
latent semantic indexed text corpus. NEURAL PROCESSING LETTERS 15 
(1): 31-34.  
Kadoya, Y; Atlam, ES; Morita, K; Fuketa, M; Sumitomo, T; Aoe, J. 2004. A 
new classification method of determining the speaker's intention for 
sentences in conversation. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3213: 549-557.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kadoya, Y; Morita, K; Fuketa, M; Oono, M; Atlam, ES; Sumitomo, T; Aoe, 
JI. 2005. A sentence classification technique using intention association 
expressions. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMPUTER 
MATHEMATICS 82 (7): 777-792.  
 326
KAGAN, YY; JACKSON, DD. 1991. LONG-TERM EARTHQUAKE 
CLUSTERING. GEOPHYSICAL JOURNAL INTERNATIONAL 104 (1): 
117-133.  
Kaki, M; Aula, A. 2005. Findex: improving search result use through 
automatic filtering categories. INTERACTING WITH COMPUTERS 17 
(2): 187-206.  
Kando, N. 2003. CLIR at NTCIR workshop 3: Cross-language and cross-
genre retrieval. ADVANCES IN CROSS-LANGUAGE INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL 2785: 485-504.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kando, N. 2003. Evaluation of information access technologies at the 
NTCIR workshop. COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF 
MULTILINGUAL INFORMATION ACCESS SYSTEMS 3237: 29-43.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kaneda, Y; Ueda, N; Saito, K. 2004. Extended parametric mixture model for 
robust multi-labeled text categorization. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 3214: 616-623.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kang, DK; Zhang, J; Silvescu, A; Honavar, V. 2005. Multinomial event 
model based abstraction for sequence and text classification. 
ABSTRACTION, REFORMULATION AND APPROXIMATION, 
PROCEEDINGS 3607: 134-148.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Kang, JH; Ryu, KR; Kwon, HC. 2004. Using cluster-based sampling to 
select initial training set for active learning in text classification. 
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, 
PROCEEDINGS 3056: 384-388.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Kang, SS. 2004. Term-specific language modeling approach to text 
categorization. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
- ICCSA 2004, PT 4 3046: 735-742.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kang, YH. 2005. Representative terrn based feature selection method for 
SVM based document classification. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3681: 56-61.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Karopka, T; Scheel, T; Bansemer, S; Glass, A. 2004. Automatic construction 
of gene relation networks using text mining and gene expression data. 
 327
MEDICAL INFORMATICS AND THE INTERNET IN MEDICINE 29 (2): 
169-183.  
Karras, DA; Mertzios, BG. 2002. A robust meaning extraction methodology 
using supervised neural networks. AL 2002: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 2557: 498-510.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Characterization of FMN2 gene at human 
chromosome 1q43. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR 
MEDICINE 14 (3): 469-474.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout hesl genes in silico. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 14 (4): 747-751.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
DFNA5L, mouse DFNA5L, and rat DFNA5L genes in silico. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY 25 (3): 765-770.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
CKTSF1B2 and CKTSF1B3 genes in silico. ONCOLOGY REPORTS 12 
(2): 423-427.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
HES2, HES3, and HES5 genes in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
ONCOLOGY 25 (2): 529-534.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
ARHGAP23 gene in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
ONCOLOGY 25 (2): 535-540.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
FCHO2 and mouse Fcho2 genes in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 14 (2): 327-331.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of 
ARHGAP24 and ARHGAP25 genes in silico. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 14 (2): 333-338.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of the human 
FMN1 gene in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR 
MEDICINE 14 (1): 121-126.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of human 
FOXK1 gene in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR 
MEDICINE 14 (1): 127-132.  
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2005. Comparative genomics on nemo-like kinase 
gene. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY 26 (6): 1715-1719.  
 328
Katoh, M; Katoh, M. 2005. Identification and characterization of rat Ankrd6 
gene in silico. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR 
MEDICINE 15 (2): 359-363.  
Katoh, Y; Katoh, M. 2004. Identification and characterization of CDC50A, 
CDC50B and CDC50C genes in silico. ONCOLOGY REPORTS 12 (4): 
939-943.  
Katoh, Y; Katoh, M. 2004. KIF27 is one of orthologs for Drosophila Costal-
2. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY 25 (6): 1875-1880.  
Kawahara, M; Kawano, H. 1999. ROC performance evaluation of web-
based bibliographic navigator using extended association rules. INTERNET 
APPLICATIONS 1749: 216-225.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kawano, H; Kawahara, M. 2000. Mondou: Information navigator with 
visual interface. DATA WAREHOUSING AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 1874: 425-430.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kawano, M; Watada, J; Kawaura, T. 2005. Data mining method from text 
databases. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, PROCEEDINGS 3683: 1122-1128.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Kayed, A; Colomb, RM. 2002. Extracting ontological concepts for tendering 
conceptual structures. DATA & KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING 40 (1): 
71-89.  
Kazama, J; Tsujii, J. 2005. Maximum entropy models with inequality 
constraints: A case study on text categorization. MACHINE LEARNING 60 
(1-3): 159-194.  
Kehagias, A; Petridis, V; Kaburlasos, VG; Fragkou, P. 2003. A comparison 
of word- and sense-based text categorization using several classification 
algorithms. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
21 (3): 227-247.  
Keller, M; Bengio, S. 2005. A neural network for text representation. 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS: FORMAL MODELS AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS - ICANN 2005, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3697: 667-672.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Khan, MS; Khor, SW. 2004. Web document clustering using a hybrid neural 
network. APPLIED SOFT COMPUTING 4 (4): 423-432.  
Kibriya, AM; Frank, E; Pfahringer, B; Holmes, G. 2004. Multinomial naive 
Bayes for text categorization revisited. AI 2004: ADVANCES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3339: 488-499.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
 329
Kim, BM; Li, Q; Lee, KH; Kang, BY. 2005. Extraction of representative 
keywords considering co-occurrence in positive documents. FUZZY 
SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 
3614: 752-761, Part 2.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Kim, D; Jung, HM; Lee, GG. 2003. Unsupervised learning of mDTD 
extraction patterns for Web text mining. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 39 (4): 623-637.  
Kim, HJ; Kim, J. 2004. Combining active learning and boosting for Naive 
Bayes text classifiers. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 3129: 519-527.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kim, HJ; Kim, JU; Ra, YG. 2005. Boosting Naive Bayes text classification 
using uncertainty-based selective sampling. NEUROCOMPUTING 67: 403-
410.  
Kim, HJ; Lee, SG. 2002. User feedback-driven document clustering 
technique for information organization. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS E85D (6): 1043-1048.  
Kim, HJ; Lee, SG. 2004. An intelligent information system for organizing 
online text documents. KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
6 (2): 125-149.  
Kim, J; Kim, MH. 2004. An evaluation of passage-based text categorization. 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 23 (1): 47-65.  
Kim, JH. 2002. Bioinformatics and genomic medicine. GENETICS IN 
MEDICINE 4 (6): 62S-65S, Suppl. S.  
Kim, LC; Myoung, SH. 2003. Text categorization using hybrid multiple 
model schemes. ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS V 
2810: 88-99.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kim, S; Fox, EA. 2004. Interest-based user grouping model for collaborative 
filtering in digital libraries. DIGITAL LIBRARIES: INTERNATIONAL 
COLLABORATION AND CROSS-FERTILIZATION, PROCEEDINGS 
3334: 533-542.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kim, SB; Rim, HC. 2004. Recomputation of class relevance scores for 
improving text classification. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND 
INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 2945: 580-583.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kim, SB; Rim, HC; Kim, JD. 2005. Topic document model approach for 
naive Bayes text classification. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS E88D (5): 1091-1094.  
 330
Kim, SW; Oommen, BJ. 2002. Optimizing Kernel-based Nonlinear 
Subspace methods using Prototype Reduction Schemes. AL 2002: 
ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2557: 155-166.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Kim, SW; Oommen, BJ. 2004. Enhancing prototype reduction schemes with 
recursion: A method applicable for "large" data sets. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS MAN AND CYBERNETICS PART B-
CYBERNETICS 34 (3): 1384-1397.  
Kim, SW; Oommen, BJ. 2004. On using prototype reduction schemes to 
optimize kernel-based nonlinear subspace methods. PATTERN 
RECOGNITION 37 (2): 227-239.  
Kim, YS; Chang, JH; Zhang, BT. 2003. An empirical study on 
dimensionality optimization in text mining for linguistic knowledge 
acquisition. ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA 
MINING 2637: 111-116.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Kise, K; Junker, M; Dengel, A; Matsumoto, K. 2003. Effectiveness of 
passage-based document retrieval for short queries. IEICE 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS E86D (9): 1753-
1761.  
Kleinberg, J. 2003. Bursty and hierarchical structure in streams. DATA 
MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 7 (4): 373-397.  
Klopotek, MA. 2002. A new Bayesian tree learning method with reduced 
time and space complexity. FUNDAMENTA INFORMATICAE 49 (4): 
349-367.  
Klopotek, MA. 2002. Mining Bayesian network structure for large sets of 
variables. FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, 
PROCEEDINGS 2366: 114-122.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Klopotek, MA. 2005. Very large Bayesian multinets for text classification. 
FUTURE GENERATION COMPUTER SYSTEMS 21 (7): 1068-1082.  
Klopotek, MA; Wierzchon, ST; Ciesielski, K; Draminski, M; Czerski, D. 
2005. Coexistence of fuzzy and crisp concepts in document maps. 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS: FORMAL MODELS AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS - ICANN 2005, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3697: 859-864.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Klopotek, MA; Woch, M. 2003. Very large Bayesian networks in text 
classification. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE - ICCS 2003, PT I, 
PROCEEDINGS 2657: 397-406.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
 331
Ko, HM; Lam, W. 2005. A new approach for semi-supervised online news 
classification. WEB AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES AND 
INTERNET -RELATED SOCIAL ISSUES - HSI 2005 3597: 238-247.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Ko, Y; Park, J; Seo, J. 2004. Improving text categorization using the 
importance of sentences. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 40 (1): 65-79.  
Ko, Y; Seo, J. 2004. Using the feature projection technique based on a 
normalized voting method for text classification. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 40 (2): 191-208.  
Kobayashi, M; Aono, M; Takeuchi, H; Samukawa, H. 2002. Matrix 
computations for information retrieval and major and outlier cluster 
detection. JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL AND APPLIED 
MATHEMATICS 149 (1): 119-129.  
Kobayashi, N; Inui, K; Matsumoto, Y; Tateishi, K; Fukushima, T. 2005. 
Collecting evaluative expressions for opinion extraction. NATURAL 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 596-605.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kogan, J; Nicholas, C; Volkovich, V. 2003. Text mining with information - 
Theoretic clustering. COMPUTING IN SCIENCE & ENGINEERING 5 (6): 
52-59.  
Kolcz, A; Chowdhury, A. 2005. Improved naive Bayes for extremely 
skewed misclassification costs. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN 
DATABASES: PKDD 2005 3721: 561-568.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Kolda, TG; O'Leary, DP. 1998. A semidiscrete matrix decomposition for 
latent semantic indexing in information retrieval. ACM TRANSACTIONS 
ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 16 (4): 322-346.  
Kolda, TG; O'Leary, DP. 2000. Algorithm 805: Computation and uses of the 
semidiscrete matrix decomposition. ACM TRANSACTIONS ON 
MATHEMATICAL SOFTWARE 26 (3): 415-435.  
Kongovi, M; Guzman, JC; Dasigi, V. 2002. Text categorization: An 
experiment using phrases. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION 
REFTRIEVAL 2291: 213-228.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kontos, J; Malagardi, I; Alexandris, C; Bouligaraki, M. 2000. Greek verb 
semantic processing for stock market text mining. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING-NLP 2000, PROCEEDINGS 1835: 395-405.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
 332
Kontostathis, A; Pottenger, WM. 2006. A framework for understanding 
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) performance. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 42 (1): 56-73.  
Koster, CHA; Seutter, M. 2003. Taming wild phrases. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 161-176.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Koster, CHA; Seutter, M; Beney, J. 2003. Multi-classification of patent 
applications with Winnow. PERSPECTIVES OF SYSTEM 
INFORMATICS 2890: 546-555.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kostoff, R. 2001. The extraction of useful information from the biomedical 
literature. ACADEMIC MEDICINE 76 (12): 1265-1270.  
Kostoff, RN. 1994. Research Impact Quantification. R & D 
MANAGEMENT 24 (3): 206-218.  
Kostoff, RN. 1995. Research requirements for research impact assessment. 
RESEARCH POLICY 24 (6): 869-882.  
Kostoff, RN. 1997. Citation analysis cross-field normalization: A new 
paradigm. SCIENTOMETRICS 39 (3): 225-230.  
Kostoff, RN. 1998. The use and misuse of citation analysis in research 
evaluation - Comments on theories of citation?. SCIENTOMETRICS 43 (1): 
27-43.  
Kostoff, RN. 1999. Science and technology innovation. TECHNOVATION 
19 (10): 593-604.  
Kostoff, RN. 2002. Citation analysis of research performer quality. 
SCIENTOMETRICS 53 (1): 49-71.  
Kostoff, RN. 2002. Overcoming specialization. BIOSCIENCE 52 (10): 937-
941.  
Kostoff, RN. 2003. Bilateral asymmetry prediction. MEDICAL 
HYPOTHESES 61 (2): 265-266.  
Kostoff, RN. 2003. Role of technical literature in science and technology 
development and exploitation. JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 
29 (3): 223-228. 
Kostoff, RN; Bedford, CD; del Rio, JA; Cortes, HD; Karypis, G. 2004. 
Macromolecule mass spectrometry: Citation mining of user documents. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MASS 
SPECTROMETRY 15 (3): 281-287.  
Kostoff, RN; Block, JA. 2005. Factor matrix text filtering and clustering. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (9): 946-968.  
 333
Kostoff, RN; Boylan, R; Simons, GR. 2004. Disruptive technology 
roadmaps. TECHNOLOGICAL FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 
71 (1-2): 141-159.  
Kostoff, RN; Braun, T; Schubert, A; Toothman, DR; Humenik, JA. 2000. 
Fullerene data mining using bibliometrics and database tomography. 
JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND COMPUTER 
SCIENCES 40 (1): 19-39. 
Kostoff, RN; del Rio, JA. 2001. The impact of physics research. PHYSICS 
WORLD 14 (6): 47-51.  
Kostoff, RN; del Rio, JA; Cortes, HD; Smith, C; Smith, A; Wagner, C; 
Leydesdorff, L; Karypis, G; Malpohl, G; Tshiteya, R. 2005. The structure 
and infrastructure of Mexico's science and technology. TECHNOLOGICAL 
FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 72 (7): 798-814.  
Kostoff, RN; del Rio, JA; Humenik, JA; Garcia, EO; Ramirez, AM. 2001. 
Citation mining: Integrating text mining and bibliometrics for research user 
profiling. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 52 (13): 1148-1156.  
Kostoff, RN; DeMarco, RA. 2001. Extracting information from the literature 
by text mining. ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY 73 (13): 370A-378A.  
Kostoff, RN; Eberhart, HJ; Toothman, DR. 1997. Database tomography for 
information retrieval. JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 23 (4): 
301-311.  
Kostoff, RN; Eberhart, HJ; Toothman, DR. 1998. Database tomography for 
technical intelligence: A roadmap of the near-earth space science and 
technology literature. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 
34 (1): 69-85.  
Kostoff, RN; Eberhart, HJ; Toothman, DR. 1999. Hypersonic and 
supersonic flow roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE 50 (5): 427-447.  
Kostoff, RN; Eberhart, HJ; Toothman, DR; Pellenbarg, R. 1997. Database 
Tomography for technical intelligence: Comparative roadmaps of the 
research impact assessment literature and the journal of the American 
Chemical Society. SCIENTOMETRICS 40 (1): 103-138.  
Kostoff, RN; Geisler, E. 1999. Strategic management and implementation of 
textual data mining in government organizations. TECHNOLOGY 
ANALYSIS & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 11 (4): 493-525.  
Kostoff, RN; Green, KA; Toothman, DR; Humenik, JA. 2000. Database 
tomography applied to an aircraft science and technology investment 
strategy. JOURNAL OF AIRCRAFT 37 (4): 727-730.  
 334
Kostoff, RN; Karpouzian, G; Malpohl, G. 2005. Text mining the global 
abrupt-wing-stall literature. JOURNAL OF AIRCRAFT 42 (3): 661-664.  
Kostoff, RN; Martinez, WL. 2005. Is citation normalization realistic?. 
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 31 (1): 57-61.  
Kostoff, RN; Scaller, RR. 2001. Science and technology roadmaps. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT 48 (2): 132-143.  
Kostoff, RN; Shlesinger, MF. 2005. CAB: Citation-assisted background. 
SCIENTOMETRICS 62 (2): 199-212.  
Kostoff, RN; Shlesinger, MF; Malpohl, G. 2004. Fractals text mining using 
bibliometrics and database tomography. FRACTALS-COMPLEX 
GEOMETRY PATTERNS AND SCALING IN NATURE AND SOCIETY 
12 (1): 1-16.  
Kostoff, RN; Tshiteya, R; Pfeil, KM; Humenik, JA. 2002. Electrochemical 
power text mining using bibliometrics and database tomography. JOURNAL 
OF POWER SOURCES 110 (1): 163-176.  
Kostoff, RN; Tshiteya, R; Pfeil, KM; Humenik, JA; Karypis, G. 2005. 
Power source roadmaps using bibliometrics and database tomography. 
ENERGY 30 (5): 709-730.  
Kotis, K; Vouros, GA; Stergiou, K. 2004. Capturing semantics towards 
automatic coordination of domain ontologies. ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE: METHODOLOGY, SYSTEMS, AND APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3192: 22-32.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Kotropoulos, C; Pitas, I. 2003. Segmentation of ultrasonic images using 
Support Vector Machines. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 24 (4-5): 
715-727.  
Kou, HZ; Napoli, A; Toussaint, Y. 2005. Application of text categorization 
to astronomy field. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 32-43.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
KOULOPOULOS, TM. 1992. DOCUMENT CLUSTERING. BYTE 17 (6): 
272-273.  
Kowalczyk, A; Raskutti, B; Ferra, H. 2004. Exploring potential of leave-
one-out estimator for calibration of SVM in text mining. ADVANCES IN 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 
3056: 361-372.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Krishnapuram, R; Joshi, A; Nasraoui, O; Yi, LY. 2001. Low-complexity 
fuzzy relational clustering algorithms for Web mining. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS 9 (4): 595-607.  
 335
Krogel, MA; Scheffer, T. 2004. Multi-relational learning, text mining, and 
semi-supervised learning for functional genomics. MACHINE LEARNING 
57 (1-2): 61-81.  
Kruengkrai, C; Sornlertlamvanich, V; Isahara, H. 2005. Document clustering 
using linear partitioning hyperplanes and reallocation. INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY 3411: 36-47.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Kruger, O; Ladewig, J; Koster, K; Ragg, H. 2002. Widespread occurrence of 
serpin genes with multiple reactive centre-containing exon cassettes in 
insects and nematodes. GENE 293 (1-2): 97-105.  
Ku, S; Lee, B; Lee, D. 2002. TWIMC: An anonymous recipient E-mail 
system. DEVELOPMENTS IN APPLIED ARTIFICAIL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 2358: 363-372.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Kuflik, T; Boger, Z; Shoval, P. 2006. Filtering search results using an 
optimal set of terms identified by an artificial neural network. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 42 (2): 469-483.  
Kugo, A; Yoshikawa, H; Shimoda, H; Wakabayashi, Y. 2005. Text mining 
analysis of public comments regarding high-level radioactive waste disposal. 
JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 42 (9): 755-
767.  
Kuhnhold, M. 2000. The concept of "text mining". 
WIRTSCHAFTSINFORMATIK 42 (2): 175-179.  
Kuo, HKJ; Lee, CH. 2003. Discriminative training of natural language call 
routers. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SPEECH AND AUDIO 
PROCESSING 11 (1): 24-35.  
Kurimo, M. 2002. Thematic indexing of spoken documents by using self-
organizing maps. SPEECH COMMUNICATION 38 (1-2): 29-45.  
Kusumura, Y; Hijikata, Y; Nishida, S. 2004. NTM-Agent: Text mining 
agent for net auction. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND 
SYSTEMS E87D (6): 1386-1396.  
Kwon, OW; Lee, JH. 2003. Text categorization based on k-nearest neighbor 
approach for Web site classification. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 39 (1): 25-44.  
Lagus, K. 2002. Text retrieval using self-organized document maps. 
NEURAL PROCESSING LETTERS 15 (1): 21-29.  
Lagus, K; Honkela, T; Kaski, S; Kohonen, T. 1999. Websom for textual data 
mining. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE REVIEW 13 (5-6): 345-364.  
 336
Lagus, K; Kaski, S; Kohonen, T. 2004. Mining massive document 
collections by the WEBSOM method. INFORMATION SCIENCES 163 (1-
3): 135-156.  
Lakshminarayan, C; Yu, QF; Benson, A. 2005. Improving customer 
experience via text mining. DATABASES IN NETWORKED 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3433: 288-299.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lam, W; Han, YQ. 2003. Automatic textual document categorization based 
on generalized instance sets and a metamodel. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 25 (5): 628-
633.  
Lam, W; Ruiz, M; Srinivasan, P. 1999. Automatic text categorization and its 
application to text retrieval. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE 
AND DATA ENGINEERING 11 (6): 865-879.  
Landau, D; Feldman, R; Aumann, Y; Fresko, M; Lindell, Y; Lipshtat, O; 
Zamir, O. 1998. TextVis: An integrated visual environment for text mining. 
PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
1510: 56-64.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Lanquillon, C. 2000. Partially supervised text classification: Combining 
labeled and unlabeled documents using an EM-like scheme. MACHINE 
LEARNING: ECML 2000 1810: 229-237.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Lapalut, S. 1996. Text clustering to help knowledge acquisition from 
documents. ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION 1076: 115-
130.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Lappe, M; Holm, L. 2005. Algorithms for protein interaction networks. 
BIOCHEMICAL SOCIETY TRANSACTIONS 33: 530-534, Part 3.  
Lau, RYK. 2003. Belief revision for adaptive recommender agents in E-
commerce. INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED 
LEARNING 2690: 99-103.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Lau, RYK; van den Brand, P. 2003. Belief revision and text mining for 
adaptive recommender agents. FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS 2871: 226-230.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Lebart, L. 1998. Text mining in different languages. APPLIED 
STOCHASTIC MODELS AND DATA ANALYSIS 14 (4): 323-334.  
Lee, B; Park, Y. 2003. An e-mail monitoring system for detecting outflow of 
confidential documents. INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY 
 337
INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 2665: 371-374.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lee, CH; Yang, HC. 2003. A multilingual text mining approach based on 
self-organizing maps. APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 18 (3): 295-310.  
Lee, CK; Lee, GG. 2006. Information gain and divergence-based feature 
selection for machine learning-based text categorization. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 42 (1): 155-165.  
Lee, KC; Kang, SS; Hahn, KS. 2005. A term weighting approach for text 
categorization. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 3689: 673-678.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Lee, KH; Kay, J; Kang, BH. 2003. Active learning: Applying RinSCut 
thresholding strategy to uncertainty sampling. AI 2003: ADVANCES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2903: 922-932.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Lee, KS; Kageura, K. 2003. Incorporating virtual relevant documents for 
learning in text categorization. DIGITAL LIBRARIES: TECHNOLOGY 
AND MANAGEMENT OF INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR GLOBAL 
ACCESS 2911: 62-72.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lee, KS; Kageura, K; Choi, KS. 2004. Implicit ambiguity resolution using 
incremental clustering in cross-language information retrieval. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 40 (1): 145-159.  
Lee, KS; Park, YC; Choi, KS. 2001. Re-ranking model based on document 
clusters. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 37 (1): 1-14.  
Lee, MD; Corlett, EY. 2003. Sequential sampling models of human text 
classification. COGNITIVE SCIENCE 27 (2): 159-193.  
LEHNERT, W; SODERLAND, S; ARONOW, D; FENG, FF; SHMUELI, 
A. 1995. INDUCTIVE TEXT CLASSIFICATION FOR MEDICAL 
APPLICATIONS. JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL & THEORETICAL 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 7 (1): 49-80.  
Leopold, E; Kindermann, J. 2002. Text categorization with support vector 
machines. How to represent texts in input space ?. MACHINE LEARNING 
46 (1-3): 423-444.  
Lertnattee, V; Theeramunkong, T. 2003. Term-length normalization for 
centroid-based text categorization. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 2773: 850-856.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
 338
Lertnattee, V; Theeramunkong, T. 2004. Effect of term distributions on 
centroid-based text categorization. INFORMATION SCIENCES 158: 89-
115.  
Lertnattee, V; Theeramunkong, T. 2004. Multidimensional text classification 
for drug information. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE 8 (3): 306-312.  
Lertnattee, V; Theeramunkong, T. 2004. Parallel text categorization for 
multi-dimensional data. PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING: 
APPLICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGIES, PROCEEDINGS 3320: 38-41.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Leslie, C; Kuang, R. 2003. Fast kernels for inexact string matching. 
LEARNING THEORY AND KERNEL MACHINES 2777: 114-128.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Letsche, TA; Berry, MW. 1997. Large-scale information retrieval with latent 
semantic indexing. INFORMATION SCIENCES 100 (1-4): 105-137.  
Leuski, A; Allan, J. 2004. Interactive information retrieval using clustering 
and spatial proximity. USER MODELING AND USER-ADAPTED 
INTERACTION 14 (2-3): 259-288.  
Lewis, KN; Robinson, MD; Hughes, TR; Hogue, CWV. 2004. MyMED: A 
database system for biomedical research on MEDLINE data. IBM 
SYSTEMS JOURNAL 43 (4): 756-767.  
Li, BL; Chen, YZ; Bai, XJ; Yu, SW. 2003. Experimental study on 
representing units in Chinese text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING, 
PROCEEDINGS 2588: 602-614.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Li, H; Li, C. 2004. Word translation disambiguation using bilingual 
bootstrapping. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS 30 (1): 1-22.  
Li, H; Yamanishi, K. 2002. Text classification using ESC-based stochastic 
decision lists. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 38 (3): 
343-361.  
Li, H; Yamanishi, K. 2003. Topic analysis using a finite mixture model. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 39 (4): 521-541.  
Li, HP; Doermann, D; Kia, O. 1999. Text extraction, enhancement and OCR 
in digital video. DOCUMENT ANALYSIS SYSTEMS: THEORY AND 
PRACTICE 1655: 363-377.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Li, RL; Tao, XP; Tang, L; Hu, YF. 2004. Using maximum entropy model 
for Chinese text categorization. ADVANCED WEB TECHNOLOGIES 
 339
AND APPLICATIONS 3007: 578-587.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Li, XG; Yu, G; Wang, DL. 2005. MMPClust: A skew prevention algorithm 
for model-based document clustering. DATABASE SYSTEMS FOR 
ADVANCED APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3453: 536-547.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Li, XG; Yu, G; Wang, DL; Bao, YB. 2005. ESPClust: An effective skew 
prevention method for model-based document clustering. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 3406: 735-745.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Li, XL; Shi, ZZ. 2002. Innovating web page classification through reducing 
noise. JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 17 
(1): 9-17.  
Liang, BY; Tang, J; Li, JZ; Wang, KH. 2004. Keyword extraction based 
peer clustering. GRID AND COOPERATIVE COMPUTING GCC 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3251: 827-830.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Liao, SS; Jiang, MH. 2005. An improved method of feature selection based 
on concept attributes in text classification. ADVANCES IN NATURAL 
COMPUTATION, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3610: 1140-1149.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liao, YH; Vemuri, VR. 2002. Use of K-Nearest Neighbor classifier for 
intrusion detection. COMPUTERS & SECURITY 21 (5): 439-448.  
LIDDY, ED; PAIK, WJ; YU, ES. 1994. TEXT CATEGORIZATION FOR 
MULTIPLE USERS BASED ON SEMANTIC FEATURES FROM A 
MACHINE-READABLE DICTIONARY. ACM TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 12 (3): 278-295.  
Lim, HS. 2004. Improving kNN based text classification with well estimated 
parameters. NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING 3316: 516-523.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lin, CT; Chen, HC; Nunamaker, JF. 1999. Verifying the proximity and size 
hypothesis for self-organizing maps. JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 16 (3): 57-70.  
Lin, HF; Zhan, XG; Yao, TS. 1999. Example-based Chinese text filtering 
model. INTERNET APPLICATIONS 1749: 415-420.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lin, TY; Chiang, IJ. 2005. A simplicial complex, a hypergraph, structure in 
the latent semantic space of document clustering. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF APPROXIMATE REASONING 40 (1-2): 55-80.  
 340
Lindsay, RK; Gordon, MD. 1999. Literature-based discovery by lexical 
statistics. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 50 (7): 574-587.  
Lindsey, CS; Stromberg, M. 2000. Image classification using the frequencies 
of simple features. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 21 (3): 265-268.  
Liu, CL; Chang, CT; Ho, JH. 2004. Case instance generation and refinement 
for case-based criminal summary judgments in Chinese. JOURNAL OF 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 20 (4): 783-800.  
Liu, F; Jenssen, TK; Nygaard, V; Sack, J; Hovig, E. 2004. FigSearch: a 
figure legend indexing and classification system. BIOINFORMATICS 20 
(16): 2880-2882.  
Liu, F; Ma, FY; Li, ML; Huang, LP. 2004. A framework for semantic grid 
service discovery. WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004 
WORKSHOPS, PROCEEDINGS 3307: 3-10.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, F; Ma, FY; Li, ML; Huang, LP. 2004. Distributed information retrieval 
based on hierarchical semantic overlay network. GRID AND 
COOPERATIVE COMPUTING GCC 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3251: 657-
664.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, F; Ma, FY; Ye, YM; Li, ML; Yu, JD. 2005. IglooG: A distributed web 
crawler based on grid service. WEB TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT - APWEB 2005 3399: 207-216.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, F; Zhang, WJ; Ma, FY; Li, ML. 2004. SPSS: A case of semantic peer-
to-peer search system. WEB INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3306: 718-723.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Liu, F; Zhang, WJ; Yu, S; Ma, FY; Li, ML. 2004. A peer-to-peer hypertext 
categorization using Directed Acyclic Graph Support Vector Machines. 
PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING: APPLICATIONS AND 
TECHNOLOGIES, PROCEEDINGS 3320: 54-57.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, FF; Jin, QL; Zhao, J; Xu, B. 2005. Bilingual chunk alignment based on 
interactional matching and probabilistic latent semantic indexing. 
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 416-425.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, H; Huang, ST. 2003. A genetic semi-supervised fuzzy clustering 
approach to text classification. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 2762: 173-180.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 341
Liu, H; Huang, ST. 2003. Evolutionary semi-supervised fuzzy clustering. 
PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 24 (16): 3105-3113.  
Liu, JJ; Cutler, G; Li, WX; Pan, Z; Peng, SH; Hoey, T; Chen, LB; Ling, 
XFB. 2005. Multiclass cancer classification and biomarker discovery using 
GA-based algorithms. BIOINFORMATICS 21 (11): 2691-2697.  
Liu, RL; Lin, WJ. 2003. Mining for interactive identification of users' 
information needs. INFORMATION SYSTEMS 28 (7): 815-833.  
Liu, RL; Lin, WJ. 2005. Incremental mining of information interest for 
personalized web scanning. INFORMATION SYSTEMS 30 (8): 630-648.  
Liu, T; Guo, J. 2005. Text similarity computing based on standard deviation. 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT COMPUTING, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 
3644: 456-464.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, XM; Yin, JW; Dong, JX; Ghafoor, MA. 2005. An improved FloatBoost 
algorithm for Naive Bayes text classification. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 3739: 162-171.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, XW; He, PL. 2005. A study on text clustering algorithms based on 
frequent term sets. ADVANCED DATA MINING AND APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3584: 347-354.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Liu, XZ; Chen, M; Yang, GW. 2004. Latent semantic indexing in peer-to-
peer networks. ORGANIC AND PERVASIVE COMPUTING - ARCS 2004 
2981: 63-77.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Liu, Y; Carbonell, J; Jin, R. 2003. A new pairwise ensemble approach for 
text classification. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2003 2837: 277-288.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Liu, Y; Loh, HT; Tor, SB. 2005. Comparison of extreme learning machine 
with support vector machine for text classification. INNOVATIONS IN 
APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 3533: 390-399.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
LOCHBAUM, KE; STREETER, LA. 1989. COMPARING AND 
COMBINING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF LATENT SEMANTIC 
INDEXING AND THE ORDINARY VECTOR-SPACE MODEL FOR 
INFORMATION-RETRIEVAL. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 25 (6): 665-676.  
Lodhi, H; Saunders, C; Shawe-Taylor, J; Cristianini, N; Watkins, C. 2002. 
Text classification using string kernels. JOURNAL OF MACHINE 
LEARNING RESEARCH 2 (3): 419-444.  
 342
Loh, S; De Oliveira, JPM; Gameiro, MA. 2003. Knowledge discovery in 
texts for constructing decision support systems. APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 
18 (3): 357-366.  
Lorensuhewa, A; Pham, B; Geva, S. 2003. Style recognition using keyword 
analysis. MINING MULTIMEDIA AND COMPLEX DATA 2797: 266-
280.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Losee, RM; Church, L. 2005. Are two document clusters better than one? 
The cluster performance question for information retrieval. JOURNAL OF 
THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 56 (1): 106-108.  
Losiewicz, P; Oard, DW; Kostoff, RN. 2000. Textual data mining to support 
science and technology management. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 15 (2): 99-119.  
Lu, HJ; Luo, Q; Shun, YK. 2003. Extending a Web Browser with client-side 
mining. WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND APPLICATIONS 2642: 166-177.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lu, JJ; Xu, BW; Jiang, JX. 2004. Generating different semantic spaces for 
document classification. CONTENT COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 3309: 
430-436.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lu, JJ; Xu, BW; Jiang, JX; Kang, DZ. 2004. Non-negative matrix 
factorization for filtering Chinese document. COMPUTATIONAL 
SCIENCE - ICCS 2004, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3037: 113-120.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lu, W; Kan, MY. 2005. Supervised categorization of JavaScript (TM) using 
program analysis features. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 3689: 160-173.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lu, WH; Chien, LF; Lee, HJ. 2004. Anchor text mining for translation of 
Web queries: A transitive translation approach. ACM TRANSACTIONS 
ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 22 (2): 242-269.  
Luehrs, R; Pavon, J; Schneider, M. 2003. DEMOS tools for online 
discussion and decision making. WEB ENGINEERING, PROCEEDINGS 
2722: 525-528.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Luo, DS; Wang, XH; Wu, XH; Chi, HS. 2005. Learning outliers to refine a 
corpus for Chinese webpage categorization. ADVANCES IN NATURAL 
COMPUTATION, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3610: 167-178.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Luo, X; Zincir-Heywood, AN. 2004. Analyzing the temporal sequences for 
text categorization. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
 343
PROCEEDINGS 3215: 498-505.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Luo, X; Zincir-Heywood, AN. 2005. Evaluation of two systems on multi-
class multi-label document classification. FOUNDATIONS OF 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3488: 161-169.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Lussner, W. 2000. Knowledge management technologies. NFD 
INFORMATION-WISSENSCHAFT UND PRAXIS 51 (6): 364-366.  
Maarek, YS; BenShaul, IZ. 1996. Automatically organizing bookmarks per 
contents. COMPUTER NETWORKS AND ISDN SYSTEMS 28 (7-11): 
1321-1333.  
Mack, R; Mukherjea, S; Soffer, A; Uramoto, N; Brown, E; Coden, A; 
Cooper, J; Inokuchi, A; Iyer, B; Mass, Y; Matsuzawa, H; Subramaniam, LV. 
2004. Text analytics for life science using the unstructured information 
management architecture. IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 43 (3): 490-515.  
MACLEOD, KJ; ROBERTSON, W. 1991. A NEURAL ALGORITHM 
FOR DOCUMENT CLUSTERING. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 27 (4): 337-346.  
MacMullen, WJ; Vaughan, KTL; Moore, ME. 2004. Planning 
bioinformatics education and information services in an academic health 
sciences library. COLLEGE & RESEARCH LIBRARIES 65 (4): 320-333.  
Macskassy, SA; Hirsh, H; Banerjee, A; Dayanik, AA. 2003. Converting 
numerical classification into text classification. ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 143 (1): 51-77.  
Maderlechner, G; Suda, P; Bruckner, T. 1997. Classification of documents 
by form and content. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 18 (11-13): 
1225-1231.  
Makagonov, P; Sboychakov, K. 2001. Software for creating domain-
oriented dictionaries and document clustering in full-text databases. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 2004: 454-456.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Makrehchi, M; Kamel, MS. 2005. Text classification using small number of 
features. MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA MINING IN PATTERN 
RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 3587: 580-589.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Manjula, D; Geetha, TV. 2004. Description logic based knowledge 
representation for information extraction and query processing. IETE 
JOURNAL OF RESEARCH 50 (6): 437-441.  
 344
Marcus, A; Maletic, JI; Sergeyev, A. 2005. Recovery of traceability links 
between software documentation and source code. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND KNOWLEDGE 
ENGINEERING 15 (5): 811-836.  
Marques, NC; Braud, A. 2003. Mining generalized character n-grams in 
large corpora. PROGRESS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2902: 419-
423.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Martin, DMA; Hill, P; Barton, GJ; Flavell, AJ. 2003. Visual representation 
of database search results: the RHIMS Plot. BIOINFORMATICS 19 (8): 
1037-1038.  
Martin, EPG; Bremer, EG; Guerin, MC; DeSesa, C; Jouve, O. 2004. 
Analysis of protein/protein interactions through biomedical literature: Text 
mining of abstracts vs. text mining of full text articles. KNOWLEDGE 
EXPLORATION IN LIFE SCIENCE INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 
3303: 96-108.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Martinez-Trinidad, JF; Beltran-Martinez, B; Ruiz-Shulcloper, J. 2000. A 
tool to discover the main themes in a Spanish or English document. 
EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 19 (4): 319-327.  
Martin-Merino, M; Munoz, A. 2001. Self Organizing Map and Sammon 
Mapping for asymmetric proximities. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL 
NETWORKS-ICANN 2001, PROCEEDINGS 2130: 429-435.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Martin-Merino, M; Munoz, A. 2005. Extending the SOM algorithm to 
visualize word relationships. ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA 
ANALYSIS VI, PROCEEDINGS 3646: 228-238.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Martin-Merino, M; Munoz, A. 2005. Visualizing asymmetric proximities 
with SOM and MDS models. NEUROCOMPUTING 63: 171-192.  
Martin-Valdivia, MT; Garcia-Vega, M; Urena-Lopez, LA. 2003. LVQ for 
text categorization using a multilingual linguistic resource. 
NEUROCOMPUTING 55 (3-4): 665-679.  
Marton, Y; Wu, N; Hellerstein, L. 2005. On compression-based text 
classification. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 3408: 300-
314.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Massey, L. 2003. On the quality of ART1 text clustering. NEURAL 
NETWORKS 16 (5-6): 771-778.  
Masuyama, T; Nakagawa, H. 2003. Cascaded feature selection in SVMs text 
categorization. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT 
TEXT PROCESSING, PROCEEDINGS 2588: 588-591.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 345
Masuyama, T; Nakagawa, H. 2004. Two step POS selection for SVM based 
text categorization. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND 
SYSTEMS E87D (2): 373-379.  
Mather, LA. 2000. A linear algebra measure of cluster quality. JOURNAL 
OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE 51 (7): 
602-613.  
Matsuda, Y; Yamaguchi, K. 2005. An efficient MDS algorithm for the 
analysis of massive document collections. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 3682: 1015-1021.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Matsumoto, S; Takamura, H; Okumura, M. 2005. Sentiment classification 
using word sub-sequences and dependency sub-trees. ADVANCES IN 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 
3518: 301-311.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Matsuzawa, H; Fukuda, T. 2000. Mining structured association patterns 
from databases. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, 
PROCEEDINGS 1805: 233-244.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Mavroeidis, D; Tsatsaronis, G; Vazirgiannis, M; Theobald, M; Weikum, G. 
2005. Word sense disambiguation for exploiting hierarchical thesauri in text 
classification. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 
2005 3721: 181-192.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
McCallum, AK; Nigam, K; Rennie, J; Seymore, K. 2000. Automating the 
construction of internet portals with machine learning. INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL 3 (2): 127-163.  
McDonald, DM; Chen, HC; Su, H; Marshall, BB. 2004. Extracting gene 
pathway relations using a hybrid grammar: the Arizona Relation Parser. 
BIOINFORMATICS 20 (18): 3370-3378.  
Meier, M; Beckh, M. 2000. Text mining. WIRTSCHAFTSINFORMATIK 
42 (2): 165-167.  
Menon, R; Tong, LH; Sathiyakeerthi, S; Brombacher, A. 2003. Automated 
text classification for fast feedback - Investigating the effects of document 
representation. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGNET INFORMATION 
AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 2774: 1008-
1014.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Menon, R; Tong, LH; Sathiyakeerthi, S; Brombacher, A; Leong, C. 2004. 
The needs and benefits of applying textual data mining within the product 
 346
development process. QUALITY AND RELIABILITY ENGINEERING 
INTERNATIONAL 20 (1): 1-15.  
Merkl, D. 1997. Exploration of document collections with self-organizing 
maps: A novel approach to similarity representation. PRINCIPLES OF 
DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1263: 101-111.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Merkl, D. 1998. Text classification with self-organizing maps: Some lessons 
learned. NEUROCOMPUTING 21 (1-3): 61-77.  
Metzger, J; Schillo, M; Fischer, K. 2003. A multiagent-based peer-to-peer 
network in Java for distributed spam filtering. MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS 
AND APPLICATIONS III, PROCEEDINGS 2691: 616-625.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Miller, DJ; Browning, J. 2003. A mixture model and EM-based algorithm 
for class discovery, robust classification, and outlier rejection in mixed 
labeled/unlabeled data sets. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN 
ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 25 (11): 1468-1483.  
Miller, MH. 1997. A method for representing search results in three 
dimensions. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
ASSOCIATION: 533-537, Suppl. S.  
Milward, D; Bjareland, M; Hayes, W; Maxwell, M; Oberg, L; Tilford, N; 
Thomas, J; Hale, R; Knight, S; Barnes, JE. 2005. Ontology-based interactive 
information extraction from scientific abstracts. COMPARATIVE AND 
FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS 6 (1-2): 67-71.  
Missikoff, M; Velardi, P; Fabriani, P. 2003. Text mining techniques to 
automatically enrich a domain ontology. APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 18 
(3): 323-340.  
Miyamoto, S. 2003. Information clustering based on fuzzy multisets. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 39 (2): 195-213.  
Miyamoto, S; Mizutani, K. 2004. Fuzzy multiset model and methods of 
nonlinear document clustering for information retrieval. MODELING 
DECISIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3131: 
273-283.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Mladenic, D; Grobelnik, M. 2003. Feature selection on hierarchy of web 
documents. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 35 (1): 45-87.  
Modha, DS; Spangler, WS. 2003. Feature weighting in k-means clustering. 
MACHINE LEARNING 52 (3): 217-237.  
Moens, MF; Dumortier, J. 2000. Text categorization: the assignment of 
subject descriptors to magazine articles. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 36 (6): 841-861.  
 347
Mons, B. 2005. Which gene did you mean?. BMC BIOINFORMATICS 6: 
art. no.-142.  
Montanes, E; Combarro, EF; Diaz, I; Ranilla, J. 2005. Towards automatic 
and optimal Filtering Levels for Feature Selection in Text Categorization. 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS VI, PROCEEDINGS 
3646: 239-248.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montanes, E; Combarro, EF; Diaz, I; Ranilla, J; Quevedo, JR. 2004. Words 
as rules: Feature selection in text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL 
SCIENCE - ICCS 2004, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 3036: 666-669.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montanes, E; Diaz, I; Ranilla, J; Combarro, EF; Fernandez, J. 2005. Scoring 
and selecting terms for text categorization. IEEE INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS 20 (3): 40-47.  
Montanes, E; Fernandez, J; Diaz, I; Combarro, EF; Ranilla, J. 2003. 
Measures of rule quality for feature selection in Text Categorization. 
ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS V 2810: 589-598.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montanes, E; Quevedo, JR; Diaz, I. 2003. A wrapper approach with support 
vector machines for text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS 
IN NEURAL MODELING, PT 1 2686: 230-237.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montes-y-Gomez, M; Gelbukh, A; Lopez-Lopez, A. 2001. A statistical 
approach to the discovery of ephemeral associations among news topics. 
DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS 2113: 491-500.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montes-y-Gomez, M; Gelbukh, A; Lopez-Lopez, A. 2002. Text mining at 
detail level using conceptual graphs. CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURES: 
INTEGRATION AND INTERFACES, PROCEEDINGS 2393: 122-136.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Montes-y-Gomez, M; Gelbukh, A; Lopez-Lopez, A; BaezaYates, R. 2001. 
Flexible comparison of conceptual graphs. DATABASE AND EXPERT 
SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS 2113: 102-111.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Montes-y-Gomez, M; Perez-Coutino, M; Villasenor-Pineda, L; Lopez-
Lopez, A. 2004. Contextual exploration of text collections. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 2945: 488-497.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
 348
Morgan, AA; Hirschman, L; Colosimo, M; Yeh, AS; Colombe, JB. 2004. 
Gene name identification and normalization using a model organism 
database. JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS 37 (6): 396-410.  
Morik, K; Kopcke, H. 2005. Features for learning local patterns in time-
stamped data. LOCAL PATTERN DETECTION 3539: 98-114.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Morita, K; Kadoya, Y; Atlam, ES; Fuketa, M; Kashiji, S; Aoe, J. 2004. A 
method of extracting and evaluating popularity and unpopularity for natural 
language expressions. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3213: 567-574.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Morizet-Mahoudeaux, P; Bachimont, B. 2005. Indexing and mining 
audiovisual data. ACTIVE MINING 3430: 34-58.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Morris, S; DeYong, C; Wu, Z; Salman, S; Yemenu, D. 2002. DIVA: a 
visualization system for exploring document databases for technology 
forecasting. COMPUTERS & INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING 43 (4): 841-
862. 
Moschitti, A. 2003. A study on optimal parameter tuning for Rocchio text 
classifier. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 420-435.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Moschitti, A; Basili, R. 2004. Complex linguistic features for text 
classification: A comprehensive study. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 2997: 181-196.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Mostafa, J; Mukhopadhyay, S; Lam, W; Palakal, M. 1997. A multilevel 
approach to intelligent information filtering: Model, system, and evaluation. 
ACM TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 15 (4): 368-399.  
Moyotl-Hernandez, E; Jimenez-Salazar, H. 2005. Enhancement of DTP 
feature selection method for text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 719-
722.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Muller, HM; Kenny, EE; Sternberg, PW. 2004. Textpresso: An ontology-
based information retrieval and extraction system for biological literature. 
PLOS BIOLOGY 2 (11): 1984-1998.  
Muresan, G; Harper, DJ. 2004. Topic modeling for mediated access to very 
large document collections. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY 
FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 55 (10): 892-910.  
 349
Nakov, P. 2000. Web personalization using Extended Boolean operations 
with latent semantic indexing. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: 
METHODOLOGY, SYSTEMS, APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 1904: 
189-198.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Nam, T; Lee, HG; Jeong, CY; Han, C. 2004. A harmful content protection in 
peer-to-peer networks. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND 
SIMULATION 3397: 617-626.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Nanas, N; Uren, V; de Roeck, A; Domingue, J. 2004. Multi-topic 
information filtering with a single user profile. METHODS AND 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
3025: 400-409.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Narayanasamy, V; Mukhopadhyay, S; Palakal, M; Potter, DA. 2004. 
TransMiner: Mining transitive associations among biological objects from 
text. JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL SCIENCE 11 (6): 864-873.  
Narayanaswamy, M; Ravikumar, KE; Vijay-Shanker, K. 2005. Beyond the 
clause: extraction of phosphorylation information from medline abstracts. 
BIOINFORMATICS 21: I319-I327, Suppl. 1.  
Nardiello, P; Sebastiani, F; Sperduti, A. 2003. Discretizing continuous 
attributes in AdaBoost for text categorization. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 320-334.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Nasukawa, T; Nagano, T. 2001. Text analysis and knowledge mining 
system. IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 40 (4): 967-984.  
Nenadic, G; Mima, H; Spasic, I; Ananiadou, S; Tsujii, J. 2002. 
Terminology-driven literature mining and knowledge acquisition in 
biomedicine. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL 
INFORMATICS 67 (1-3): 33-48.  
Nenadic, G; Spasic, I; Ananiadou, S. 2003. Terminology-driven mining of 
biomedical literature. BIOINFORMATICS 19 (8): 938-943.  
Newby, GB. 2001. Empirical study of a 3D visualization for information 
retrieval tasks. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 18 (1): 31-53. 
Nguyen, CD; Dung, TA; Cao, TH. 2005. Text classification for DAG-
structured categories. ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND 
DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 3518: 290-300.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Nigam, K; McCallum, AK; Thrun, S; Mitchell, T. 2000. Text classification 
from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM. MACHINE LEARNING 
39 (2-3): 103-134.  
 350
Niimi, A; Konishi, O. 2003. Data mining for distributed Databases with 
multiagents. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGNET INFORMATION 
AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 2774: 1412-
1418.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Niimi, A; Konishi, O. 2004. Extension of multiagent data mining for 
distributed databases. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 3215: 780-787.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Niimi, A; Noji, H; Konishi, O. 2005. Distributed web integration with 
multiagent data mining. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 3, 
PROCEEDINGS 3683: 513-519.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Nomoto, T; Matsumoto, Y. 2003. The diversity-based approach to open-
domain text summarization. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 39 (3): 363-389.  
Novovicova, J; Malik, A. 2003. Application of multinomial mixture model 
to text classification. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE 
ANALYSIS, PROCEEDINGS 2652: 646-653.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Novovicova, J; Malik, A. 2004. Text document classification based on 
mixture models. KYBERNETIKA 40 (3): 293-304.  
Novovicova, J; Malik, A; Pudil, P. 2004. Feature selection using improved 
mutual information for text classification. STRUCTURAL, SYNTACTIC, 
AND STATISTICAL PATTERN RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 3138: 
1010-1017.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Ohsumi, N; Yasuda, A. 2004. Reviewing textual data mining in japan. 
SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY AND METHODS 19 (2): 135-159.  
Oliveira, S; Seok, SC. 2005. A multi-level approach for document 
clustering. COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE - ICCS 2005, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3514: 204-211.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Oliver, DE; Bhalotia, G; Schwartz, AS; Altman, RB; Hearst, MA. 2004. 
Tools for loading MEDLINE into a local relational database. BMC 
BIOINFORMATICS 5: art. no.-146.  
Omelayenko, B. 2002. Integrating vocabularies: Discovering and 
representing vocabulary maps. SEMANTIC WEB - ISWC 2002 2342: 206-
220.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 351
Ong, TH; Chen, HC; Sung, WK; Zhu, B. 2005. Newsmap: a knowledge map 
for online news. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 39 (4): 583-597.  
Onodera, N. 2001. A bibliometric study on chemical information and 
computer sciences focusing on literature of JCICS. JOURNAL OF 
CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND COMPUTER SCIENCES 41 (4): 878-
888.  
Orengo, VM; Huyck, C. 2003. Portuguese-English experiments using latent 
semantic indexing. ADVANCES IN CROSS-LANGUAGE 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2785: 147-154.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
OTTAVIANI, JS. 1994. THE FRACTAL NATURE OF RELEVANCE - A 
HYPOTHESIS. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE 45 (4): 263-272.  
Oudshoff, AM; Bosloper, IE; Klos, TB; Spaanenburg, L. 2003. Knowledge 
discovery in virtual community texts: Clustering virtual communities. 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT & FUZZY SYSTEMS 14 (1): 13-24.  
Ozono, T; Shintani, T; Ito, T; Hasegawa, T. 2004. A feature selection for 
text categorization on research support system papits. PRICAI 2004: 
TRENDS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3157: 524-
533.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Pal, U; Chaudhuri, BB. 2001. Machine-printed and hand-written text lines 
identification. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 22 (3-4): 431-441.  
Palotai, Z; Gabor, B; Lorincz, A. 2005. Adaptive highlighting of links to 
assist surfing on the Internet. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & DECISION MAKING 4 (1): 117-139.  
Pan, H; Zuo, L; Choudhary, V; Zhang, Z; Leow, SH; Chong, FT; Huang, 
YL; Ong, VWS; Mohanty, B; Tan, SL; Krishnan, SPT; Bajic, VB. 2004. 
Dragon TF Association Miner: a system for exploring transcription factor 
associations through text-mining. NUCLEIC ACIDS RESEARCH 32: 
W230-W234, Suppl. 2.  
Pan, LY; Song, H; Ma, FY. 2004. A macrocommittees method of combining 
multistrategy classifiers for heterogeneous ontology matching. ADVANCES 
IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 3129: 
672-677.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Papadimitriou, CH; Raghavan, P; Tamaki, H; Vempala, S. 2000. Latent 
semantic indexing: A probabilistic analysis. JOURNAL OF COMPUTER 
AND SYSTEM SCIENCES 61 (2): 217-235.  
Pappuswamy, U; Bhembe, D; Jordan, PW; VanLehn, K. 2005. A supervised 
clustering method for text classification. COMPUTATIONAL 
 352
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 704-
714.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Paradis, RO; Nie, JY. 2005. Filtering contents with bigrams and named 
entities to improve text classification. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 3689: 135-146.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Park, BK; Han, H; Song, IY. 2005. XML-OLAP: A multidimensional 
analysis framework for XML warehouses. DATA WAREHOUSING AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 3589: 32-42.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Park, H; Jeon, M; Ben Rosen, J. 2003. Lower dimensional representation of 
text data based on centroids and least squares. BIT 43 (2): 427-448.  
Park, HS; Kim, MK; Choi, EJ; Seol, YJ. 2005. Text mining from 
categorized stem cell documents to infer developmental stage-specific 
expression and regulation patterns of stem cells. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 
353-356.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Park, J; Lee, C; Park, JC. 2005. Information visualization with text data 
mining for knowledge discovery tools in bioinformatics. ON THE 
CONVERGENCE OF BIO-INFORMATION-, ENVIRONMENTAL-, 
ENERGY-, SPACE- AND NANO-TECHNOLOGIES, PTS 1 AND 2 277-
279: 259-265.  
 KEY ENGINEERING MATERIALS  
Park, SB; Zhang, BT. 2004. Co-trained support vector machines for large 
scale unstructured document classification using unlabeled data and 
syntactic information. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 40 (3): 421-439.  
Patman, F; Thompson, P. 2003. Names: A new frontier in text mining. 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 
2665: 27-38.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Peng, FC; Schuurmans, D. 2003. Combining naive Bayes and n-gram 
language models for text classification. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL 2633: 335-350.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Peng, FC; Schuurmans, D; Wang, SJ. 2004. Augmenting naive Bayes 
classifiers with statistical language models. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
7 (3-4): 317-345.  
Percannella, G; Sorrentino, D; Vento, M. 2005. Automatic indexing of news 
videos through text classification techniques. PATTERN RECOGNITION 
 353
AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3687: 512-521.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Perez-Sancho, C; Inesta, JM; Calera-Rubio, J. 2005. A text categorization 
approach for music style recognition. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND 
IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3523: 649-657.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Perrin, P; Petry, FE. 2003. Extraction and representation of contextual 
information for knowledge discovery in texts. INFORMATION SCIENCES 
151: 125-152.  
Persidis, A; Deftereos, S; Persidis, A. 2004. Systems literature analysis. 
PHARMACOGENOMICS 5 (7): 943-947. 
Peters, C; Koster, CHA. 2002. Uncertainty-based noise reduction and term 
selection in text categorization. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION 
REFTRIEVAL 2291: 248-267.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Peters, CMEE; Koster, CHA. 2003. Uncertainty and term selection in text 
categorization. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF UNCERTAINTY 
FUZZINESS AND KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS 11 (1): 115-137.  
Petridis, V; Kaburlasos, VG. 2001. Clustering and classification in 
structured data domains using Fuzzy Lattice Neurocomputing (FLN). IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 13 
(2): 245-260.  
Pierrakos, D; Paliouras, G; Papatheodorou, C; Karkaletsis, V; Dikaiakos, M. 
2004. Web Community Directories: A new approach to Web 
Personalization. WEB MINING: FROM WEB TO SEMANTIC WEB 3209: 
113-129.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Pierre, JM. 2002. Mining knowledge from text collections using 
automatically generated metadata. PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 2569: 537-548.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Pongpinigpinyo, S; Rivepiboon, W. 2005. Word sense disambiguation of 
Thai language with unsupervised learning. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3681: 1275-1283.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Pons-Porrata, A; Berlanga-Llavori, R; Ruiz-Shulcloper, J. 2003. Building a 
hierarchy of events and topics for newspaper digital libraries. ADVANCES 
IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 588-596.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 354
Pons-Porrata, A; Ruiz-Shulcloper, J; Berlanga-Llavori, R. 2003. A method 
for the automatic summarization of topic-based clusters of documents. 
PROGRESS IN PATTERN RECOGNITION, SPEECH AND IMAGE 
ANALYSIS 2905: 596-603.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Porter, AL; Kongthon, A; Lui, JC. 2002. Research profiling: Improving the 
literature review. SCIENTOMETRICS 53 (3): 351-370.  
Prasad, PC; Arunkumar, S. 2004. From short-term memory to semantics-a 
computational model. NEURAL COMPUTING & APPLICATIONS 13 (2): 
157-167.  
Price, L; Thelwall, M. 2005. The clustering power of low frequency words 
in academic webs. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (8): 883-888.  
Price, RJ; Zukas, AE. 2005. Application of latent semantic indexing to 
processing of noisy text. INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY 
INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 3495: 602-603.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Pullwitt, D. 2002. Integrating contextual information to enhance SOM-based 
text document clustering. NEURAL NETWORKS 15 (8-9): 1099-1106.  
Qian, TY; Wang, YZ; Long, H; Feng, JL. 2005. 2-PS based associative text 
classification. DATA WAREHOUSING AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY, PROCEEDINGS 3589: 378-387.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Qian, WN; Zhang, L; Liang, YQ; Qian, HL; Jin, W. 2000. A two-level 
method for clustering DTDs. WEB-AGE INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 1846: 41-52.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Qiang, W; Wang, XL; Yi, G. 2005. A study of semi-discrete matrix 
decomposition for LSI in automated text categorization. NATURAL 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 606-615.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Quan, TT; Hui, SC; Fong, A. 2003. Mining multiple clustering data for 
knowledge discovery. DISCOVERY SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 2843: 
452-459.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Raez, AM; Lopez, LAU; Lopez, LAU; Steinberger, R. 2004. Adaptive 
selection of base classifiers in one-against-all learning for large multi-
labeled collections. ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING 3230: 1-12.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
 355
Raj, PCR; Raman, S. 2005. A phrase grammar-based conceptual indexing 
paradigm. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 19 (6): 559-599.  
Rauber, A; Merkl, D. 1999. The SOMLib digital library system. 
RESEARCH AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY FOR DIGITAL 
LIBRARIES, PROCEEDINGS 1696: 323-342.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Rauber, A; Merkl, D. 2003. Text mining in the SOMLib Digital Library 
System: The representation of topics and genres. APPLIED 
INTELLIGENCE 18 (3): 271-293.  
Rehel, S; Mineau, GW. 2005. Vocabulary completion through word 
cooccurrence analysis using unlabeled documents for text categorization. 
ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3501: 
377-388.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Reinberger, ML; Daelemans, W. 2003. Is shallow parsing useful for 
unsupervised learning of semantic clusters?. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING, 
PROCEEDINGS 2588: 304-313.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Reinberger, ML; Spyns, P; Daelemans, W; Meersman, R. 2003. Mining for 
lexons: Applying unsupervised learning methods to create ontology bases. 
ON THE MOVE TO MEANINGFUL INTERNET SYSTEMS 2003: 
COOPIS, DOA, AND ODBASE 2888: 803-819.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Reinberger, ML; Spyns, P; Pretorius, AJ; Daelemans, W. 2004. Automatic 
initiation of an ontology. ON THE MOVE TO MEANINGFUL INTERNET 
SYSTEMS 2004: COOPIS, DOA, AND ODBASE, PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 
3290: 600-617.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Remeikis, N; Skucas, I; Melninkaite, V. 2004. Text categorization using 
neural networks initialized with decision trees. INFORMATICA 15 (4): 
551-564.  
RILOFF, E; LEHNERT, W. 1994. INFORMATION EXTRACTION AS A 
BASIS FOR HIGH-PRECISION TEXT CLASSIFICATION. ACM 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 12 (3): 296-333.  
Rizzo, R; Munna, EG. 2000. A neural network tool to organize large 
document sets. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: METHODOLOGY, 
SYSTEMS, APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 1904: 301-309.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Rogozan, A; Neveol, A; Darmoni, SJ. 2003. Text categorization prior to 
indexing for the CISMEF health catalogue. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
 356
IN MEDICINE, PROCEEDINGS 2780: 81-85.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Romero, E; Marquez, L; Carreras, X. 2004. Margin maximization with feed-
forward neural networks: a comparative study with SVM and AdaBoost. 
NEUROCOMPUTING 57: 313-344.  
Rosso, P; Molina, A; Pla, F; Jimenez, D; Vidal, V. 2004. Information 
retrieval and text categorization with semantic indexing. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 2945: 596-600.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Roussinov, D; Zhao, JL. 2003. Automatic discovery of similarity 
relationships through Web mining. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 35 
(1): 149-166.  
Roussinov, DG; Chen, HC. 1999. Document clustering for electronic 
meetings: an experimental comparison of two techniques. DECISION 
SUPPORT SYSTEMS 27 (1-2): 67-79.  
Roussinov, DG; Chen, HC. 2001. Information navigation on the web by 
clustering and summarizing query results. INFORMATION PROCESSING 
& MANAGEMENT 37 (6): 789-816.  
Ruch, P; Baud, R; Geissbuhler, A. 2003. Learning-free text categorization. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE, PROCEEDINGS 2780: 
199-208.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Ruiz, ME; Srinivasan, P. 2002. Hierarchical text categorization using neural 
networks. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 5 (1): 87-118.  
Ruiz, ME; Srinivasan, P. 2003. Hybrid hierarchical classifiers for 
categorization of medical documents. ASIST 2003: PROCEEDINGS OF 
THE 66TH ASIST ANNUAL MEETING, VOL 40, 2003 40: 65-70.  
PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASIST ANNUAL MEETING  
Russell, B; Yin, HJ; Allinson, NM. 2002. Document clustering using the 
1+1 dimensional Self-Organising Map. INTELLIGENT DATA 
ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING - IDEAL 2002 2412: 
154-160.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Rzhetsky, A; Iossifov, I; Koike, T; Krauthammer, M; Kra, P; Morris, M; Yu, 
H; Duboue, PA; Weng, WB; Wilbur, WJ; Hatzivassiloglou, V; Friedman, C. 
2004. GeneWays: a system for extracting, analyzing, visualizing, and 
integrating molecular pathway data. JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL 
INFORMATICS 37 (1): 43-53.  
Sadakane, K; Imai, H. 2001. Fast algorithms for k-word proximity search. 
IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON FUNDAMENTALS OF ELECTRONICS 
 357
COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTER SCIENCES E84A (9): 2311-
2318.  
Saidi, AS. 2005. Using CLP to characterise linguistic lattice boundaries in a 
text mining process. LOGIC PROGRAMMING, PROCEEDINGS 3668: 
418-420.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Sakakibara, Y; Misue, K; Koshiba, T. 1996. A machine learning approach to 
knowledge acquisitions from text databases. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 8 (3): 309-324.  
Sakkis, G; Androutsopoulos, I; Paliouras, G; Karkaletsis, V; Spyropoulos, 
CD; Stamatopoulos, P. 2003. A memory-based approach to anti-spam 
filtering for mailing lists. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 6 (1): 49-73.  
Sakurai, S; Ichimura, Y; Suyama, A; Orihara, R. 2002. Acquisition of a 
knowledge dictionary from training examples including multiple values. 
FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 2366: 
103-113.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Sakurai, S; Suyama, A. 2005. An e-mail analysis method based on text 
mining techniques. APPLIED SOFT COMPUTING 6 (1): 62-71.  
Sanchez, VD. 2003. Advanced support vector machines and kernel methods. 
NEUROCOMPUTING 55 (1-2): 5-20.  
SanJuan, E; Dowdall, J; Ibekwe-SanJuan, F; Rinaldi, F. 2005. A symbolic 
approach to automatic multiword term structuring. COMPUTER SPEECH 
AND LANGUAGE 19 (4): 524-542. 
Sanz, I; Perez, JM; Berlanga, R; Aramburu, MJ. 2003. XML schemata 
inference and evolution. DATABASE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS 
APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 2736: 109-118.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Saravanan, M; Raj, PCR; Raman, S. 2003. Summarization and 
categorization of text data in high-level data cleaning for information 
retrieval. APPLIED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 17 (5-6): 461-474.  
Sarkar, K; Bandyopadhyay, S. 2005. Generating headline summary from a 
document set. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT 
TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 649-652.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Sauban, M; Pfahringer, B. 2003. Text categorisation using document 
profiling. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2003, 
PROCEEDINGS 2838: 411-422.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Scarinci, RG; Wives, LK; Loh, S; Zabenedetti, C; de Oliveira, JPM. 2003. 
Managing unstructured E-commerce information. ADVANCED 
 358
CONCEPTUAL MODELING TECHNIQUES 2784: 414-426.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schaal, M; Muller, RM; Brunzel, M; Spiliopoulou, M. 2005. RELFIN - 
Topic discovery for ontology enhancement and annotation. SEMANTIC 
WEB: RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS, PROCEEDINGS 3532: 608-
622.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schapire, RE; Singer, Y. 2000. BoosTexter: A boosting-based system for 
text categorization. MACHINE LEARNING 39 (2-3): 135-168.  
Scharl, A; Bauer, C. 2004. Mining large samples of web-based corpora. 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS 17 (5-6): 229-233.  
Schenker, A; Bunke, H; Last, M; Kandel, A. 2004. A graph-based 
framework for Web document mining. DOCUMENT ANALYSIS 
SYSTEMS VI, PROCEEDINGS 3163: 401-412.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schenker, A; Bunke, H; Last, M; Kandel, A. 2004. Building graph-based 
classifier ensembles by random node selection. MULTIPLE CLASSIFIER 
SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3077: 214-222.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schenker, A; Last, M; Bunke, H; Kandel, A. 2003. Graph representations for 
Web document clustering. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE 
ANALYSIS, PROCEEDINGS 2652: 935-942.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schenker, A; Last, M; Bunke, H; Kandel, A. 2004. Classification of web 
documents using graph matching. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 18 (3): 
475-496.  
Schenker, A; Last, M; Bunke, H; Kandell, A. 2004. Comparison of 
algorithms for web document clustering using graph representations of data. 
STRUCTURAL, SYNTACTIC, AND STATISTICAL PATTERN 
RECOGNITION, PROCEEDINGS 3138: 190-197.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Scherf, M; Epple, A; Werner, T. 2005. The next generation of literature 
analysis: Integration of genomic analysis into text mining. BRIEFINGS IN 
BIOINFORMATICS 6 (3): 287-297.  
Schijvenaars, BJA; Mons, B; Weeber, M; Schuemie, MJ; van Mulligen, EM; 
Wain, HM; Kors, JA. 2005. Thesaurus-based disambiguation of gene 
symbols. BMC BIOINFORMATICS 6: art. no.-149.  
Schneider, KM. 2004. On word frequency information and negative 
evidence in Naive Bayes text classification. ADVANCES IN NATURAL 
 359
LANGUAGE PROCESSING 3230: 474-485.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Schneider, KM. 2005. Learning to filter junk e-mail from positive and 
unlabeled examples. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING - IJCNLP 
2004 3248: 426-435.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schneider, KM. 2005. Techniques for improving the performance of naive 
Bayes for text classification. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND 
INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 3406: 682-693.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Schneider, KM. 2005. Weighted average pointwise mutual information for 
feature selection in text categorization. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN 
DATABASES: PKDD 2005 3721: 252-263.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Schuemie, MJ; Kors, JA; Mons, B. 2005. Word sense disambiguation in the 
biomedical domain: An overview. JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL 
BIOLOGY 12 (5): 554-565.  
Sclaroff, S; La Cascia, M; Sethi, S; Taycher, L. 1999. Unifying textual and 
visual cues for content-based image retrieval on the World Wide Web. 
COMPUTER VISION AND IMAGE UNDERSTANDING 75 (1-2): 86-98.  
Seki, K; Mostafa, J. 2005. A hybrid approach to protein name identification 
in biomedical texts. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 
41 (4): 723-743.  
Selamat, A; Omatu, S. 2004. Web page feature selection and classification 
using neural networks. INFORMATION SCIENCES 158: 69-88. 
Settles, B. 2005. ABNER: an open source tool for automatically tagging 
genes, proteins and other entity names in text. BIOINFORMATICS 21 (14): 
3191-3192.  
Sever, H; Bolat, Z; Raghavan, VV. 2004. Use of preference relation for text 
categorization. ROUGH SETS AND CURRENT TRENDS IN 
COMPUTING 3066: 708-713.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Sever, H; Gorur, A; Tolun, MR. 2003. Text categorization with ILA. 
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCES - ISCIS 2003 2869: 300-
307.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Sevillano, X; Alias, F; Socoro, JC. 2004. Reliability in ICA-based text 
classification. INDEPENDENT COMPONENT ANALYSIS AND BLIND 
SIGNAL SEPARATION 3195: 1213-1220.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 360
Shahnaz, F; Berry, MW; Pauca, VP; Plemmons, RJ. 2006. Document 
clustering using nonnegative matrix factorization/. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 42 (2): 373-386.  
Shanahan, JG; Roma, N. 2003. Improving SVM text classification 
performance through threshold adjustment. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 
2003 2837: 361-372.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Shatkay, H. 2005. Hairpins in bookstacks: Information retrieval from 
biomedical text. BRIEFINGS IN BIOINFORMATICS 6 (3): 222-238.  
SHAW, RJ; WILLETT, P. 1993. ON THE NONRANDOM NATURE OF 
NEAREST-NEIGHBOR DOCUMENT CLUSTERS. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 29 (4): 449-452.  
Shi, M; Edwin, DS; Menon, R; Shen, LX; Lim, JYK; Loh, HT; Keerthi, SS; 
Ong, CJ. 2003. A machine learning approach for the curation of biomedical 
literature. ADVANCES IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 597-604.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Shima, K; Todoriki, M; Suzuki, A. 2004. SVM-based feature selection of 
latent semantic features. PATTERN RECOGNITION LETTERS 25 (9): 
1051-1057.  
Shimazu, K; Momma, A; Furukawa, K. 2003. Discovering exceptional 
information from customer inquiry by association rule miner. DISCOVERY 
SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 2843: 269-282.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Shimbo, M; Yamasaki, T; Matsumoto, Y. 2005. Sentence role identification 
in medline abstracts: Training classifier with structured abstracts. ACTIVE 
MINING 3430: 236-254.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Sidhom, S; Hassoun, M. 2002. Morpho-syntactic parsing for a text mining 
environment: An NP recognition model for knowledge visualization and 
information retrieval. KNOWLEDGE ORGANIZATION 29 (3): 171-180.  
Siefkes, C; Assis, F; Chhabra, S; Yerazunis, WS. 2004. Combining Winnow 
and orthogonal sparse bigrams for incremental spam filtering. 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3202: 410-421.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Silverstein, C; Brin, S; Motwani, R. 1998. Beyond market baskets: 
Generalizing association rules to dependence rules. DATA MINING AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 2 (1): 39-68.  
 361
Silverstein, C; Brin, S; Motwani, R; Ullman, J. 2000. Scalable techniques 
for mining causal structures. DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY 4 (2-3): 163-192.  
Singh, P; Bhimavarapu, R; Davulcu, H; Baral, C; Kim, S; Liu, H; Bittner, 
M; Ramakrishnan, IV. 2005. BioLog: A browser based collaboration and 
resource navigation assistant for biomedical researchers. DATA 
INTEGRATION IN THE LIFE SCIENCES, PROCEEDINGS 3615: 19-30.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Singh, P; Bhimavarapu, R; Davulcu, H; Baral, C; Kim, S; Liu, H; Bittner, 
M; Ramakrishnan, IV. 2005. BioLog: A browser based collaboration and 
resource navigation assistant for biomedical researchers. DATA 
INTEGRATION IN THE LIFE SCIENCES, PROCEEDINGS 3615: 19-30.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Singh, SB; Hull, RD; Fluder, EM. 2003. Text Influenced Molecular 
Indexing (TIMI): A literature database mining approach that handles text 
and chemistry. JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND 
COMPUTER SCIENCES 43 (3): 743-752.  
Singh, SB; Sheridan, RP; Fluder, EM; Hull, RD. 2001. Mining the chemical 
quarry with joint chemical probes: An application of latent semantic 
structure indexing (LaSSI) and TOPOSIM (dice) to chemical database 
mining. JOURNAL OF MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY 44 (10): 1564-1575.  
Sinka, MP; Corne, DW. 2005. The BankSearch web document dataset: 
investigating unsupervised clustering and category similarity. JOURNAL 
OF NETWORK AND COMPUTER APPLICATIONS 28 (2): 129-146.  
Skarmeta, AG; Bensaid, A; Tazi, N. 2000. Data mining for text 
categorization with semi-supervised agglomerative hierarchical clustering. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 15 (7): 
633-646.  
Slaney, M; Subrahmonia, J; Maglio, P. 2003. Modeling multitasking users. 
USER MODELING 2003, PROCEEDINGS 2702: 188-197.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Smalheiser, NR. 2001. Predicting emerging technologies with the aid of 
text-based data mining: the micro approach. TECHNOVATION 21 (10): 
689-693.  
Smalheiser, NR; Palmer, CL; Swanson, DR; Srinivasan, P; Hearst, M. 2003. 
Literature-based discovery: New trends and techniques. ASIST 2003: 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE 66TH ASIST ANNUAL MEETING, VOL 40, 
2003 40: 497-497.  PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASIST ANNUAL MEETING  
SMALHEISER, NR; SWANSON, DR. 1994. ASSESSING A GAP IN THE 
BIOMEDICAL LITERATURE - MAGNESIUM-DEFICIENCY AND 
 362
NEUROLOGIC DISEASE. NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH 
COMMUNICATIONS 15 (1): 1-9.  
Smalheiser, NR; Swanson, DR. 1996. Indomethacin and Alzheimer's 
disease. NEUROLOGY 46 (2): 583-583.  
Smalheiser, NR; Swanson, DR. 1996. Linking estrogen to Alzheimer's 
disease: An informatics approach. NEUROLOGY 47 (3): 809-810.  
Smalheiser, NR; Swanson, DR. 1998. Using ARROWSMITH: a computer-
assisted approach to formulating and assessing scientific hypotheses. 
COMPUTER METHODS AND PROGRAMS IN BIOMEDICINE 57 (3): 
149-153.  
Smirnov, A; Pashkin, M; Chilov, N; Levashova, T; Krizhanovsky, A; 
Kashevnik, A. 2005. Ontology-based users and requests clustering in 
customer service management system. AUTONOMOUS INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS: AGENTS AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 3505: 231-
246.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Smith, B; Kohler, J; Kumar, A. 2004. On the application of formal principles 
to life science data: a case study in the gene ontology. DATA 
INTEGRATION IN THE LIFE SCIENCES, PROCEEDINGS 2994: 79-94.  
LECTURE NOTES IN BIOINFORMATICS  
Soboroff, IM; Nicholas, CK. 2002. Related, but not relevant: Content-based 
collaborative filtering in TREC-8. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 5 (2-3): 
189-208.  
Sohler, F; Hanisch, D; Zimmer, R. 2004. New methods for joint analysis of 
biological networks and expression data. BIOINFORMATICS 20 (10): 
1517-1521.  
Song, FX; Liu, SH; Yang, JY. 2005. A comparative study on text 
representation schemes in text categorization. PATTERN ANALYSIS AND 
APPLICATIONS 8 (1-2): 199-209. 
Song, XD; Tseng, BL; Lin, CY; Sun, MT. 2005. ExpertiseNet: Relational 
and evolutionary expert modeling. USER MODELING 2005, 
PROCEEDINGS 3538: 99-108.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Soonthornphisaj, N; Kijsirikul, B. 2004. Iterative cross-training: An 
algorithm for learning from unlabeled Web pages. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 19 (1-2): 131-147.  
Soucy, P; Mineau, GW. 2003. Feature selection strategies for text 
categorization. ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 2671: 505-509.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
 363
Spangler, S; Kreulen, JT; Lessler, J. 2003. Generating and browsing multiple 
taxonomies over a document collection. JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 19 (4): 191-212.  
Spasic, I; Ananiadou, S; McNaught, J; Kumar, A. 2005. Text mining and 
ontologies in biomedicine: Making sense of raw text. BRIEFINGS IN 
BIOINFORMATICS 6 (3): 239-251.  
Spiliopoulou, M. 1999. Data mining for the web. PRINCIPLES OF DATA 
MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 1704: 588-589.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Srinivasan, P. 2001. MeSHmap: A text mining tool for MEDLINE. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
ASSOCIATION: 642-646, Suppl. S.  
Srinivasan, P. 2004. Text mining: Generating hypotheses from MEDLINE. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 55 (5): 396-413.  
Stamatatos, E; Kokkinakis, G; Fakotakis, N. 2000. Automatic text 
categorization in terms of genre and author. COMPUTATIONAL 
LINGUISTICS 26 (4): 471-495.  
Stegmann, J; Grohmann, G. 2003. Hypothesis generation guided by co-word 
clustering. SCIENTOMETRICS 56 (1): 111-135.  
Stein, B; Eissen, SMZ. 2003. Automatic document categorization - 
Interpreting the perfomance of clustering algorithms. KI 2003: ADVANCES 
IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2821: 254-266.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Stensmo, M. 2002. A scalable and efficient probabilistic information 
retrieval and text mining system. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS - 
ICANN 2002 2415: 643-648.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Story, RE. 1996. An explanation of the effectiveness of latent semantic 
indexing by means of a Bayesian regression model. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 32 (3): 329-344.  
Strehl, A; Ghosh, J. 2003. Relationship-based clustering and visualization 
for high-dimensional data mining. INFORMS JOURNAL ON 
COMPUTING 15 (2): 208-230.  
Su, Z; Zhang, L; Pan, Y. 2003. Document clustering based on vector 
quantization and growing-cell structure. DEVELOPMENTS IN APPLIED 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 2718: 326-336.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Subasic, P; Huettner, A. 2001. Affect analysis of text using fuzzy semantic 
typing. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS 9 (4): 483-496.  
 364
Sun, A; Lim, EP; Ng, WK. 2003. Performance measurement framework for 
hierarchical text classification. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY 
FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 54 (11): 1014-
1028.  
Sun, AX; Lim, EP; Ng, WK; Srivastava, J. 2004. Blocking reduction 
strategies in hierarchical text classification. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 16 (10): 1305-1308. 
Sun, Q; Schommer, C; Lang, A. 2004. Integration of manual and automatic 
text categorization. A categorization workbench for text-based email and 
spam. KI 2004: ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
PROCEEDINGS 3238: 156-167.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Sutcliffe, AG; Ennis, M; Hu, J. 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of visual 
user interfaces for information retrieval. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
HUMAN-COMPUTER STUDIES 53 (5): 741-763.  
SWANSON, DR. 1986. FISH OIL, RAYNAUDS SYNDROME, AND 
UNDISCOVERED PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE. PERSPECTIVES IN 
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 30 (1): 7-18.  
SWANSON, DR. 1986. NEW HORIZONS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS - 
TREATMENT OF NECROSISTIC PERSONALITY-DISORDERS. 
PERSPECTIVES IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 29 (4): 493-498.  
SWANSON, DR. 1986. SUBJECTIVE VERSUS OBJECTIVE 
RELEVANCE IN BIBLIOGRAPHIC RETRIEVAL-SYSTEMS. LIBRARY 
QUARTERLY 56 (4): 389-398.  
SWANSON, DR. 1986. UNDISCOVERED PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE. 
LIBRARY QUARTERLY 56 (2): 103-118.  
SWANSON, DR. 1987. 2 MEDICAL LITERATURES THAT ARE 
LOGICALLY BUT NOT BIBLIOGRAPHICALLY CONNECTED. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE 38 (4): 228-233. 
SWANSON, DR. 1990. MEDICAL LITERATURE AS A POTENTIAL 
SOURCE OF NEW KNOWLEDGE. BULLETIN OF THE MEDICAL 
LIBRARY ASSOCIATION 78 (1): 29-37.  
SWANSON, DR. 1993. INTERVENING IN THE LIFE-CYCLES OF 
SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE. LIBRARY TRENDS 41 (4): 606-631.  
Swanson, DR; Smalheiser, NR. 1997. An interactive system for finding 
complementary literatures: A stimulus to scientific discovery. ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 91 (2): 183-203.  
 365
Swanson, DR; Smalheiser, NR. 1999. Implicit text linkages between 
Medline records: Using Arrowsmith as an aid to scientific discovery. 
LIBRARY TRENDS 48 (1): 48-59.  
Swanson, DR; Smalheiser, NR; Bookstein, A. 2001. Information discovery 
from complementary literatures: Categorizing viruses as potential weapons. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 52 (10): 797-812.  
Tai, XY; Ren, F; Kita, K. 2002. An information retrieval model based on 
vector space method by supervised learning. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 38 (6): 749-764.  
Takahashi, S; Takahashi, H; Tsuda, K. 2004. An efficient learning system 
for knowledge of asset management. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3213: 494-500.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Takahashi, S; Takahashi, M; Takahashi, H; Tsuda, K. 2005. Learning value-
added information of asset management from analyst reports through text 
mining. KNOWLEDGE-BASED INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND 
ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 4, PROCEEDINGS 3684: 785-791.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Takama, Y; Hirota, K. 2003. Web information visualization method 
employing immune network model for finding topic stream from document-
set sequence. NEW GENERATION COMPUTING 21 (1): 49-59.  
Takamura, H; Okumura, M. 2005. A comparative study on the use of labeled 
and unlabeled data for large margin classifiers. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 456-465.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Takano, A; Niwa, Y; Nishioka, S; Iwayama, M; Hisamitsu, T; Imaichi, O; 
Sakurai, H. 2000. Information access based on associative calculation. 
SOFSEM 2000: THEORY AND PRACTICE OF INFORMATICS 1963: 
187-201.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Takasu, A; Tanaka, K. 2004. Feature word tracking in time series 
documents. INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED 
LEARNING IDEAL 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3177: 660-665.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Takci, H; Sogukpinar, L. 2004. Centroid-based language identification using 
letter feature set. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND 
INTELLIGENT TEXT PROCESSING 2945: 640-648.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 366
Takeuchi, K; Collier, N. 2005. Bio-medical entity extraction using support 
vector machines. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MEDICINE 33 (2): 
125-137.  
Tan, CKY. 2004. Text classification using belief augmented frames. PRICAI 
2004: TRENDS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 
3157: 515-523.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Tan, CM; Wang, YF; Lee, CD. 2002. The use of bigrams to enhance text 
categorization. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 38 
(4): 529-546.  
Tan, SB. 2005. Binary k-nearest neighbor for text categorization. ONLINE 
INFORMATION REVIEW 29 (4): 391-399.  
Tan, SB. 2005. Neighbor-weighted K-nearest neighbor for unbalanced text 
corpus. EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 28 (4): 667-671.  
Tanabe, L; Scherf, U; Smith, LH; Lee, JK; Hunter, L; Weinstein, JN. 1999. 
MedMiner: An Internet text-mining tool for biomedical information, with 
application to gene expression profiling. BIOTECHNIQUES 27 (6): 1210-+.  
Tanaka, H; Kumano, T; Uratani, N; Ehara, T. 1999. An efficient document 
clustering algorithm and its application to a document browser. 
INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 35 (4): 541-557.  
Tang, B; Shepherd, M; Heywood, MI; Luo, X. 2005. Comparing dimension 
reduction techniques for document clustering. ADVANCES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3501: 292-296.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Tang, CQ; Xu, ZC; Dwarkadas, S. 2003. Peer-to-peer information retrieval 
using self-organizing semantic overlay networks. COMPUTER 
COMMUNICATION REVIEW 33 (4): 175-186.  
Tang, J; Li, JZ; Wang, KH; Cai, YR. 2004. Loss minimization based 
keyword distillation. ADVANCED WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND 
APPLICATIONS 3007: 572-577.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Tang, N; Vemuri, VR. 2005. User-interest-based document filtering via 
semi-supervised clustering. FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3488: 573-582.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Tang, XJ; Liu, YJ; Zhang, W. 2005. Computerized support for idea 
generation during knowledge creating process. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 4, 
PROCEEDINGS 3684: 437-443.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
 367
Tauritz, DR; Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, IG. 1999. Adaptive information filtering 
algorithms. ADVANCES IN INTELLIGENT DATA ANALYSIS, 
PROCEEDINGS 1642: 513-524.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Terada, A; Tokunaga, T. 2003. Corpus based method of transforming 
nominalized phrases into clauses for text mining application. IEICE 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS E86D (9): 1736-
1744.  
Tezuka, T; Tanaka, K. 2005. Landmark extraction: A web mining approach. 
SPATIAL INFORMATION THEORY, PROCEEDINGS 3693: 379-396.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Theeramunkong, T. 2004. Applying passage in Web text mining. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 19 (1-2): 
149-158.  
Thelwall, M; Wilkinson, D. 2004. Finding similar academic Web sites with 
links, bibliometric couplings and colinks. INFORMATION PROCESSING 
& MANAGEMENT 40 (3): 515-526.  
Tho, QT; Hui, SC; Fong, A. 2003. Web mining for identifying research 
trends. DIGITAL LIBRARIES: TECHNOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
OF INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR GLOBAL ACCESS 2911: 290-
301.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Thomas, JC; Kellogg, WA; Erickson, T. 2001. The knowledge management 
puzzle: Human and social factors in knowledge management. IBM 
SYSTEMS JOURNAL 40 (4): 863-884.  
Thompson, P. 2005. Text mining, names and security. JOURNAL OF 
DATABASE MANAGEMENT 16 (1): 54-59.  
Tiffin, N; Kelso, JF; Powell, AR; Pan, H; Bajic, VB; Hide, WA. 2005. 
Integration of text- and data-mining using ontologies successfully selects 
disease gene candidates. NUCLEIC ACIDS RESEARCH 33 (5): 1544-1552.  
Tikk, D; Yang, JD; Bang, SL. 2003. Hierarchical text categorization using 
fuzzy relational thesaurus. KYBERNETIKA 39 (5): 583-600.  
Toivonen, J; Visa, A; Vesanen, T; Back, B; Vanharanta, H. 2001. Validation 
of text clustering based on document contents. MACHINE LEARNING 
AND DATA MINING IN PATTERN RECOGNITION 2123: 184-195.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Tombros, A; Jose, JM; Ruthven, I. 2003. Clustering top-ranking sentences 
for information access. RESEARCH AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 
FOR DIGITAL LIBRARIES 2769: 523-528.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 368
Tombros, A; van Rijsbergen, CJ. 2004. Query-sensitive similarity measures 
for information retrieval. KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 6 (5): 617-642. 
Tombros, A; Villa, R; Van Rijsbergen, CJ. 2002. The effectiveness of query-
specific hierarchic clustering in information retrieval. INFORMATION 
PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 38 (4): 559-582.  
Tomsich, P; Rauber, A; Merkl, D. 2000. parSOM: Using parallelism to 
overcome memory latency in self-organizing neural networks. HIGH 
PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND NETWORKING, PROCEEDINGS 
1823: 136-145.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Tong, S; Koller, D. 2002. Support vector machine active learning with 
applications to text classification. JOURNAL OF MACHINE LEARNING 
RESEARCH 2 (1): 45-66.  
Topchy, A; Punch, W. 2003. Dimensionality reduction via genetic value 
clustering. GENETIC AND EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION - 
GECCO 2003, PT II, PROCEEDINGS 2724: 1431-1443.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Torkkola, K. 2003. Discriminative features for text document classification. 
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS 6 (4): 301-308.  
Torvik, VI; Weeber, M; Swanson, DR; Smalheiser, NR. 2005. A 
probabilistic similarity metric for Medline records: A model for author name 
disambiguation. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 56 (2): 140-158.  
Toselli, AH; Pastor, M; Juan, A; Vidal, E. 2005. Spontaneous handwriting 
text recognition and classification using finite-state models. PATTERN 
RECOGNITION AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3523: 
363-370.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Trybula, WJ. 1999. Text mining. ANNUAL REVIEW OF INFORMATION 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 34: 385-419.  
Tsay, JJ; Wang, JD. 2004. Improving linear classifier for Chinese text 
categorization. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 40 
(2): 223-237.  
Tseng, CM; Tsai, KH; Hsu, CC; Chang, HC. 2005. On the Chinese 
document clustering based on dynamical term clustering. INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, PROCEEDINGS 3689: 534-539.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Tseng, FSC; Hwung, WJ. 2002. An automatic load/extract scheme for XML 
documents through object-relational repositories. JOURNAL OF SYSTEMS 
AND SOFTWARE 64 (3): 207-218.  
 369
Turney, PD; Littman, ML. 2003. Measuring praise and criticism: Inference 
of semantic orientation from association. ACM TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 21 (4): 315-346.  
Uramoto, N; Matsuzawa, H; Nagano, T; Murakami, A; Takeuchi, H; 
Takeda, K. 2004. A text-mining system for knowledge discovery from 
Biomedical Documents. IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 43 (3): 516-533.  
Urena-Lopez, LA; Buenaga, M; Gomez, JM. 2001. Integrating linguistic 
resources in TC through WSD. COMPUTERS AND THE HUMANITIES 
35 (2): 215-230.  
van der Eijk, CC; van Mulligen, EM; Kors, JA; Mons, B; van den Berg, J. 
2004. Constructing an associative concept space for literature-based 
discovery. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR 
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 55 (5): 436-444.  
VANRIJSBERGEN, CJ; CROFT, WB. 1975. DOCUMENT CLUSTERING 
- EVALUATION OF SOME EXPERIMENTS WITH CRANFIELD 1400 
COLLECTION. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 11 
(5-7): 171-182. 
Vembu, S; Baumann, S. 2005. A self-organizing map based knowledge 
discovery for music recommendation systems. COMPUTER MUSIC 
MODELING AND RETRIEVAL 3310: 119-129.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Vert, JP. 2001. Adaptive context trees and text clustering. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY 47 (5): 1884-1901.  
Vert, JP. 2001. Text categorization using adaptive context trees. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
PROCESSING 2004: 423-436.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Viator, JA; Pestorius, FM. 2001. Investigating trends in acoustics research 
from 1970-1999. JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF 
AMERICA 109 (5): 1779-1783, Part 1.  
Vilar, D; Castro, MJ; Sanchis, E. 2004. Multi-label text classification using 
multinomial models. ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING 3230: 220-230.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Vinciarelli, A. 2005. Noisy text categorization. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON 
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 27 (12): 1882-
1895.  
Vinokourov, A; Girolami, M. 2002. A probabilistic framework for the 
hierarchic organisation and classification of document collections. 
 370
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 18 (2-3): 153-
172.  
Vinot, R; Yvon, F. 2003. Improving Rocchio with weakly supervised 
clustering. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2003 2837: 456-467.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Visa, A. 2001. Technology of text mining. MACHINE LEARNING AND 
DATA MINING IN PATTERN RECOGNITION 2123: 1-11.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Visa, A; Toivonen, J; Vanharanta, H; Back, B. 2002. Contents matching 
defined by prototypes: Methodology verification with books of the bible. 
JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 18 (4): 87-
100.  
Vittaut, JN; Amini, MR; Gallinari, P. 2002. Learning classification with 
both labeled and unlabeled data. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2002 
2430: 468-479.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Voss, A; Althoff, KD; Becker-Kornstaedt, U; Decker, B; Klotz, A; Leopold, 
E; Rech, J. 2002. Enhancing experience management and process learning 
with moderated discourses: The indiGo approach. PRACTICAL ASPECTS 
OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 2569: 114-125.  LECTURE NOTES 
IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Walter, JA. 2004. H-MDS: a new approach for interactive visualization with 
multidimensional scaling in the hyperbolic space. INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 29 (4): 273-292.  
Wang, C; Wang, WY. 2005. Using term clustering and supervised term 
affinity construction to boost text classification. ADVANCES IN 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING, PROCEEDINGS 
3518: 813-819.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Wang, DL; Yu, G; Bao, YB; Zhang, M. 2005. An optimized K-Means 
algorithm of reducing cluster intra-dissimilarity for document clustering. 
ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 3739: 785-790.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Wang, HY; Chen, Y; Dai, YQ. 2005. A soft real-time web news 
classification system with double control loops. ADVANCES IN WEB-
AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 3739: 81-90.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Wang, JTL; Liu, JH; Wang, JH. 2005. XML clustering and retrieval through 
principal component analysis. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TOOLS 14 (4): 683-699.  
 371
Wang, K; Liu, HQ. 2000. Discovering structural association of 
semistructured data. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING 12 (3): 353-371.  
Wang, Q; Ng, YK. 2003. An ontology-based binary-categorization approach 
for recognizing multiple-record web documents using a probabilistic 
retrieval model. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 6 (3-4): 295-332.  
Wang, SY; Yu, L; Lai, KK. 2004. A novel hybrid AI system framework for 
crude oil price forecasting. DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT 3327: 233-242.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Wang, W; Do, DB; Lin, XM. 2005. Term graph model for text 
classification. ADVANCED DATA MINING AND APPLICATIONS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3584: 19-30.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Wang, YT; Kitsuregawa, M. 2001. Link based clustering of Web search 
results. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 2118: 225-236.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Watts, RJ; Porter, AL; Cunningham, S; Zhu, DH. 1997. TOAS intelligence 
mining; Analysis of natural language processing and computational 
linguistics. PRINCIPLES OF DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY 1263: 323-334.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Wee, LKA; Tong, LC; Tan, CL. 1998. Knowledge representation issues in 
information extraction. PRICAI'98: TOPICS IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 1531: 448-458.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Weeber, M; Klein, H; Aronson, AR; Mork, JG; de Jong-van den Berg, 
LTW; Vos, R. 2000. Text-based discovery in biomedicine: The architecture 
of the DAD-system. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL 
INFORMATICS ASSOCIATION: 903-907, Suppl. S.  
Weeber, M; Klein, H; de Jong-van den Berg, LTW; Vos, R. 2001. Using 
concepts in literature-based discovery: Simulating Swanson's Raynaud-fish 
oil and migraine-magnesium discoveries. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN 
SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 52 (7): 
548-557.  
Weeber, M; Kors, JA; Mons, B. 2005. Online tools to support literature-
based discovery in the life sciences. BRIEFINGS IN BIOINFORMATICS 6 
(3): 277-286.  
 372
Wei, CP; Cheng, TH; Pai, YC. 2006. Semantic enrichment in knowledge 
repositories: Annotating semantic relationships between discussion 
documents. JOURNAL OF DATABASE MANAGEMENT 17 (1): 49-66.  
Wei, CP; Hu, PJ; Dong, YX. 2002. Managing document categories in e-
commerce environments: an evolution-based approach. EUROPEAN 
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 11 (3): 208-222.  
Wei, CP; Lee, YH. 2004. Event detection from Online news documents for 
supporting environmental scanning. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 36 
(4): 385-401. 
Wei, CP; Yang, CS; Hsiao, HW; Cheng, TH. 2006. Combining preference- 
and content-based approaches for improving document clustering 
effectiveness. INFORMATION PROCESSING & MANAGEMENT 42 (2): 
350-372.  
Weiss, SM; Apte, C; Damerau, FJ; Johnson, DE; Oles, FJ; Goetz, T; 
Hampp, T. 1999. Maximizing text-mining performance. IEEE 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS & THEIR APPLICATIONS 14 (4): 63-69.  
Weiss, SM; Apte, CV. 2002. Automated generation of model cases for help-
desk applications. IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL 41 (3): 421-427.  
Weng, SS; Lin, YJ. 2003. A study on searching for similar documents based 
on multiple concepts and distribution of concepts. EXPERT SYSTEMS 
WITH APPLICATIONS 25 (3): 355-368.  
Weng, SS; Liu, CK. 2004. Using text classification and multiple concepts to 
answer e-mails. EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 26 (4): 529-
543.  
Wermter, S. 2000. Neural network agents for learning semantic text 
classification. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 3 (2): 87-103.  
Wiebe, J; Wilson, T; Bruce, R; Bell, M; Martin, M. 2004. Learning 
subjective language. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS 30 (3): 277-308.  
WILBUR, WJ. 1992. RETRIEVAL TESTING BY THE COMPARISON 
OF STATISTICALLY INDEPENDENT RETRIEVAL METHODS. 
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION 
SCIENCE 43 (5): 358-370.  
Wilbur, WJ; Yang, YM. 1996. An analysis of statistical term strength and its 
use in the indexing and retrieval of molecular biology texts. COMPUTERS 
IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 26 (3): 209-222.  
WILLETT, P. 1980. DOCUMENT CLUSTERING USING AN INVERTED 
FILE APPROACH. JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE 2 (5): 223-
231.  
Williamson, J; Dooley, K; Corman, S. 2004. Using text mining to create 
actionable knowledge: Application to network failure incident reports. 
 373
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, 
PROCEEDINGS 3336: 71-81.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Wiratunga, N; Lothian, R; Chakraborti, S; Koychev, I. 2005. A propositional 
approach to textual case indexing. KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN 
DATABASES: PKDD 2005 3721: 380-391.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Wise, MJ. 2000. Protein Annotators' Assistant: A novel application of 
information retrieval techniques. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN 
SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE 51 (12): 1131-1136.  
Witte, R; Baker, CJO. 2005. Combining biological databases and text 
mining to support new bioinformatics applications. NATURAL 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS, 
PROCEEDINGS 3513: 310-321.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Witten, IH. 2000. Browsing around a digital library: Today and tomorrow. 
COMBINATORIAL PATTERN MATCHING 1848: 12-26.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Witten, IH. 2002. Learning structure from sequences, with applications in a 
digital library. ALGORITHMIC LEARNING THEORY, PROCEEDINGS 
2533: 42-56.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Witter, DI; Berry, MW. 1998. Downdating the latent semantic indexing 
model for conceptual information retrieval. COMPUTER JOURNAL 41 (8): 
589-601.  
Wnek, J. 2005. LSI-based taxonomy generation: The taxonomist system. 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMATICS, PROCEEDINGS 
3495: 389-394.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Wong, TL; Lam, W; Wang, W. 2003. Beyond supervised learning of 
wrappers for extracting information from unseen Web sites. INTELLIGENT 
DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING 2690: 725-733.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Wormell, I. 2000. Bibliometric analysis of the Welfare Topic. 
SCIENTOMETRICS 48 (2): 203-236.  
Wormell, I. 2000. Critical aspects of the Danish Welfare State - as revealed 
by issue tracking. SCIENTOMETRICS 48 (2): 237-250.  
Wren, JD. 2006. Using fuzzy set theory and scale-free network properties to 
relate MEDLINE terms. SOFT COMPUTING 10 (4): 374-381.  
Wu, JQ; Wu, YZ; Liu, J; Zhuang, YT. 2004. Multi-document summarization 
based on link analysis and text classification. DIGITAL LIBRARIES: 
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION AND CROSS-FERTILIZATION, 
 374
PROCEEDINGS 3334: 649-649.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Wu, XY; Srihari, R; Zheng, ZH. 2004. Document representation for one-
class SVM. MACHINE LEARNING: ECML 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3201: 
489-500.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Wu, ZH; Zhou, XZ; Liu, BY; Chen, JL. 2004. Text mining for finding 
functional community of related genes using TCM knowledge. 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES: PKDD 2004, 
PROCEEDINGS 3202: 459-470.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Xu, ST; Zhang, J. 2004. A parallel hybrid web document clustering 
algorithm and its performance study. JOURNAL OF SUPERCOMPUTING 
30 (2): 117-131.  
Xu, X; Zhang, BF; Zhong, QX. 2005. Text categorization using SVMs with 
Rocchio ensemble for Internet information classification. NETWORKING 
AND MOBILE COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 3619: 1022-1031.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Xu, YH; Umemura, K. 2003. Optimal local dimension analysis of latent 
semantic indexing on query neighbor space. IEICE TRANSACTIONS ON 
INFORMATION AND SYSTEMS E86D (9): 1762-1772.  
Xu, Z; Yu, K; Tresp, V; Xu, XW; Wang, JZ. 2003. Representative sampling 
for text classification using support vector machines. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 393-407.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Xue, D; Sun, MS. 2003. Chinese text categorization based on the binary 
weighting model with non-binary smoothing. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 2633: 408-419.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Xue, DJ; Sun, MS. 2003. A study on feature weighting in Chinese text 
categorization. COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT 
TEXT PROCESSING, PROCEEDINGS 2588: 592-601.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Xue, DJ; Sun, MS. 2004. Eliminating high-degree biased character bigrams 
for dimensionality reduction in Chinese text categorization. ADVANCES IN 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, PROCEEDINGS 2997: 197-208.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Xue, DJ; Sun, MS. 2004. Raising high-degree overlapped character bigrams 
into trigrams for dimensionality reduction in Chinese text categorization. 
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND INTELLIGENT TEXT 
 375
PROCESSING 2945: 584-595.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Yamamoto, S; Asanuma, T; Takagi, T; Fukuda, KI. 2004. The Molecule 
Role Ontology: an ontology for annotation of signal transduction pathway 
molecules in the scientific literature. COMPARATIVE AND 
FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS 5 (6-7): 528-536.  
Yamasaki, M; Takeda, M; Fukuda, T; Nanri, I. 1998. Discovering 
characteristic patterns from collections of classical Japanese poems. 
DISCOVERY SCIENCE 1532: 129-140.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Yan, W. 2005. Network attack scenarios extraction and categorization by 
mining IDS alert streams. JOURNAL OF UNIVERSAL COMPUTER 
SCIENCE 11 (8): 1367-1382.  
Yan, X; Li, X; Song, DW. 2004. A correlation analysis on LSA and HAL 
semantic space models. COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION 
SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3314: 711-717.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Yang, CF; Ye, M; Zhao, J. 2005. Document clustering based on nonnegative 
sparse matrix factorization. ADVANCES IN NATURAL COMPUTATION, 
PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3611: 557-563.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2003. Building topic maps using a text mining 
approach. FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 2871: 307-314.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2003. Discovering image semantics from web pages 
using a text mining approach. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT, PROCEEDINGS 2762: 495-502.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2003. Mining environmental texts of images in web 
pages for image retrieval. FOUNDATIONS OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 
2871: 334-338.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2004. A text mining approach on automatic generation 
of web directories and hierarchies. EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH 
APPLICATIONS 27 (4): 645-663.  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2005. A text mining approach for automatic 
construction of hypertexts. EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 
29 (4): 723-734.  
Yang, HC; Lee, CH. 2005. Automatic category theme identification and 
hierarchy generation for Chinese text categorization. JOURNAL OF 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 25 (1): 47-67.  
 376
Yang, JW; Chen, XO. 2002. A semi-structured document model for text 
mining. JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 17 
(5): 603-610.  
Yang, L; Rahi, A. 2003. Dynamic clustering of web search results. 
COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS - ICCSA 2003, 
PT 1, PROCEEDINGS 2667: 153-159.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Yang, YM; Carbonell, JG; Brown, RD; Frederking, RE. 1998. Translingual 
information retrieval: learning from bilingual corpora. ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 103 (1-2): 323-345.  
YANG, YM; CHUTE, CG. 1994. AN APPLICATION OF EXPERT 
NETWORK TO CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION AND MEDLINE 
INDEXING. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL 
INFORMATICS ASSOCIATION: 157-161, Suppl. S.  
YANG, YM; CHUTE, CG. 1994. AN EXAMPLE-BASED MAPPING 
METHOD FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION AND RETRIEVAL. ACM 
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS 12 (3): 252-277.  
Yang, YM; Slattery, S; Ghani, R. 2002. A study of approaches to hypertext 
categorization. JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 18 (2-3): 219-241.  
Yang, YM; Wilbur, J. 1996. Using corpus statistics to remove redundant 
words in text categorization. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY 
FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE 47 (5): 357-369.  
Ye, JP; Janardan, R; Park, CH; Park, H. 2004. An optimization criterion for 
generalized discriminant analysis on undersampled problems. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE 
INTELLIGENCE 26 (8): 982-994. 
Ye, JP; Li, Q. 2005. A two-stage linear discriminant analysis via QR-
decomposition. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND 
MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 27 (6): 929-941.  
Yin, ZH; Wang, YC; Song, JP; Zeng, YM. 2002. Filtering multi-category 
noise in knowledge base for automatic text classification. CHINESE 
JOURNAL OF ELECTRONICS 11 (4): 450-453.  
Yoon, B; Park, Y. 2005. A systematic approach for identifying technology 
opportunities: Keyword-based morphology analysis. TECHNOLOGICAL 
FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 72 (2): 145-160.  
Yoon, JP; Raghavan, V; Chakilam, V; Kerschberg, L. 2001. BitCube: A 
three-dimensional bitmap indexing for XML documents. JOURNAL OF 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 17 (2-3): 241-254.  
 377
Yoon, Y; Lee, C; Lee, GG. 2005. Systematic construction of hierarchical 
classifier in SVM-based text categorization. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING - IJCNLP 2004 3248: 616-625.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Yoon, Y; Lee, GG. 2005. Practical application of associative classifier for 
document classification. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGY, 
PROCEEDINGS 3689: 467-478.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Yu, S; Song, H; Ma, FY. 2004. Novel SVM performance estimators for 
information retrieval systems. ADVANCED WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND 
APPLICATIONS 3007: 895-898.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Yuan, ST; Sun, J. 2005. Ontology-based structured cosine similarity in 
document summarization: With applications to mobile audio-based 
knowledge management. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS MAN 
AND CYBERNETICS PART B-CYBERNETICS 35 (5): 1028-1040.  
Yukari, I; Satoru, T; Kazuhiko, T. 2004. A study of knowledge extraction 
from free text data in customer satisfaction survey. KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
INTELLIGENT INFORMATION AND ENGINEERING SYSTEMS, PT 1, 
PROCEEDINGS 3213: 509-515.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Zamir, O; Etzioni, O. 1999. Grouper: a dynamic clustering interface to Web 
search results. COMPUTER NETWORKS-THE INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
NETWORKING 31 (11-16): 1361-1374.  
Zelikovitz, S; Hirsh, H. 2002. Integrating background knowledge into 
nearest-neighbor text classification. ADVANCES IN CASE-BASED 
REASONING 2416: 1-5.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE  
Zelikovitz, S; Marquez, F. 2005. Transductive learning for short-text 
classification problems using latent semantic indexing. INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF PATTERN RECOGNITION AND ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 19 (2): 143-163.  
Zha, HY; Simon, HD. 1999. On updating problems in latent semantic 
indexing. SIAM JOURNAL ON SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING 21 (2): 782-
791.  
Zha, HY; Zhang, ZY. 2000. Matrices with low-rank-plus-shift structure: 
Partial SVD and latent semantic indexing. SIAM JOURNAL ON MATRIX 
ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS 21 (2): 522-536.  
 378
Zhang, BC; Chen, X; Gao, W. 2005. Discriminant analysis based on 
kernelized decision boundary for face recognition. AUDIO AND VIDEO 
BASED BIOMETRIC PERSON AUTHENTICATION, PROCEEDINGS 
3546: 966-976.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhang, J. 2001. The characteristic analysis of the DARE visual space. 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 4 (1): 61-78.  
Zhang, J; Chen, XY; Chen, Y; Hui, YF. 2005. Association classification 
based on sample weighting. FUZZY SYSTEMS AND KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3614: 624-633, Part 2.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Zhang, M; Yang, DQ; Deng, ZH; Feng, Y; Wang, WQ; Zhao, PX; Wu, S; 
Wang, SA; Tang, SW. 2004. PKUSpace: A collaborative platform for 
scientific researching. ADVANCES IN WEB-BASED LEARNING - ICWL 
2004 3143: 120-127.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhang, MY; Lu, ZD; Zou, CY. 2004. A Chinese word segmentation based 
on language situation in processing ambiguous words. INFORMATION 
SCIENCES 162 (3-4): 275-285.  
Zhang, T; Iyengar, VS. 2002. Recommender systems using linear classifiers. 
JOURNAL OF MACHINE LEARNING RESEARCH 2 (3): 313-334.  
Zhang, T; Oles, FJ. 2001. Text categorization based on regularized linear 
classification methods. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 4 (1): 5-31.  
Zhang, X; Zhu, XY. 2005. Extended Bi-gram features in text categorization. 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND IMAGE ANALYSIS, PT 2, 
PROCEEDINGS 3523: 379-386.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE  
Zhang, XY; Berry, MW; Raghavan, P. 2001. Level search schemes for 
information filtering and retrieval. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 37 (2): 313-334.  
Zhang, Y; Zhang, LJ; Li, ZH; Yan, JF. 2003. Improving the performance of 
text classifiers by using association features. FOUNDATIONS OF 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 2871: 315-319.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Zhang, Z; Zhou, SG; Zhou, AY. 2004. Sequential classifiers combination for 
text categorization: An experimental study. ADVANCES IN WEB-AGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: PROCEEDINGS 3129: 509-518.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhang, ZH; Shen, H. 2005. Application of online-training SVMs for real-
time intrusion detection with different considerations. COMPUTER 
COMMUNICATIONS 28 (12): 1428-1442.  
 379
Zhao, H; Lu, BL. 2004. Modular k-nearest neighbor classification method 
for massively parallel text categorization. COMPUTATIONAL AND 
INFORMATION SCIENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3314: 867-872.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhao, R; Grosky, WI. 2002. Narrowing the semantic gap - Improved text-
based web document retrieval using visual features. IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA 4 (2): 189-200.  
Zhao, R; Grosky, WI. 2002. Negotiating the semantic gap: from feature 
maps to semantic landscapes. PATTERN RECOGNITION 35 (3): 593-600.  
Zhao, Y; Karypis, G. 2004. Empirical and theoretical comparisons of 
selected criterion functions for document clustering. MACHINE 
LEARNING 55 (3): 311-331.  
Zhao, Y; Karypis, G. 2005. Hierarchical clustering algorithms for document 
datasets. DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 10 (2): 141-
168.  
Zhdanova, AV; Shishkin, DV. 2002. Classification of email queries by 
topic: Approach based on hierarchically structured subject domain. 
INTELLIGENT DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED 
LEARNING - IDEAL 2002 2412: 99-104.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zheng, XS; Liu, WL; He, PL; Da, WD. 2004. Document clustering 
algorithm based on tree-structured growing self-organizing feature map. 
ADVANCES IN NEURAL NETWORKS - ISNN 2004, PT 1 3173: 840-
845.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhong, N; Matsunaga, T; Liu, CN. 2002. A text mining agents based 
architecture for personal e-mail filtering and management. INTELLIGENT 
DATA ENGINEERING AND AUTOMATED LEARNING - IDEAL 2002 
2412: 329-336.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhong, S. 2005. Efficient streaming text clustering. NEURAL NETWORKS 
18 (5-6): 790-798.  
Zhong, S; Ghosh, J. 2005. Generative model-based document clustering: a 
comparative study. KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 8 
(3): 374-384.  
Zhou, AY; Qian, WI; Qian, HL; Zhang, L; Liang, YQ; Jin, W. 2002. 
Clustering DTDs: An interactive two-level approach. JOURNAL OF 
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 17 (6): 807-819.  
Zhou, SG; Guan, JH. 2002. Evaluation and construction of training corpuses 
for text classification: A preliminary study. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS 2553: 97-108.  
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
 380
Zhou, XD; Wang, T; Zhou, HP; Chen, HW. 2004. Categorizing Web 
information on subject with statistical language modeling. WEB 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS - WISE 2004, PROCEEDINGS 3306: 403-
408.  LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhou, XZ; Wu, ZH. 2004. Distributional character clustering for chinese text 
categorization. PRICAI 2004: TRENDS IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE, PROCEEDINGS 3157: 575-584.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Zhou, ZH; Jiang, K; Li, M. 2005. Multi-instance learning based web mining. 
APPLIED INTELLIGENCE 22 (2): 135-147.  
Zhu, DH; Porter, AL. 2002. Automated extraction and visualization of 
information for technological intelligence and forecasting. 
TECHNOLOGICAL FORECASTING AND SOCIAL CHANGE 69 (5): 
495-506.  
Zhu, JB; Chen, WL. 2005. Improving text categorization using domain 
knowledge. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PROCEEDINGS 3513: 103-113.  LECTURE 
NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zhu, JB; Chen, WL; Yao, TS. 2004. Using seed words to learn to categorize 
Chinese text. ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
3230: 464-473.  LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Zhu, X; Cao, HL; Yu, Y. 2006. SDQE: towards automatic semantic query 
optimization in P2P systems. INFORMATION PROCESSING & 
MANAGEMENT 42 (1): 222-236.  
Zhuang, L; Dai, HH; Hang, XS. 2005. A novel field learning algorithm for 
dual imbalance text classification. FUZZY SYSTEMS AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, PT 2, PROCEEDINGS 3614: 39-48, Part 2.  
LECTURE NOTES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Zu, GW; Murata, M; Ohyama, W; Wakabayashi, T; Kimura, F. 2004. The 
impact of OCR accuracy on automatic text classification. CONTENT 
COMPUTING, PROCEEDINGS 3309: 403-409.  LECTURE NOTES IN 
COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zu, GW; Ohyama, W; Wakabayashi, T; Kimura, F. 2005. Automatic text 
classification of English newswire articles based on statistical classification 
techniques. ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING IN JAPAN 152 (1): 50-60.  
 
