Computers and Translation 1 (1986) 
9 Paradigm Press, Inc. 
S t y l i s t i c s  a n d  C o m p u t i n g :  M a c h i n e  T r a n s l a t i o n  as a T o o l  
for  a N e w  A p p r o a c h  to  S t y l i s t i c s  
A n n e - M a r l e  L a u r i a n  
Technical and scientific texts are being 
produced on a large scale and translated 
into several languages, mainly from and to 
English, French, German, Russian, and  
Japanese, but  also Spanish, Portuguese and 
Arabic, in numerous fields such as engineer- 
ing, computer  science, aeronautics, medicine, 
economy, electromechanics, geology and oil 
prospecting, agriculture, and mari t ime legis- 
lation. Scientific and technical culture is be- 
ing disseminated nowadays through mass 
production, by means of mass distribution, 
for mass consumption.  Scientific and tech- 
nical documents  consti tute a very large part  
of the total  amount  of texts read by a re- 
searcher, an engineer, a technician, or a 
specialist in any field, as well as a growing 
part  of the papers non-specialists read to in- 
crease their knowledge of the world in which 
they live. 
Tradi t ional  stylistics deals with literary 
texts, with the literary intentions of authors 
and the affective aspects of the linguistic 
choices the authors make. The present 
change of orientat ion toward consumption 
should lead stylistic specialists to study spe- 
cialized types of texts with particular atten- 
tion. Machine translation is an excellent in- 
s t rument  for approaching the stylistics of 
technical and scientific texts. 
Raw translations produced by machine 
have to be post-edited, and the post-edited 
versions can be used to determine a frame 
for the analysis of their style. The concept 
of style enlarged through an analysis based 
Anne-Marie  Laurian is a research lin- 
guist at C.N.R.S. and editor of  Contrastes. 
on machine translation is thus a new one. 
The basic notions of the new concept will be 
discussed in this article, as well as the new 
directions research in stylistics should take 
in order to cope with any kind of text that  
might  appear in the near future. 
1. C o m p u t e r ,  T e x t ,  a n d  S ty l e  
1.1. C o m p u t e r  S t y l e  
Does the computer  have its own style? It is 
very fashionable among some people, 
scholars and translators and others, to con- 
sider the computer  an imitat ion of the 
human being, a would-be, could-be, a will-be 
human being. On that  basis, they give it 
human features such as will, behavior pat- 
terns, and feelings. If computers  can speak 
or write, they have a style: that  seems 
clear. But what  style can they output? 
When a text is automatically writ ten by a 
computer  program, it is obvious that  one or 
several programmers,  computer  scientists, 
and other engineers have first elaborated a 
grammar  and lexicon specific to the use of 
that  word processor. In the field of machine 
translation, special programs have been 
developed to fit the precise needs of the text 
to be translated. Thus,  on the basis of 
general g rammar  and vocabulary, numerous 
rules have adapted the system to a special 
use in restricted domains of science and 
technology. The language of the pr intout  is 
produced through the rules of the designers 
and their linguistic choices. 
Post-editors working on raw translations 
are very sensitive to the style of these t ex t s .  
As a mat te r  of fact, many of them at first 
are quite shocked by their style and some 
even deny them the s tatus of translations 
because they are not perfect linguistic 
216 LAURIAN 
products. Of course, there are quite a few 
errors, some very minor, others more 
serious, and when, on occasion, errors be- 
come too numerous,  some post-editors feel it 
would be easier to re-do the translation than 
to correct such an output .  
1.2. T e c h n i c a l  S t y l e  Is N o t  N e u t r a l  
It is commonly believed that  technical and 
scientific texts have no style, or conversely, 
that  style is unique to novels or poetry. 
This essentially means tha t  the style that  is 
perceived is tha t  of novels and poetry, a spe- 
cial and personal way an author  expresses 
his own version of the world and of the 
things surrounding him. The style of spe- 
cialized texts is not  generally perceived, and 
therefore is thought  not  to exist, the reason 
being the non-individual aspect of special- 
ized li terature that  is often thought  to be 
the expression of a group, team, or school. 
As a mat te r  of fact, a technical text is 
easy to recognize stylistically, not only be- 
cause it shows figures and tables, and not  
even because of the terminology that  is of- 
ten thought  to be the principal characteris- 
tic of technical and scientific documents.  
There is also a special syntax and a par- 
ticular use of existing morphology, as well as 
a rejection of some linguistic theoretical pos- 
sibilities. Style is both a positive and a 
negative array of features. I include ex- 
amples of negative and positive stylistic 
choices in Laurian 1987. 
It would be erroneous to think that  there 
is only one single technical style. Instead, 
there are several. In the light of machine 
translation, the differences among special- 
ized texts appear clearly. Some texts induce 
many errors during machine processing for 
translation; others give a better output ,  but  
the raw translat ion still needs extensive 
post-editing. At  times the translation can 
be used as it is. Different types of discourse, 
each with its own stylistic features, can be 
described. The length of the sentences, the 
presence or absence of adverbs, the formula- 
tions with personal or impersonal forms, the 
existence of active verbs or of defining ex- 
pressions (by means of be or other verbs or 
by punctuat ion marks), to mention a few ex- 
amples, are features taken into account in a 
typology that  enables a classification of dis- 
course types. Such a typology has been 
proposed in Laurian 1983a. Another  kind of 
typology can be based on the si tuations of 
communicat ion,  among them the social 
characteristics of the author  and those of 
the reader, the characteristics of the mes- 
sage considered from outside. Such a typol- 
ogy has been proposed in Laurian 1983b. 
Style is usually thought  to be located 
beyond correctness and exactness. Actually, 
considering machine translation output ,  an 
evaluation of the style of the original text 
can be given on the basis of the errors that  
the text causes in machine translation. 
Tha t  was the aim of the typology published 
in Laurian 1983a, which was based on the 
type of errors the system produced during 
processing for machine translation. Errors 
and stylistic da ta  are thus closely related. 
Stylistic research can, therefore, be based on 
machine translation from the point of view 
of errors generated by computer  processing. 
1.3. Non- l inguis t ic  E lements  Must  Be 
I n t r o d u c e d  i n t o  t h e  N o t i o n  o f  
S t y l e  
Some iconographic elements and also some 
special typographic uses have been taken 
into account in the definition of style 
proposed here. Obviously, readers are sen- 
sitive to the use of figures and tables and to 
the use of colors in them or on the printed 
page. They are also sensitive to the use of 
punctuat ion marks and other marks used in 
technical texts, dashes, parentheses, and so 
on. As regards punctuat ion,  English is dif- 
ferent from French and a stylistic s tudy of 
specialized texts of one of these languages 
should not forget tha t  compulsory dif- 
ferences have to be distinguished from the 
group variants. 
In a previous s tudy carried out  within the 
program 'Science, Technologic, Socidtd' for 
STYLISTICS AND COMPUTING 217 
the Centre National de la Recherche Scien- 
tifique, 'Du discours scienti fique au dis- 
cours social: une analyse linguistique de la 
continuitd' (Laurian and Jacobi), it has been 
shown that  the proportion of diagrams and 
photographs is proportional to the level of 
popularization of a scientific text. For in- 
stance, in a high-level publication in physics, 
such as Comptes-Rendus de l'Academie des 
Sciences de Paris, there is very little lin- 
guistic text and a great number  of tables. 
The specialized readers of that  very highly 
specialized publication want  figures, with 
the min imum text necessary to make them 
understandable.  Sometimes the linguistic 
part  of it even seems superfluous, or just a 
necessary concession to some sort of decency 
or good taste. By contrast,  popular science 
journals such as La Recherche or Pour la 
Science, which is the French version of 
Scienti f ic American,  provide many 
photographs and figures. It is often difficult 
for non-specialists to interpret  a picture. 
They must  be guided by the author or 
editor of the article. Under such an illustra- 
tion, a lengthy text can be found, from 3 to 
15 lines, explaining a process, an experimen- 
tal device, or the specificity of the illustra- 
tion. In a stylistic typology of scientific 
texts, such non-linguistic elements must  be 
taken into consideration. 
From a similar point of view, the fre- 
quency of subtitles in an article and the fre- 
quency of words writ ten in capital letters or 
italics can be observed. The frequency of 
parentheses, which are nothing but  punctua- 
tion marks, also gives very interesting data  
on the style of the text. Moreover, the 
numerous values of the parentheses lead to a 
very impor tant  semantic component  of the 
scientific texts: the varieties of definitions 
and their 'pseudo-variants ' ,  equivalence or 
bi-denomination. Actually, parentheses 
sometimes introduce a lexical equivalent on 
another language level, for instance the com- 
mon name and the specialized name of a 
unique chemical; they also introduce the 
definition of a term new to the reader, or, 
by contrast, they give the specialized name 
of something defined in a previous clause; or 
they simply refer to a figure or to a hand- 
book, or to a previous article or s tudy,  or to 
a mere footnote, which can be located 
equally well at the end of the article, at the 
bot tom of the page, or in the margin, us 
done, for instance, in La Recherche. 
Quite often in scientific popularization 
journals the text below the photographs is a 
'double', a ' twin' ,  of the real text, so a 
repeated message is given to the reader. Of- 
ten the subtitles also play the role of 
doublets, in addition to the parallel elements 
in the text. They help the reader through 
the article. 
Traditionally,  only linguistic features such 
as lexical items, lexical choices, syntactic 
choices, and types of formulations were in- 
troduced in a style analysis to determine the 
author 's  intention. All such semiotic fea- 
tures should be taken into account in an 
analysis of style. Often these non-linguistic 
features do not depend entirely on the au- 
thor: the editor might  add or suppress 
marks according to the guidelines of a jour- 
nal or of a publishing house. Nevertheless, 
the final text has its own style distinguish- 
able both from the house style and from the 
style of other publications, at the same time 
belonging to the same type of style as many 
other texts in the scientific or technical 
fields that  fill up scientific and technical 
journals. Thus, that  style is no longer a 
strictly personal question; it is composed of 
personal and environmental  features. The 
concept of style then has to include a social 
aspect: the level of popularization or 
specialization that  takes into account the 
communicat ion situation, and the way the 
group produces or takes part  in the produc- 
tion of the article as well as the way the 
group uses it, consumes it. 
218 LAURIAN 
2. A N e w  I n s t r u m e n t  for  an  Old  
C o n c e p t  
2 .1 .  P o s t - e d i t i n g  C a n  Be  U s e d  A s  an  
I n s t r u m e n t  for  S ty l i s t i c  R e s e a r c h  
In a human translation, errors are usually 
not repetitive: a t ranslator  makes a mistake 
in a sentence, but  he doesn ' t  make a mis- 
take on the same word in a later sentence, 
because' the contexts are not the same. A 
human translator  helps himself a great deal 
through the context. A machine translation 
is homogeneous: the system reacts the same 
way to the same word in all contexts, al- 
though recently the system has been able to 
take into account some elements of the text 
that  are not too far away. This  advance is 
being introduced little by little, according to 
the observations of the post-editors and the 
feedback they send to the linguists and 
programmers  in charge of the development 
of machine translation. This  way of work- 
ing is used by personnel responsible for 
Systran development  at the Commission of 
the European Communi t ies  in Luxembourg. 
Psychologically, the post-editor often feels 
very unsatisfied with a raw translation, 
since he finds the same error several times. 
He feels tha t  he is the one who is working 
like a machine when he corrects the same 
mistake several times. Actually, repetitive 
correction is the unfor tunate  aspect of the 
post-editor 's  job,  the good aspect being the 
part icipation in the development  of a new 
product,  the innovation of a new type of 
work in global research. 
Linguistically, the post-editor applies cor- 
rections based on two types of concern: 
depending on whether  he has in mind the 
author  of the text or the reader, his post- 
editing will be different. Usually post- 
editors tend to think of the author  and of 
the original text. From a stylistic point  of 
view, the way the translation will be used 
should interact with the way it is post- 
edited. For a s tudy of two types of post- 
editing, each one adjusted to the consump- 
tion of the translation, see Laurian 1986. If 
a text is to be published and read by a great 
number  of people, it should be post-edited 
much more carefully than if it is a working 
paper to be used by a small group of ex- 
perts. 'Rapid Post-Edit ing '  (RiP.E.) is used 
to meet an urgent  demand; 'Conventional  
Post-Edit ing'  (C.P.E.) is used for publishing 
the text. In the appendix to this article an 
example of an English text from the Com- 
mission of European Communi t ies  is given, 
followed by an R.P.E. and a C.P.E. version 
of the Systran translation. The two post- 
editions can be compared with regard to the 
use of adjectives, the choice of emphatic  or 
other kinds of formulations, the word or 
clause order, etc. Readers of this article are 
invited to discover the linguistic differences 
through these examples. 
Comparison of R.P.E. and C.P.E. of one 
text gives the basis for a sort of 's tylogram' 
or 'style chart ' ,  an image of the texts 
provided by the post-editors. The image 
gives information about  the conception of a 
group of people, a professional group, an age 
group, an intellectual group, concerning 
their own language, the good and beautiful 
language, the technical language, style, the 
ideal style that  they always try to approach. 
2.2.  A n  E n q u i r y  t h r o u g h  a S ty l i s t i c  
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  
Another  ins t rument  for stylistic research has 
been worked out: the 'questionnaire-test 
stylistique'(questionnaire on style) in mul- 
tiple choice form. This questionnaire is 
composed of a collection of sentences, each 
one appearing under three to seven forms or 
variants. The source text is a document  
writ ten within the Commission of the 
European Communi t ies  and machine trans- 
lated by Systran. The variants  have been 
determined according to selected linguistic 
features. For example, non-personal forms 
are supposed to be inelegant in French, so 
some have been proposed for acceptance or 
rejection by post-editors. Similarly, repeti- 
tions of words or of constructions are sup- 
posed to be deleted in a good translation (as 
STYLISTICS AND COMPUTING 219 
well as in a good original) even if they are 
the simplest and the only precise means of 
expression. The position of a subject, of a 
complement,  of a determinant  has been 
tested, too, by means of varied word order. 
The subjects for the experiment were all 
professional translators or s tudents  of trans- 
lation at the end of their studies with 
professional experience in a translator 's  of- 
fice or in the translation service of an inter- 
national organization. In one part  of the en- 
quiry, the subjects were asked to choose be- 
tween the French variants as spontaneously 
as possible, wi thout  having seen the English 
original. Therefore, the only criterion they 
had for choosing was their own feeling of 
style and convenience or beauty (fluidity 
and correctness). In another part, they were 
asked to detail the reasons for their choice. 
Then they were shown the original and 
asked again to choose among the variants, 
in relation to the original, taking into ac- 
count  the fidelity (accuracy) of meaning and 
form. Next they were asked for a classifica- 
tion of the variants  on a subjective scale of 
'good to bad'  translation in order to obtain 
a hierarchy of elegance, correctness, and 
rejection, a scale in the strength of the 
preferences. This  experiment is presented 
with details in Laurian, 1987. 
The aim of such an enquiry is to deter- 
mine which linguistic features embody the 
stylistic criteria tha t  post-editors or trans- 
lators apply, most of the time unconsciously. 
Language preferences would make them 
choose one variant  even without  knowing 
why a n d  mainly without  respect to the ef- 
ficiency of the communicat ion,  i.e. without  
respect to its purpose. 
2.3 .  'Mass  Style'~ a R e c e n t  
P h e n o m e n o n  
Traditionally,  literary style is the unique 
and inimitable element of a work. It is the 
expression of the very genius of a writer. In 
specialized fields, authors often communi- 
cate on behalf of a group. Even when they 
do not  do so explicitly, a school of thought  
can usually be recognized because the 
methodology applied is that  of a specific 
laboratory or group of scientists. On the 
other hand, scientific and technical texts are 
read in a different way than literary texts. 
A text is not read the same way sit t ing in a 
deep armchair under the light of a semi- 
shadowy light as on a lab stool lighted by 
neon tubes. A novel has to be read linearly 
from the beginning to the end. A scientific 
article, on the contrary, can be read rapidly 
or by noting down some of the figures or 
some of the main ideas; it is not usually 
read straight  through and can be re-read in 
parts, 'strolling' through it or hurrying to 
the conclusions. The reading is bi- 
directional (horizontal following the phrase 
structures and vertical jumping from one 
key word to another). 
Adequate style for a translation or the 
post-editing of a raw translation permits the 
reader to grasp the information as quickly 
as possible wi thout  any possibility of am- 
biguity. The kind of reading -- or, better, 
the consumption -- customary for scientific 
texts justifies the use of machines for their 
translation and also justifies a kind of style 
adjusted to rapid consumption. 
Machine translation facilitates the trans- 
lation of a great number  of documents.  
Large amounts  often mean uniformization: 
all machine translated texts (by a given 
system) are most likely to be uniformized as 
regards style. The intervention of the post- 
editor might  bring an element of variety 
into the final style of the text, a sort of per- 
sonal touch, but, as a mat ter  of fact, con- 
sidering the whole of the specialized docu- 
ments  of the same type, style tends to level 
toward a uniformity tha t  could be called a 
'mass style'. Human translation tends to 
standardize style; machine translation tends 
to uniformize it. The intervention of the 
post-editor is a contribution to that  stylistic 
uniformization of texts that  are to be very 
widely disseminated. Surprisingly, a post- 
edited machine translation can be easily 
recognized by its style. 
220 LAURIAN 
3. T o w a r d  a N e w  Def in i t i on  o f  S t y l e  
3.1. T y p e s  o f  Errors  and  T y p e s  o f  
S t y l e s  
The  errors tha t  remain after machine trans- 
lation give valuable information on the 
characteristics of the texts processed, be- 
cause machine translat ion works as a 
homogeneous sieve to sort out  specialized 
texts. Error analysis enables a new ap- 
proach to style studies. Usually, error 
analysis is regarded as an aid for didactic 
methods,  for instance in foreign language 
teaching. It can also be an aid to style 
analysis, especially the style of translated 
texts. 
Error analysis conceived in relation to 
machine product ion has been used as an 
auxiliary to obtain information on the lin- 
guistic characteristics of technical and scien- 
tific texts. A grid has been worked out  to 
describe errors in raw translat ion produced 
by Systran and to draw a specialized text 
typology with a strong stylistic component  
(Laurian 1983a). Machine translat ion works 
like a chemical reagent with which the 
chemical elements always react the same 
way, a reagent tha t  indicates one or several 
components  of a substance just  as error 
analysis indicates one or several stylistic fea- 
tures of the text studied. 
This  error analysis also includes factors 
such as context,  s i tuation of communicat ion,  
and special uses; thus, it is a functional 
analysis. It could lead to stylistics applied 
to the teaching of post-editing, stylistics ap- 
plied to the teaching of specialized trans- 
lation, and also to stylistics applied to the 
teaching of specialized document  writing. 
3.2. T h e  D i s s e m i n a t i o n  o f  D o c u m e n t s  
and t h e  T y p e s  of  Sty les  
The three basic qualities of a translation, 
considered as given, are the ' three C's': cor- 
rectness, clearness, and comprehensibility. 
Another  quality is also considered as given: 
fidelity to the original. There still remains a 
whole assembly of da ta  that  the post-editor 
can manipulate:  these are the components  of 
the style, which fits best when it adapts  to 
the consumers'  needs. 
Adapta t ion to the consumers '  needs 
means that  the post-editor 's  work must  be 
articulated in an exchange with the receiver 
of the translation and no longer only with 
the producer, the writer, as has been the 
practice traditionally. The point is not only 
to unders tand and t ransmit  the ideas and 
intentions of the author,  but  also to trans- 
mit  a text adjusted to the use that  will be 
made of it. As a consequence, the aim of 
the style is to reach a sort of new conform- 
ity to a non-explicit demand or expectation 
of a large public, i.e. s tandards  tha t  are not 
yet defined, but  are felt or respected im- 
plicitly. New stylistic research should at 
first describe very carefully and in detail 
these implicit s tandards  of scientific and 
technical style. The stylistic questionnaire 
was a first a t t empt  on the way to a descrip- 
tion; it was also a test for a methodology. 
It could be applied on a broader scale, as  
could other methodologies yet to be 
developed. Finally, style is not only a 
characteristic, but  also an aim: for present 
actuality, but  also for the future. Moreover, 
style is not an 'added value'  of the text, as 
many scholars would consider it, but  a con- 
s t i tuent  part. 
3.3. C o n t r a s t i v e  Linguis t i c s  and  
A u t o m a t i c  P r o d u c t i o n  
Using machine translation for stylistic 
research on technical and scientific texts, as 
well as for stylistic research in general, con- 
st i tutes only one aspect of large-scale work 
on theoretical and applied research. This  
work is founded on contrastive linguistics. 
It applies first of all to different languages, 
but  also to different kinds of documents,  
and different types of discourse in the same 
language. 
Linguistic uses of translators in their 
professional behavior help linguists to under- 
s tand phenomena related to translat ion from 
one language to another.  The  analysis or 
STYLISTICS AND COMPUTING 221 
use of machine t ransla t ion with an aim at 
theoretical  research helps to disclose 
phenomena tha t  are usually considered as 
surface features, but  which are, if the at- 
t i tudes toward au tomat ion  of t ranslat ion 
and towards post-edit ing habits are ex- 
amined, fundamenta l  phenomena: facts of 
style. 
Reflection on the differing post-editions 
makes possible, whether  in a multi l ingual or 
a monolingual  contrast ive frame, a new vi- 
sion of stylistics tha t  includes and integrates 
author  and reader as producer and con- 
sumer. 
REFERENCES 
Laurian, Anne-Marie. 1983a. 'Pour une 
typologie des erreurs dans la traduction 
automatique.' Multilingua, 1983, 
2-2:65-78. 
. . . . . .  . 1983b. 'Typologie des discours scien- 
tifiques: deux approches.' Etude8 de Lin- 
guistique Appliqude, 1983, 51:8-20. 
. . . . . .  . 1986. 'Post-~dition rapide et post-~dition 
conventionelle: deux modMitgs d'une 
activitg spgcifique.' Multilingua, 1986, 
5-2:81-88. 
. . . . . .  . 1987. 'Enqu6te stylistique sur la traduc- 
tion automatique de documents 
techniques.' Article to be published in 
IRAL (International Review of Applied 
Linguistics), 1987, 20. 
222 LAURIAN 
A p p e n d i x  
Post-edition As an Instrument for Research on Style: Examples of Rapid 
Post-edition and Conventional Post-edition of the Same Raw Translation 
A. Original English Text (Doc. No. 8101/3 /81  e, C.C.E.) 
Although both Governments and the Industry train personnel, it is frequently done on a 
piecemeal basis; the present document attempts to bring together the requirements for training 
for all personnel; (...) Certain General Training must be given to all personnel who work off- 
shore. This includes such items as Abandonment procedure, firefighting, Survival at Sea etc., 
and is further explained in Section II (General Training) of this report. In addition to this, in- 
dividuals have specialised jobs and specialised tasks in emergency, and these individuals require 
Special Training which is tailored to - their normal Job and responsibilities (e.g. Toolpushers, rig 
mechanics, and Supervisors) and - their specific tasks in case of emergency (e.g. Firefighting and 
Rescue personnel, radio operators etc.). 
B. Text with Rapid Post-edition (Doc. 6101/3 /82  f, C.C.E.) 
Bien que les gouvernements et l 'industrie forment le personnel, ils le font souvent sur une base 
fragmentaire, le document present pour but de rassembler les besoins de formation pour tout le 
personnel; (...) Une certaine formation ggngrale doit ~tre donnge ~ tout le personnel qui 
fonctionne off-shore. Ceci comprend des articles tels que la m~thode d'abandon des installations 
la lutte contre l'incendie, la survie en met etc...et est encore expliqu~ dans la section II (formation 
g~n~rale) de ce rapport. En plus de ceci, les individus ont des emplois spgcialisSs et des ts 
sp~cialisges en cas d'urgence, et ces individus ont besoin d'une formation sp~ciale adaptge ~ leur 
travail et responsabilitgs normaux (par exmple les chefs de chantier, mgcanicier de montage, et 
surveillants) et ~ leurs ts spgcifiques duns le cas de l'urgence (par exemple le personnel de 
lutte contre l'incendie et de sauvetage, les op~rateurs radio). 
C. Text with Conventional Post-edition (Doe. 6101/3 /81  FR, C.C.E.) 
Tant  les pouvoirs publics que t'industrie donnent une formation au personnel, mais ils le font 
souvent par bribes. C'est pourquoi il est tenth de rassembler dans le prSsent document les con- 
ditions de formation requises pour tout le personnel; (...) Tout le personnel travaillant en met 
doit recevoir une certaine formation ggngrale portant sur des points tels que la proc6dure 
d'~vacuation, la lutte contre l'incendie la survie en mer, etc. Cette formation est d~crite plus en 
dgtail duns la section II (Formation ggngrale) du present rapport. (...) En outre, les personnes qui 
ont une mission particuli~re ~ remplir en cas de situation critique, doivent recevoir une formation 
sp~ciale adapt~e ~ leur travail et ~ leurs responsabilit~s normales (par exemple : chefs de chantier, 
machinistes d'installation de forage, repr~sentants du mMtre d'oeuvre) ainsi qu'~. leurs missions 
sp6cifiques en situation critique (par exemple personnel de lutte contre l'incendie et de sauvetage, 
op~rateurs radio, etc.). 
STYLISTICS AND C O M P U T I N G  223 
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e s  A s  a n  I n s t r u m e n t  f o r  R e s e a r c h  o n  S t y l e :  E x a m p l e s  o f  S t y l i s t i c  
V a r i a n t s  
A. 
B. 
1. On suppose dgalement que ceci est ddj~ une consultat ion.  
2. I1 y a Sgalement l 'hypoth~se que ceci est ddj~ une consultat ion.  
3. I1 semble aussi que ceci soit d~j~ une consultat ion.  
C. 
. 
. 
. 
Nous  devons insister sur les points sur lesquels nous 6tions d 'accord 
avec la Commission depuis le tou t  ddbut  de la crise. 
Nous  de,vons souligner sur quels points nous avons 6tg d 'accord avec 
la Commission depuis le tou t  ddbut  de la crise. 
I1 eonvient d ' insister  s u r n o s  points d 'accord avec la Commission 
depuis le tou t  ddbut  de la crise. 
1. Ces idges sont  ~videmment encore d 'actuali t~ et doivant  ~tre 
soulev~es encore au Comit~ Consultatif .  
2. Ces idles sont  manifes tement  toujours  d 'actuali t~ et devraient  ~tre 
$voque~s une nouvelle lois devant  le Comit~ Consultat if .  
3. Ces questions sont  manifes tement  toujours  d 'actuali t~ et on devrai t  
les soulever une fois encore au Comit~ Consultatif .  
4. Ces questions sont  encore bien actuelles et doivant  ~tre soulev~es en- 
core devant  le Comitg Consultatif .  
