Style Variation in Cooking Recipes
Jing Lin1 and Chris Mellish2 and Ehud Reiter3
Abstract. Human text by specific authors has varied characteris-
tics. Even when different authors write about identical topics within
a fixed genre under a predefined domain, their text will still be differ-
ent. For example, in food recipes there are style variations between
authors even with describing the same cooking actions and foods.
This paper summarises style variations in food recipes written by
different people.
1 Introduction
Nowadays it is common to use corpora of human-authored texts to
acquire knowledge in natural language generation (NLG), such as
STOP [10] and SumTime [12], and so on. To make sure the corpora
are big enough and broad enough, the corpora generally contain texts
from several authors. When corpora are analysed, the differences be-
tween authors are normally ignored. Reiter and Sripada [9, 8] have
suggested that “There are substantial variations between individual
writers, which reduces the effectiveness of corpus-based learning”.
Our ultimate goal is to build an NLG system which translates recipes
written by one author into the style of another author. This requires
a good model of what aspects of recipes differ between authors; the
corpus analysis presented here is a step towards such a model.
In the NLG area, some researchers have investigated producing
text with varied styles. Hovy [4, 5] discussed rhetorical goals that are
“the existence of a level of organization mediating between commu-
nicative goals and generator decisions”. Furthermore, Stamatatos etc.
[13] can produce outputs based on different user requirements, such
as written style, tone, and so on. None of these researches focuses
on generating texts with the style from an author. In literary compar-
ison, stylometry, which is a subcategory of attributing authorship,
researchers try to identify an author’s style by building a set of mea-
surable patterns[14]. The purpose of stylometry is to identify the au-
thor of texts, instead of describing the writing characteristics. Most
of the defined style markers of stylometry are not enough to identify
writing characteristics. For example, Burrows [1] only considers the
frequencies of a group of the top (typically 30 or 50) frequent words.
Moreover, some researchers used character-level n-grams recently,
such as Kešelj [6], Peng [7], and Clement and Sharp [2], to consider
the impact of morphological variations of words.
We introduce our corpora based on authors in Section 2 and give
two example recipes by different authors in Section 3. Section 4 de-
scribes style variations in food recipes, which are categorised in at
the sentence level and at the recipe level. The final section is our
conclusion in Section 5, which relates this work to the problem of
generating texts with styles of authors.
1 University of Aberdeen, UK, email: j.lin@abdn.ac.uk
2 University of Aberdeen, UK, email: c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk
3 University of Aberdeen, UK, email: e.reiter@abdn.ac.uk
2 Our Corpora
To catch style variations between authors, we need to collect good
quality corpora. Certain genres are less suited to analysing writing
differences, such as daily news and fictions. Burrow [1] suggests that
“in fiction: The language of its dialogue and that of its narrative usu-
ally differ from each other in some obvious and many less obvious
ways”. The authors of daily news often narrate matters with quotes
from involved people and daily news is normally subjective from its
authors, which make the text varied. Texts in food recipes, on the
other hand, have features which are narrative, imperative, and ob-
jective. Although these features partly limit text variations, they also
highlight styles between authors.
Based on the recipe domain, we collected a set of corpora based
on authors from the Internet and recipe books. Table 1 presents in-
formation about our corpora. Our corpora include two recipe books,
Recipes for Health Eating [3] and Food for Health [11]. There is
an amateur recipe author: CM from the website (www.cooks.com).
We also collected a few corpora of professional cooks from the BBC
recipe website (www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes).
Table 1. Author corpora information
Corpus Information
Author Corpus Number Total Total
of Recipes Lines Words
Recipes for Health Eating 76 961 9212
Dewhurst and Lockie [3]
Food for Health 113 1347 11791
Roe [11]
CM 48 537 6432
CM (www.cooks.com)
Ainsley Harriott 87 891 14217
Harriott (www.bbc.co.uk)
Antony Worral Thompson 1026 7790 99791
Thompson (www.bbc.co.uk)
James Martin 1103 8996 119582
Martin (www.bbc.co.uk)
Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 77 932 12187
Fearnley-Whittingstall (www.bbc.co.uk)
3 Two Example Recipes
We list two recipes as examples from our corpora to provide an idea
what our recipes look like. Both of the recipes are fish pie recipes, but
14
they show many differences between one and the other. For example,
Step 1 of Recipe One is delayed to Step 7 of Recipe Two. Since each
cook intends to create recipes with his speciality, it is unlikely to
find two recipes describing exactly the same dish. In the following
examples, we omit the ingredient section of the recipes as these do
not typically contain syntactically valid English sentences.
Recipe One Fish Pie (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
1 Switch on oven to 220C, 425F or Gas Mark 7 and grease a 1/2
litre ovenproof serving dish.
2 Collect ingredients.
3 Wash and peel potatoes and cut into evenly-sized pieces. Place
in boiling water and cook for approximately 20 minutes until
soft.
4 Drain and mash potatoes when cooked. Add low fat spread and
stir thoroughly.
5 Meanwhile, rinse and dry fish and poach gently in milk until
fish flakes easily (approximately 10-15 minutes).
6 Drain and flake fish. Retain milk for sauce.
7 Measure warm milk and if necessary make up to 75 ml with
water.
8 Mix mashed potatoes, flaked fish and milk.
9 Wash and finely chop parsley and add to fish and potato mixture
with a good pinch of grated nutmeg.
10 Place mixture in greased ovenproof serving dish and using a
fork, mark a pattern on top.
11 Bake for 10-15 minutes until brown on top.
12 Wash tomatoes, cut into wedges and arrange neatly on top.
Place lemon slice and parsley in middle.
Recipe Two Creamy Fish Pie (Fearnley-Whittingstall, BBC online
recipes)
1 Place the fillets of fish in a medium saucepan. Add the milk,
onion, carrot, celery, bay leaf, a couple of stalks of parsley and
the peppercorns.
2 Place the pan on a low heat and let the milk heat up gently. As
soon as it comes to a simmer, switch off the heat and cover the
pan. The fish will continue cooking in the hot milk.
3 Meanwhile, peel the potatoes, cut them into even, bite-sized
chunks and put them in a large pan. Add just enough water
to cover and put the pan on the hob over a high heat. Add a
teaspoon of salt and let the water come to the boil. Lower the
heat to a simmer and cook the potatoes until they are just tender.
4 Carefully drain the potatoes and allow them to cool in a colan-
der for a minute or two. Return them to the pan and mash them,
adding 50g/2oz of the butter, cut into cubes.
5 Stand a sieve over a large jug and tip in the fish and milk mix-
ture. Wash the pan in which the fish was cooked and dry it well.
6 Add 3-4 tablespoons of the fishy milk to the mash and stir it
in well. Add some freshly ground black pepper, taste the mash,
and add some salt if you think it needs it. Put the mash to one
side.
7 Heat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
8 To make the bechamel sauce, put the remaining 75g/2 1/2oz
butter in the clean pan and melt it over a low to medium heat.
Add the flour and stir well with a wooden spoon to make a
roux. Cook for two minutes, stirring every few seconds. Then
gently whisk in one third of the hot fishy milk. The paste will
quickly turn into a very thick sauce. Add another third of the
milk, whisking all the time, and then the final third, so you end
up with a creamy sauce. Season the bechamel with salt and
freshly ground black pepper, turn the heat down to very low,
and let the sauce bubble gently for five minutes while you pre-
pare the fish.
9 Remove the vegetables, herbs and peppercorns from the fish
and discard. Carefully pick up a chunk of fish. Peel off any skin
and discard, then gently feel the flesh between your fingers for
bones, being careful not to over-shred the fish. Put the boneless
fish on a clean plate.
10 Turn off the heat under the bechamel and add the fish to the
sauce. Add the prawns, then chop the remaining parsley and stir
this in too. Taste the sauce once more and add more seasoning,
to taste.
11 Generously butter a pie dish and pour in the fishy bechamel.
Spoon over the mash and spread it carefully across the surface
of the fish sauce. Dot a little extra butter over the top of the pie.
12 Wearing oven gloves, put the pie in the oven and bake for
about 25 minutes or until the top is starting to brown and the
fishy sauce is bubbling up the sides of the mash.
13 Serve with buttered minted peas and crusty bread to mop up
the sauce.
4 Style Variations
There are different types of style features with examples in food
recipes. We catergorised them into sentence level and recipe level
features. The style features at the sentence level are those that can
be identified within one sentence, and do not have many connec-
tions outside of their sentence. The style features at the recipe level
are those features which involve relationships between sentences, or
cannot be simply defined within one sentence.
4.1 Sentence Level Features
Sentence level features include lexical preferences (Section 4.1.1),
skipping objects (Section 4.1.2), content selection (Section 4.1.3),
other differences at the sentence level (Section 4.1.4), and ortho-
graphical differences (spelling) (Section 4.1.5).
4.1.1 Lexical Preferences
Authors express the same action with different words, which can be
synonyms with each other, or can be not. For example in Recipe One
Step 1, Dewhurst and Lockie say ‘Switch on oven’ whereas in Recipe
Two Step 7, Fearnley-Whittingstall says ‘Heat the oven’. The follow-
ing other examples show similar variation in the same action from
other authors.
Example 1 “Put the oven on.” (Roe, [11])
Example 2 “Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas6.” (Thompson,
BBC online recipes)
In the above four examples, these different verbs reflect the fact
that the authors have different lexical preferences to express the same
action — preheating the oven. Table 2 shows the frequency of the 4
15
Table 2. Sentence and word information of corpora of different authors
Following Objects (oven or grill)
Authors Switch on Put on Preheat Heat
Dewhurst and Lockie 35 2 0 0
Roe 0 42 0 0
Thompson 0 0 298 2
Fearnley-Whittingstall 0 0 4 7
verbs by the authors given objects ‘oven’ or ‘grill’. Since ‘switch on’
only appears in the authors, Dewhurst and Lockie, it can be consid-
ered as idiolect. In the recipe domain, idiolects may cover verbs, and
nouns as well. For instance, some authors decide to use ‘frypan’ in-
stead of ‘pan’. Furthermore, Dewhurst and Lockie and Roe never use
the word, ‘preheat’, in their recipes. Fearnley-Whittingstall’s recipes
are various, including desserts, main courses, and so on. Only small
portion of his recipes involves bakeware, ‘oven‘ or ‘grill‘.
A similar situation happens for other verbs, as in the following ex-
amples 3 and 4.
Example 3 “Extract juice from orange and add this with the water
to the saucepan.” ([3])
Example 4 “Finely grate the ginger and squeeze out the juice into a
shallow non-metalic dish.” (Harriott, BBC online Recipes)
4.1.2 Skipping Objects
Some authors prefer to skip the objects of their verbs if they have
been mentioned before, whereas others always include objects. See
the following examples.
Example 5 “Blanch the sweet potato in boiling water for 2-3 min-
utes until softened. Transfer to a bowl and mash with the cream
and herbs.” (Thompson, BBC online recipes)
Example 6 “Wash and peel potatoes and cut into evenly-sized
pieces. Place in boiling water and cook for approximately 20 min-
utes until soft. Drain and mash potatoes when cooked.” (Step3 &
Step4 of Recipe One) (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
Thompson always skips the object, ‘potatoes’, when he mentions
the action, ‘mash’. Furthermore Fearnley-Whittingstall includes the
object as a pronoun, ‘them’, in Step 4 in Recipe Two.
4.1.3 Content Selection
Authors present conditions using different information.
Example 7 “Bake until golden.” (Roe, [11])
In the above example, in Step 11 of Recipe One, and in Step 12 of
Recipe Two, authors describe the appearance of the food when it is
cooked, by using ‘golden’ or ‘brown’. Both Dewhurst and Lockie and
Fearnley-Whittingstall also describe the cooking time in their baking
procedure. Fearnley-Whittingstall adds the delicious detail that ‘the
fishy sauce is bubbling up’ in contrast to the simpler descriptions
by Roe and Dewhurst and Lockie. Roe uses subjective descriptions,
such as ‘golden’, ‘tender’, and ‘firm’ more often, instead of time in-
formation in her recipes. Her ways are more suitable for experienced
cooks.
Some authors provide less details or no details, but others prefer to
introduce actions with clear process descriptions. This happens espe-
cially in using certain verbs, like ‘drain’ in the following examples.
Example 8 “Drain.” (Roe, [11])
Example 9 “Drain.” (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
Example 10 “Drain the beef from the marinade into a colander over
a glass bowl.” (Thompson, BBC online recipes)
When the authors present the action, ‘drain’, Roe and Dewhurst
and Lockie rarely include further information, but Thompson most of
the time presents detailed information related to the action, ‘drain’.
This is in contrast to the example of ‘mash’ in the previous section, in
which Dewhurst and Lockie gave more information than Thompson.
4.1.4 Other Differences at the Sentence Level
Because of the freedom of the English language, authors can struc-
ture the same words into different sequences.
Example 11 “Peel and finely chop onion.” (Dewhurst and Lockie,
[3])
Example 12 “Peel and chop the onion finely.” (Roe, [11])
There are some unusual grammatical presentations in our corpora,
for instance Dewhurst and Lockie always say ‘Switch on oven’ in
Step 1 of Recipe One, but never say ‘Switch on the oven’.
4.1.5 Orthographical Differences
There are some orthographical differences, which are recognised dif-
ferently in computer systems. However, they should be considered as
one word presenting in different forms, not two different words.
Example 13 “Pre-heat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.” (Thompson,
BBC online recipes)
Thompson uses the word, ‘preheat’, in the form, ‘pre-heat’, 17
times. Moreover, Dewhurst and Lockie use ‘Gas Mark 7’ in Step 1
of Recipe One instead Thompson just uses ‘Gas 7’ in the previous
example.
4.2 Recipe Level Features
At the recipe level, we find content differences (Section 4.2.1), order
differences (Section 4.2.2), structure differences (Section 4.2.3), and
aggregation (Section 4.2.4).
16
4.2.1 Content Differences
Some authors, such as Dewhurst and Lockie, always present certain
cooking actions, but others, such as Thompson, skip these actions in
recipe descriptions. Thompson never mentions ‘collect ingredients’
and ’wash potatoes’ in the cooking method section, but Dewhurst
and Lockie always does as showing in Step 2 of Recipe One.
On the other hand, most cooks only describe the food making pro-
cess. However, Fearnley-Whittingstall also involves other actions.
For example, he mentioned ‘wearing oven gloves’ in Step 12 of
Recipe Two and ‘washing the pan’ in Step 5 of Recipe Two.
4.2.2 Order Differences
Different authors describe their recipes using a different order. In
the Dewhurst and Lockie corpus ingredients are prepared when the
time comes in the cooking process, so that the actions, ’wash and
peel potatoes’, are described in the cooking methods. Fearnley-
Whittingstall follows this idea as well. On the other hand, Thompson
assumes all ingredients should be prepared properly before cooking
starts. For instance, ‘1/2 sweet potato, peeled and diced’ in the in-
gredient section, instead of as Step 3 of Recipe One in the method
part.
Describing preparing ingredients in the cooking methods is more
suitable for experienced cooking learners, since they could handle
many cooking processes at the same time. For beginners, Thomp-
son’s way could save a lot fuss.
4.2.3 Logic Preferences
In Section 3, we presented two recipes for fish pie, which contain
common cooking actions. Table 3 shows the sequence of these ac-
tions appearing in the recipes. Since these two recipes are quite sim-
ilar, it shows that the two authors have different logic preferences.
Table 3. Common cooking actions between two fish recipes
Action Code Cooking Action
Action a preheating the oven
Action b making mash potatoes
Action c cooking fish
Action d baking the pie
Authors Action Sequence
Dewhurst and Lockie a→ b→ c→ d
Fearnley-Whittingstall c→ b→ a→ d
4.2.4 Aggregation
Sometimes, one sentence in a cooking recipe contains two actions or
more. This is called action aggregation. We expected to find differ-
ent action aggregation habits from different authors. To our surprise,
the action aggregations of different authors are unpredictable in our
corpora. For instance, the authors, Dewhurst and Lockie, have ag-
gregated the actions, ‘switch on’ and ‘grease’, 10 times as in Step
1 of Recipe One, and have not aggregated them 20 times as in ex-
ample 16. The author, Martin, also aggregated the actions, ‘preheat’
and ‘grease’, 4 times as in example 17 out of 15 times. Since action
aggregation is a common feature in food recipes, though it has no
uniform style for each author, we feel it is worth mentioning here.
Table 4 shows all the aggregation information about this section’s
examples.
Example 14 “Switch on oven to 200C, 400F or Gas Mark 6 and
collect ingredients.” (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
Example 15 “Switch on oven to 180C, 350F or Gas Mark 4. Collect
ingredients.” (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
Example 16 “Switch on oven to 190C, 375F or Gas Mark 5. Grease
a 1/ litre ovenproof serving dish.” (Dewhurst and Lockie, [3])
Example 17 “Preheat the oven to 170C/325F/Gas 3 and grease a
muffin tray.” (Martin, BBC online recipes)
Example 18 “Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6. Grease a bak-
ing dish with butter and dust with flour.” (Martin, BBC online
recipes)
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we collected and analysed many style variations be-
tween different authors. Some style features are at the sentence level.
For example, most authors in our corpora have their own preferred
words when they describe some actions in lexical preferences. Other
style features locate at the recipe level, which rely on the subjective
decision of an author. Logic preferences, for instance, clearly show
the logic of an author.
In some style features, authors show clear preferences, as De-
whurst and Lockie always use ‘switch on the oven’ and Martin uses
‘preheat the oven’. However, the aggregation between different au-
thors are unpredictable. Another interesting observation is that au-
thors include varied levels of details in their recipes, as Fearnley-
Whittingstall even describes ‘bubbling up’ in the baking step of
Recipe Two.
Before a NLG system is capable to generate text with these writ-
ing style features, these style knowledge need to be extracted from
corpus first in the knowledge acquisition process. Some style fea-
tures require information from other style features. For example, all
writing style features at the recipe level need information supports
from lexical preferences and skipping objects. Therefore, to analyse
the subtle style features, lexical preferences and skipping objects are
the staring point in the knowledge acquisition. Only if all actions
have been properly identified through lexical preferences, logic pref-
erences, for example, can be identified.
Style features have their implications for NLG at different levels,
if a NLG system intends to generate text with all these features. In
the content determination, content selection at the recipe level and
logic preferences need to be considered. Content selection at the sen-
tence level and other differences involve in the sentence determina-
tion. Finally, lexical preferences, skip objects, and orthographical dif-
ferences influence in lexical choice.
REFERENCES
[1] John F. Burrow, ‘Word-patterns and story-shapes: the statistical analusis
of narrative style’, Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol 2(2), pp 61–
70, (1987).
[2] R. Clement and D. Sharp, ‘Ngram and bayesian classification of doc-
uments for topic and authorship’, Literary and Linguistic Computing,
vol 18(4), pp 423–447, (2003).
[3] Y. Dewhurst and G. Lockie, Recipes for Healthy Eating, Heinemann
Educational Books, 1986.
[4] E. H. Hovy, Generating Natural Language Under Pragmatic Con-
straints, Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ., 1988.
17
Table 4. Action aggregation Information about example 15 to example 19
Switch on — collect Switch on — grease Preheat — grease
Aggregated Separated Aggregated Separated Aggregated Separated
2 5 10 20 4 12
Total 7 Total 30 Total 16
[5] E. H. Hovy, ‘Pragmatics and natural language generation’, Artificial
Intelligence, vol 43, pp 153–197, (1990).
[6] V. Kešelj, F. C. Peng, N. Cercone, and C. Thomas, ‘N-gram-based au-
thor profiles for authorship attribution’, Proceedings the Pacific Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, (2003).
[7] F. C. Peng, ‘Language independent authorship attribution using char-
acter level language models’, Proceedings of the European Association
for Computational Linguistics (EACL-03), (2003).
[8] E. Reiter and S. Sripada, ‘Human variation and lexcial choice’, Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL-02), (2002).
[9] E. Reiter and S. Sripada, ‘Should corpora texts be gold standards for
nlg?’, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Generation (INLG-02), pp 97–104, (2002).
[10] Robertson R. Reiter, E. and Liesl Osman, ‘Knowledge acquisition for
natural language generation’, Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Natural Language Generation (INLG-00), pp 207–215.
[11] D. Roe, Food for Health, Longman, 1990.
[12] Reiter E. Hunter J. Yu J. Sripada, S. and I. Davy.
[13] E. Stamatatos, S. Michos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis, ‘A user-
assisted business letter genertor dealing with text’s stylistic variations’,
the Ninth International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(TAI-97), (1997).
[14] N. Fakotakis Stamatatos, E. and G. Kokkinakis., ‘Computer-based au-
thorship attribution without lexical measures’, Computers and the Hu-
manities, (2001).
18
