Abstract 
Objectives: The aim of the paper is to examine the efficiency of using of parts-of-speech (POS) bigram frequencies to 
address the problem of personality prediction from text. Methods/Analysis: 96 texts were used for the study which were 
randomly selected from a corpus of Russian students’ essays “Personality”. Using NLP methods frequencies of POS bigrams 
in each text (227 types of bigrams were overall identified) were computed, bigrams were then selected which are found 
in no less than 75% of the analyzed texts. Correlations between POS bigrams frequencies in texts and author gender and 
personality traits are computed. Findings: Some researchers report consistently positive contribution of POS n-grams in 
construction of models for personality prediction from text. But these conclusions were drawn based on the analysis of 
English-language texts. Our finding confirms the efficiency of POS bigrams in predicting personality from texts in Russian. 
Correlations of POS bigrams frequencies and characteristics of the authors of the texts (gender, personality traits measured 
with McCrae and Costa questionnaire) were computed. Gender was correlated with frequency of prep_noun bigram in 
the text, males typically score more on this parameter. For neuroticism the correlations were identified with adj-noun, 
noun-prep, prep-noun bigrams. There were also correlations with the Openness parameter and frequencies of noun-prep 
bigram. There were also weak correlations between the scores on Extraversion and frequencies of pers-vfin bigram, the 
scores on Agreeableness and frequencies of pers-vfin bigrams and ptcl-vfin bigrams. The paper points out that the resulting 
dependencies should be interpreted based on psychology, psycholinguistics and neurolinguistics data. Novelty of the 
study: To our knowledge, the current study has been the first one to deal with the frequencies of certain POS bigrams as 
parameters for written text author profiling for Russian-language texts. Conclusion/Application: The study conducted 
on Russian texts confirmed early finding in English regarding usefulness of POS n-grams in author profiling task. Further 
investigations on different text corpora are needed.
*Author for correspondence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, Vol 8(S9), 93–97 May 2015
ISSN (Print) : 0974-6846 
ISSN (Online) : 0974-5645
Using Part-of-Speech Sequences Frequencies in a 
Text to Predict Author Personality: a Corpus Study 
 T. A. Litvinova1*, P. V. Seredin2 and O. A. Litvinova3 
 
1Regional Centre for Russian Language, Voronezh State Pedagogical University, Voronezh, Russia; 
centr_rus_yaz@mail.ru
2Depatment of Solid State Physics and Nanostructures, Voronezh State University, Voronezh, Russia; 
paul@phys.vsu.ru
3English Language Department of Voronezh State Pedagogical University, Voronezh, Russia; 
olga_litvinova_teacher@mail.ru
1. Introduction
Due to recent rapid development of automatic lan-
guage processing (morphological, syntactical parsers, 
etc.), statistical data processing for studying written 
text authorship (author profiling based on a text pro-
duced), stylometric approach has been extensively used: 
based on large corpus materials using the methods of 
statistical data processing, correlations between quan-
titatively assessed text parameters and their authors’ 
personalities are computed and mathematical models
are designed based on the resulting correlations. The 
ultimate objective of studies of this kind is automatic 
categorization of texts based on the initial parameters 
(author’s gender, age, etc.) using analyzing software. 
Author profiling is a problem of growing importance 
in applications in forensics, security, and marketing. 
Currently, this field of research is in active progress. For 
example, author profiling task has recently (in 2013) been 
proposed in PAN which is a yearly workshop and evalu-
ation lab PAN on uncovering plagiarism, authorship, 
and social software misuse1. Author profiling at PAN-
Keywords: Author, Authorship Attribution, Corpus Linguistics, Part-of-Speech Bigrams, Personality Prediction from Text, 
Text
Using Part-of-Speech Sequences Frequencies in a Text to Predict Author Personality: a Corpus Study
Indian Journal of Science and Technology94 Vol 8 (S9) | May 2015 | www.indjst.org
clauses. Note that we intentionally avoided analyzing 
texts on the vocabulary level as our purpose was to find 
formal and grammatical parameters of texts correlat-
ing with certain personality traits. This As the analysis 
of scientific literature suggests, these are frequencies of 
sequences (bigrams) of parts of speech. The research using 
English-language materials has proved the analysis of the 
frequencies of different bigrams in texts to be efficient 
in authorship attribution, see, e.g8. It was assumed that 
N-grams of parts of speech can be “efficient at coding 
syntactical information and can therefore be used for text 
classification”6. Parts-Of-Speech (POS) sequences as a text 
parameter are used in forensic author identification using 
Russian-language materials9, particularly for the iden-
tification of heterogeneous parts which are supposedly 
by a different author, i.e. borrowings. Dividing texts into 
homogeneous parts rests on the assumption that there is 
a kind of a subconscious manner of realizing grammar 
connections in a speech flow. The authors set forth the 
algorithm for searching the parts “with a different syntag-
matics with a certain sequence of composition elements 
- words with POS characteristics”9. But POS n-grams 
are used not only for author identification, but also for 
author profiling. To our knowledge, Oberlander and Gill10 
were the first who introduced features consisting of the 
POS collocations (mostly 2-grams). Kim Luyckx and her 
collaborator Walter Daelemans extracted POS n-grams 
as features to predict Big Five personality traits11. They 
suspect that syntactic features would be more predictive 
because they are not controlled so consciously as the use 
of individual words12. Wright, Chin13 trained support vec-
tor machine to classify the Five Factor personality. His 
set of features included bag of words, essay length, word 
sentiment, negation count and part-of-speech n-grams. 
He reports of consistently positive contribution of POS 
n-grams. To our knowledge, the current study has been 
the first to deal with the frequencies of certain POS big-
rams as profiling parameters for written text author 
profiling for Russian-language texts.
2013 has been focusing on gender and age identification 
in social media, both in English and Spanish2. With 21 
teams, author profiling was one of the most popular tasks 
at the CLEF conference in 2013. Participants took diverse 
approaches to the problem: content-based, stylistic-
based, n-gram based, etc. Apart from this task, another 
two tasks were organized in 2013 on predicting different 
aspects of an author's demographics: specifically, person-
ality traits and native language. This shows the increasing 
interest of the research community in author profiling1. In 
2014, PAN was dedicated to the task on author profiling 
in social media, as well as tasks on author identification 
and plagiarism detection3. Author profiling task in PAN-
2015 is about predicting an author's demographics (age, 
gender and personality traits) from tweets in English, 
Spanish, Italian and Dutch to predict age, gender and 
personality traits4. Accuracy of author profiling is much 
lower than 100% but in some research particularly deal-
ing with gender profiling, it can be 80% accurate5,6. To our 
knowledge, no software of this kind has been developed 
for the Russian language material. In the paper7 there are 
the results of a pilot study carried out in order to identify 
the correlations between formal and grammatical param-
eters of the text (parts of speech correlations, lengths of 
words, sentences, etc.) and author’s personality (gender; 
personality tests scores) based on a specially developed 
corpus of Russian students’ essays provided with metatags 
presenting the information about its authors using statis-
tical data processing methods. The dependencies were 
obtained that connect the numerical values of formal and 
grammatical characteristics of the text and its author’s 
personality. To our knowledge, this has been the first 
attempt in Russia at designing complex prediction mod-
els allowing for several written text parameters at a time 
and employed for gender prediction and some personal-
ity traits of the author of a particular text. Overall, our 
method has proved to be efficient. Our hypothesis on 
the significance of frequencies of functional words and 
pronouns for author profiling has also been proved: the 
analysis of the frequencies of this type of words has been 
found to be efficient for author profiling. The correlations 
between the personality traits of the authors and syntacti-
cal parameters of the text have also been identified. At the 
moment, the syntactical level is not capable of being made 
automatic; therefore there are a limited number of param-
eters to be studied: 1) number of clauses; 2) number of 
composite sentences; 3) number of subordinate clauses; 
4) number of independent, compound and complex 
2. Material and Methods
96 texts were used for the study which were randomly 
selected from a corpus of texts of students’ essays (for 
more on the corpus see14). All the texts were examples of 
natural written speech (composition on the topic “What 
Would I Do if I Won a Million Dollars?”; description of a 
picture, etc.). Apart from texts, the corpus also contains the
T. A. Litvinova, P. V. Seredin and O. A. Litvinova
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 95Vol 8 (S9) | May 2015 | www.indjst.org
information about the authors - gender, results of the 
tests revealing the Big Five personality traits by McCrae 
and Costa interpreted by A.B. Khromov15, scales: 1) 
extraversion; 2) agreeableness; 3) conscientiousness; 4) 
neuroticism; 5) openness. Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) methods (free online Xerox morphological 
analyzer for Russian16 was used) were employed for com-
puting the frequencies of POS bigrams in each text (227 
types of bigrams were overall identified), bigrams were 
then selected which are found in no less than 75% of the 
analyzed texts. These are adj-noun, cm-conj, conj-noun, 
det-noun, noun-cm, noun-conj, noun-noun, noun-prep, 
noun-sent, noun-vfin, pers-vfin, pers-pers, prep-adj, prep-
noun, prep-pers, ptcl-vfin, sent-noun, sent-pers, vfin-cm, 
vfin-vfin, vfin-noun, vfin-prep. The proportion of each 
bigram in the texts was computed (the number of big-
rams was divided into the total number of words in the 
text). Following that, traditional mathematical methods 
were applied to identify the correlations between each 
of the text parameters which were the proportions of the 
most frequent bigrams and personality traits which were 
made numerical (gender: female - 0, male - 1, scores on 
5 scales of the test). The analysis took several stages. At 
the first one, by means of the correlation analysis using 
Pearson’s criteria the number of factors connected into a 
stringently determined system “text parameter-person-
ality parameter” was identified and the credibility of all 
the characteristics of the correlation connection with the 
connection p = 0.05. Furthermore, it was assumed that a 
type of connection (type of analytical function) between 
numerical values of the text parameters and author’s per-
sonality traits is linear. At the third stage, by means of 
regression analysis method of SPSS software, the initial 
regression equations were identified and the resulting 
parameters of the equations were analyzed in order to iden-
tify the errors of the established laws on a test selection.
Selecting different types of linear functions revealed 
that this dependence is most accurately described by a 
four-parameter logical regression as          f = D + (A-D)/
(1+10^((x-logC)*B)), where A = 1.0378, B = 101.8044, 
logC = 0.0750, D = 0.3728, х is the proportion of prep_
noun in a text. The model was tested on test set (texts not 
used for designing the model, 10 written by males, 10 
written by females, mean length = 161 word). If calculated 
values were in range (0, 0.5), we concluded the author was 
female, if calculated values were in range (0.5, 1), we con-
cluded the author was male. The model was found to be 
65% accurate, error rate = 0.27. It also should be noted 
that the model was considerably better at distinguishing 
females than males. For neuroticism (test scores) the cor-
relations were identified with adj-noun (-0.405; 0.00354), 
noun-prep (-0.414; 0.00282), prep-noun bigrams (-0.322; 
0.0225). A regression model was designed where y is a 
predicted number of scores on the neuroticism scale:
y = 65.086 - (26.071•adj-noun) - (123.534•noun-prep) - 
(108.884•prep-noun). The results of the tests of the model 
on the test selection indicated its high level of accuracy: 
accuracy was 79%, error rate was 4 points. There were also 
correlations with the Openness parameter and frequencies 
of noun-prep bigram (-0.506; 0.000178). The following 
model was designed: у = 58.264 - (281.926•noun-prep).
According to the results of its tests, accuracy was 88 
%, error rate was 2.5 points. There were also weak 
correlations between the scores on Extraversion and fre-
quencies of pers-vfin bigram (0.304; 0.0320), the scores 
on Agreeableness and frequencies of pers-vfin bigrams 
(0.297; 0.0359) and ptcl-vfin bigrams (-0.321; 0.0229). 
However, these correlations are not strong to be used for 
designing regression models. The results of the study are 
summarized in Table 1.
The only bigram found to have a significant correlation with 
the gender of the author of the text is prep_noun bigram. Its 
Pearson’s correlation coefficient is 0.215. Considering that 
the selection is N = 96, a number of degrees of freedom is 
N-2 = 94. The critical correlation coefficient for a level of 
significance p = 0.05 is 0.205. Therefore, it can be stated 
that there is weak linear connection between the propor-
tions of prep_noun bigrams in the text and the gender of 
its author, males typically score more on this parameter. 
3. Results
4. Discussion
The efficiency of POS bigrams as the parameters used for 
written text author profiling has for the first time been 
proved for Russian-language materials. It still remains 
unclear, though, how certain correlations between the 
frequencies of particular language tools and personality 
traits are accounted for. In our opinion, a globally devel-
oping method for author profiling making use of the 
latest statistical methods and automatic language process-
ing on large corpus materials should keep pace with the 
latest achievements in psychology, cognitive science and 
neurolinguistics in order for the resulting correlations to 
Using Part-of-Speech Sequences Frequencies in a Text to Predict Author Personality: a Corpus Study
Indian Journal of Science and Technology96 Vol 8 (S9) | May 2015 | www.indjst.org
7. References
be given a theoretical explanation. The current research 
employing the methods of neurovisualization of the brain 
in addressing certain issues found that taxonomic com-
position of words (i.e. the quantitative correlation of parts 
of speech in a text) is influenced by the activities in the 
right or left hemisphere. Particularly, as Sedov17 reported, 
the deterioration of the left hemisphere and the activity of 
the right one respectively cause a reduction in the number 
of functional words as well as verbs and pronouns, while 
there is an increasing number of nouns and adjectives. 
The right hemisphere was also found to be responsible for 
reference functions and language awareness, it “stores” 
deictic elements: pronouns (particularly, demonstrative), 
adverbs (there, here, etc.), particles (here), for more see17.
At the other end of the scale, there is currently enough 
data to suggest that a lot of psychological states have a 
neurobiological origin, e.g., are associated with the activi-
ties of the right or left hemisphere. A shift in the balance 
of interhemispheric activation for the right hemisphere is 
known to be caused by negative emotional environments, 
for more see18.
That would be logical to assume that in order to design 
more efficient complex models for written text author pro-
filing it is necessary that as early as when correlations are 
being identified, text parameters are selected not merely 
based on the intuition but the latest data of domestic and 
foreign neurolinguistics which specifies what parts of the 
brain are associated with particular elements of a text on 
one hand and the latest developments of cognitive science 
on neurobiological origins of certain personality traits on 
the other.
1. Rosso P, Rangel F. Uncovering Plagiarism - Author Profiling 
at PAN. Available from: http://ercim-news.ercim.eu/en96/
ri/uncovering-plagiarism-author-profiling-at-pan 
2. Rangel F, Rosso P, Koppel M, et al. Overview of the Author 
Profiling Task at PAN 2013. In: Forner P, Navigli R, Tufis 
D, editors. Working Notes Papers of the CLEF 2013 
Evaluation Labs. 2013. Available from: http://www.clef-
initiative.eu/documents/71612/2e4a4d3a-bae2-47f9-ba3c-
552ec66b3e04
Table 1. Correlations of POS-bigrams and personality traits
Characteristics
of an Author
Bigrams
Correlation 
Coefficient
Accuracy of Regression 
Model
Error Rate
Gender prep_noun 0.215 65 % 0.27
Neuroticism
adj-noun 
noun-prep
prep-noun
-0.405 
-0.414
-0.322
79% 4 points
Openness noun-prep -0.506 88 % 2.5 points
Extraversion pers-vfin 0.304 - -
Agreeableness
pers-vfin 
ptcl-vfin
0.297
0.321
- -
5. Conclusion
The research conducted for author profiling on the
corpus of Russian language written texts shows that there 
are statistically significant stable correlations between 
the frequencies of POS bigrams and personality traits. 
Although obtained regression models are dependent 
on dataset, they show that using POS bigrams in author 
profiling task can be useful and increase accuracy of pre-
diction models. Further investigations on different text 
corpora are needed.
 Obtained correlations can be accounted for applying the 
latest neurolinguistics and neuropsychological data. An 
approach to text author profiling can therefore be called 
neurocognitive and in conjunction with the study of large 
corpus materials using the methods of language process-
ing and mathematical statistics can yield new data on the 
connection of language and mind and in particular the 
way certain personality traits are reflected in a text.
6. Acknowledgement
The study was supported by the grant of Russian Fund of 
Fundamental Research, project N 13-06-00016 “Modeling 
the Personality of the Author of a Written Text”, grant of 
Voronezh State Pedagogical University, and project N 11 
(2014).
T. A. Litvinova, P. V. Seredin and O. A. Litvinova
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 97Vol 8 (S9) | May 2015 | www.indjst.org
3. Rangel F, et al. Overview of the 2nd Author Profiling task 
at PAN 2014. Available from: http://www.uni-weimar.de/
medien/webis/research/events/pan-14/pan14-papers-
final/pan14-author-profiling/rangel14-overview.pdf
4. PAN 2015. Available from: http://pan.webis.de/
5. Argamon SH, Koppel M, Pennebaker JW, Schler J. 
Automatically profiling the author of an anonymous text. 
Comm ACM. 2009; 52(2):119–23.
6. Argamon SH, Koppel M, Fine J, Shimoni AR. Gender, 
genre, and writing style in formal written texts. Text. 2003; 
23(3): 321–46.
7. Litvinova TA. Profiling the author of a written text in 
Russian. J Lang Lit. 2014; 5(4):210–6.
8. Keselj V, Peng F, Cercone N, Thomas C. N-gram-based 
author profiles for authorship attribution. Proceedings 
of the Conference Pacific Association for Computational 
Linguistics (PACLING’03). 2003. Available from: http://
web.cs.dal.ca/~vlado/papers/pacling03.pdf
9. Sedov AV, Rogov AA. Analiz neodnorodnostej v tekste 
na osnove posledovatel’nostej chastej rechi [Analysis 
of Inconsistences in a Text Based on POS Sequences]. 
Sovremennye problemy nauki i obrazovanija. 
Filologicheskie nauki [Modern Problems of Science and 
Education. Philology]. 2013. Available from: http://www.
science-education.ru/107-r8339.
10. Oberlander J, Gill AJ. Language with character: A stratified 
corpus comparison of individual differences in e-mail 
communication. Discourse Process. 2006; 42(3):239–70. 
11. Luyckx K, Daelemans W. Using syntactic features to predict 
author personality from text. Proceedings of Digital 
Humanities 2008 (DH 2008). 2008. p. 146–9.
12. Stamatatos E, Fakotakis N, Kokkinakis G. Computer-based 
authorship attribution without lexical measures. Comput 
Humanit. 2001; 35(2):193–214.
13. Wright WR, Chin DN. Personality profiling from text: 
introducing part-of-speech n-grams, user modeling, 
adaptation, and personalization. Lect Notes Comput Sci. 
2014; 8538:502–7.
14. Zagorovskaya OV, Litvinova TA, Litvinova OA. Elektronnyy 
korpus studencheskikh esse na russkom yazyke i ego 
vozmozhnosti dlya sovremennykh gumanitarnykh 
issledovaniy [Electronic Corpus of Student Essays and Its 
Applications in Modern Humanity Studies]. Mir nauki, 
kul’tury i obrazovaniya [World of Science, Culture and 
Education]. 2012; 3(34):387–9.
15. Khromov AB. Piatifaktornyi oprosnik lichnosti [The Five-
Factors Personal Inventory]. Kursk, 2000.
16. Xerox morphological analyzer. Available from: https://
open.xerox.com/Services/fst-nlp-tools/Consume/Part%20
of%20Speech%20Tagging%20(Standard)-178 17. Sedov 
KF. Neiropsikholingvistika [Neurolinguistics], Moscow: 
Labirint; 2007.
18. Yegorov AY. O narushenii mezhpolusharnogo 
vzaimodejstvija pri psihopatologicheskih sostojanijah [On 
the anomalies of interhemispheric relations associated 
with psychopathology], Zhurnal Evolyutsionnoi Biokhimii 
i Fiziologii [J Evol Biochem Physiol]. 2003; 39(1):41–52.
