given in corpus linguistics. The title of the book,
Corpus Linguistics 25 Years on, however may be a
bit misleading, as only Part I really provides the
historical account many readers might be looking
for. Parts II and III really more offer a snapshot of
the current state-of-the-art, not unlike conference
proceedings. However, editor Roberta Facchinetti
has skilfully managed to maintain a well-rounded
topical spread over the contributions. In doing so,
the book provides an interesting showcase of the
added scientific value corpus-based methods bring
to the field of linguistics.
Guy De Pauw, CNTS-Language Technology Group, Department
of Linguistics, University of Antwerp, Belgium
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm033
Advance Access Published on 12 November 2007
Corpus Linguistics Beyond the Word–Corpus
Research from Phrase to Discourse.
Eileen Fitzpatrick (ed.). Amsterdam/New York:
Rodopi, 2007. Language and Computers: Studies in
Practical Linguistics, nr. 60. 277 pp. ISBN: 90-420-
2135-7. $81/E58 (hardback)
This volume contains 15 selected papers originally
presented at the 5th North American Symposium
on Corpus Linguistics at Montclair State University,
New Jersey, in 2004. Focusing on the use of corpora
to study domains, ‘beyond the word’, the sympo-
sium covered a wide range of topics, from corpus
creation, discourse and register variation to applica-
tions in language or medical education, most of
them involving tools, approaches, and statistical
techniques new to corpus linguistics. The editor
uses the phrase ‘beyond the word’ to indicate
linguistic productions longer than the word, from
phrases to pragmatics. The papers are arranged in
two sections: one on syntactic analysis tools and
corpus annotation, and a second on applications in
pedagogy and linguistic analysis.
In the first chapter, Barrett, Greenberg, and
Schwartz report on exploratory research in auto-
matically selecting documents from distinct
domains for machine translation corpora in order
to improve results in machine translation. Their
method relies on the assumption that texts belong-
ing to different domains have a different syntactic
profile. A comparison of part-of-speech tag densi-
ties in seven hand-selected documents in four
different domains (medical, financial, military, and
narrative) suggests that there is a direct correlation
between texts from the same domain. This method
could also be applied to genre, register or author-
ship analysis, and in the second chapter, Grieve-
Smith investigates whether it is actually possible
to exclude grammatical sources of covariation from
a list of markers of register, genre or style variation.
Using Douglas Biber’s (e.g. Biber, 1988) notion
of the ‘envelope of variation’, where grammatical
features are counted ‘as a proportion of the
opportunities for these features to be produced’
(p. 21), Grieve-Smith analyses two features that
correlate but do not co–vary according to Biber
in the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken
English (MICASE) corpus.
Whereas the first two papers zoom in on words,
the focus shifts to phrases in the third paper. Deane
and Higgins use singular value decomposition
(SVD), a dimensionality reduction technique
which compresses a matrix and extracts significant
features from it, in order to derive a ‘measure of
constructional similarity’ (p. 43) from Local word
contexts extracted from the Lexile corpus. This
method allows generalisation over classes and
testing for synonyms. Part-of-speech tagging and
shallow or partial parsing are essential for all
methods described above, although there are quite
a few syntactic patterns that may lead to errors,
according to van Delden (Chapter 4). He distin-
guishes between two types of problems: those due
to incorrect tags and those occurring in spite of
correct tags. The suggested solutions involve adding
extra arcs to the finite state automata (FSA),
semantic rules or verb sub-categorization. In the
fifth paper, Davies reports on a large-scale investi-
gation of register-based variation in a corpus of
modern Spanish covering various registers. The
corpus was tagged according to 150 syntactic
features that might be interesting for a register
study. A web-based interface was developed which
allows the user to check the relative frequency of all
features in each register.
Reviews
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 123
Contrary to words and phrases, discourse
phenomena like animacy or linguistic weight
involve knowledge that is too complex to be
automatically coded. According to Garretson and
O’Connor (Chapter 6), these phenomena require
a ‘combined manual-and-automatic analytical
approach’ (p. 89) depending on the task. Using
the Boston University Noun Phrase Corpus, they
illustrate the approach on a case study concerning
the possessive alternation in English. Maynard and
Leicher (Chapter 7) provide the MICASE corpus
with pragmatic annotation in order to expose
interesting linguistic phenomena. Whereas teachers
usually rely on their intuition, adding this extra
annotation layer will allow them easy access to
authentic examples. The study of politeness in speech
is central in the last paper on tools and annotation.
Garcı́a Vizcaı́no discusses the implications of using
the British National Corpus (BNC) and the Corpus
Oral de Referencia del Español Contemporáneo
(COREC) for the study of intonation.
The second part of the book focuses on
applications in pedagogy and linguistic analysis, of
tools and annotations similar to the ones described
in the first part. Davis and Russell-Pinson
(Chapter 9) use the Charlotte Narrative and
Conversation Collection (CNCC) for two educa-
tional purposes: teacher training and medical
education. The corpus contains speech data from
‘a range of ages, ethnicities, cultures and native
languages’ (p. 143) which helps teachers to under-
stand their students’ backgrounds and conversations
with people diagnosed with dementia, allowing
professionals to build strategies for communicat-
ing with them. Another educational application is
the GRIMMATIK method presented by Zinggeler
(Chapter 10) which provides a research-based
German grammar for students based on fairy tales
from the brothers Grimm. The electronic corpus
supplies students with grammatical information,
meaning, frequencies and usage patterns of queried
words.
The next two papers discuss methods for
assessing students’ foreign language writing skills.
De Haan and van Esch (Chapter 11) suggest using
syntactic and lexical features in order to indicate
progress after one and two years of study of English
or Spanish as a Foreign Language (respectively,
EFL and SFL), but find that this approach does
not lead to unambiguous results. Neff et al. present
a corpus-based study on errors made by Spanish
students in EFL in the twelfth paper. Tagging every
error for error type (e.g. form, lexico-grammatical
aspects, register, style) leads to the conclusion that
two-thirds of the errors can be accounted for, by
grammar and lexis.
The last three papers give an idea of what
influence and implications corpus linguistics
research has for planning the structure of science
articles (Chapter 13), writing a grammar of
Albanian (Chapter 14) or the study of 19th-century
written English (Chapter 15). Shehzad’s corpus
consists of articles from journals from the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Computer Society. There is only limited structural
variation in these articles, which implies that it can
easily be taught. Murzaku offers a quantitative
analysis of the third person personal pronoun in
Albanian using a corpus of website content and
scanned material. Where no diachronic or syn-
chronic study so far has been able to state the
presence or absence of this pronoun, corpus
research is the answer. In the final paper,
Johansson investigates the role of the relativizer
that in the Corpus of Nineteenth-Century English
(CONCE). Generally, that is seen as less formal
than the wh-forms, but a comparison between trials,
drama, and letters shows differences in usage.
This book offers a glimpse on the computational
tools and statistical techniques for corpus study,
corpus annotation schemes and applications of
corpus linguistics. The editor provided a thorough
introduction and a logical structure. By broaden-
ing the scope from words to discourse pheno-
mena, the reader gets an idea of the gradual
increase in complexity of research on linguistic
productions ‘beyond the word’. Because of the
diversity of perspectives, any corpus or computa-
tional linguist will be activated and brought to
new ideas.
A few critical observations can be made con-
cerning the first paper, in which the authors list
some limitations of word-based methods for
text classification. They looked into literature on
Reviews
124 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
authorship attribution and spam detection, only to
find that ‘little attention has been paid in these
efforts to parts of speech’ (p. 2). They state that the
work of Brainerd (1973) is one of the exceptions.
Nevertheless, there are numerous articles in the
field of computational linguistics that investigate
the use of syntactic features for text classification
(e.g. Argamon et al., 2003; Baayen et al., 1996;
Gamon, 2004; Kukushkina et al., 2001; Stamatatos
et al., 2001). In the 13th chapter, Shehzad concludes
that there is only little structural variation in science
articles, without considering that this may be due
to corpus structure and journal editing. All science
articles are taken from journals issued by the
same society (in this case IEEE), whose editors
supply authors with style sheets and clear instruc-
tions concerning structure. This also implies that
authors who deviate too much from these recom-
mendations are asked to restructure or rewrite the
article. The reliability of Shehzad’s research would
definitely have benefited from selecting articles from
a few different journals or societies.
In summary, this book should become a resource
for anyone interested in corpus linguistics. It
broadens the reader’s perspective by introducing
new tools, approaches and applications. Because the
focus is on linguistic productions longer than the
word, the first part of the book will be valuable to
readers with backgrounds in linguistics, corpus
linguistics or computational linguistics. Teachers
in foreign language learning will be particularly
interested in the second part, where the stress is on
pedagogical applications.
References
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J., and Shimoni, A.
(2003). Gender, genre, and writing style in formal
written texts. Text, 23(3): 321–46.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brainerd, B. (1973). The computer in statistical studies
of William Shakespeare. Computer Studies in the
Humanities and Verbal Behavior, 4(1): 9–15.
Baayen, H., Van Halteren, H., and Tweedie, F. (1996).
Outside the cave of shadows: Using syntactic
annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 11(3): 121–31.
Gamon, M. (2004). Linguistic correlates of style:
Authorship classification with deep linguistic analysis
features. Proceedings of COLING 2004611–7.
Kukushkina, O., Polikarpov, A., and Khmelev, D.
(2001). Using literal and grammatical statistics for
authorship attribution. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii,
37(2): 96–108 Translated as ‘Problems of Information
Transmission’.
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., and Kokkinakis, G. (2001).
Automatic text categorization in terms of genre and
author. Computational Linguistics, 26(4): 471–95.
Kim Luyckx, CNTS-Language Technology Group, Department of
Linguistics, University of Antwerp, Belgium
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm034
Advance Access Published on 12 November 2007
Deep Time of the Media: Toward an
Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by
Technical Means.
Siegfried Zielinski. Translated by Gloria Custance.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. 375 pp. ISBN
0-262-24049-1. £25.95 (hardback). (Originally
Archäologie der Medien: Zur Tiefenzeit der
technischen Hörens und Sehens. Reinbeck bei
Hamburg: Rowohlt Taschenbuch Verlag, 2002.)
‘Our culture’, physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach
(1838–1916) declared at the close of the 19th
Century, ‘has gradually acquired full independence,
soaring far above that of antiquity. It is following an
entirely new trend. It centres around mathematical
and scientific enlightenment. The traces of ancient
ideas, still lingering in philosophy, jurisprudence,
art and science constitute impediments rather than
assets, and will come to be untenable in the long
run in face of the development of our own views.’
Such robust triumphalism may seem rather quaint
now, but it remains a triumph of the imagination
actually to write a history of technology and the
sciences that does not in one way or another share
in Mach’s error. In Nature and the Greeks, fellow
physicist Erwin Schrödinger quotes that passage
from Mach to mark his own attempt to avoid it in
Reviews
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 125
