C.C. Yang et al. (Eds.): ISI 2008 Workshops, LNCS 5075, pp. 251–259, 2008. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 
Identifying Chinese E-Mail Documents’ Authorship for 
the Purpose of Computer Forensic 
Jianbin Ma1, Ying Li2, and Guifa Teng1 
1 School of Information Science and Technology, Agricultural University of Hebei, Baoding 
071001, China 
2 School of Science, Agricultural University of Hebei, Baoding 071001, China 
{majianbin}@hebau.edu.cn 
Abstract. Nowadays, computer crimes involving e-mail increases rapidly. To 
prevent these phenomena from happening, the authorship identification 
methods for Chinese e-mail documents were described in this paper, which 
could provide evidence for the purpose of computer forensic. The theoretical 
framework was presented. Various style features including linguistic features, 
structural characteristics and format features were analyzed. The support vector 
machine algorithm was used for learning algorithm. To validate the methods, 
experiments were made on limited dataset. The results were satisfying, which 
proved that the methods were effective and feasible to apply to computer 
forensic.  
Keywords: Computer forensic, Chinese e-mail, authorship identification, 
Support Vector Machine, feature extraction. 
1   Introduction 
With the rapid growth in computer technology and information level, especially the 
increasing popularization of Internet, e-mail has become an expedient and economical 
form of communication. However, the crimes increase by means of e-mail, such as 
antisocial mail, fraud mail, racketeering mail, terroristic threatening mail, 
pornographic mail, virus and junk mail etc, which do harm to people’s daily life, even 
affect social stabilization and national security. It is the time to take some effective 
measures to prevent these phenomena. 
The current methods are merely some passive defending measures such as e-mail 
filtering, installing firewall, etc. These methods are not effective and cannot put an 
end of the e-mail crime. So the ability to provide evidence for courtroom and punish 
the criminal by means of law is an effective method for preventing the e-mail crime. 
But it is difficult to find out the real identity of e-mail by the free mailbox. Because 
the applicant of free mailbox can forge the information at will, when they register. 
The sender’s address can be forged and routed through anonymous mail server, or the 
sender’s name may have been modified. So finding some efficient methods for 
analyzing the content of e-mail messages and identifying or categorizing the authors 
of these messages automatically are becoming imperative. 
252 J. Ma, Y. Li, and G. Teng 
Stylometry is a linguistic discipline that applies statistical analysis to literature by 
capturing the often elusive character of an author's style, using a variety of 
quantitative criteria. The main assumption underlying stylometric studies is that 
authors have an unconscious aspect to their style. Every author's style is thought to 
have certain features that are independent of the author's will, and since these features 
cannot be consciously manipulated by the author, they are considered to provide the 
most reliable data for the stylometric study. Stylometry is the basis for authorship 
analysis, which evaluates writing characteristics to make inferences about who  
wrote it. Authorship identification is one approach of authorship analysis, which  
deals with attributing authorship of unidentified writing on the basis of stylistic 
similarities between the authors’ known works and the unidentified piece. From a 
machine learning point of view, this task can be seen as single-label multi-class 
machine categorization problem. 
One major subtask of the authorship identification problem is extracting the most 
optimum features for representing the style of an author. Several measures have been 
proposed, including attempting to quantify lexical features, syntax features and 
structural features. The primary problems in the field are that there is no consensus of 
fixed features set. Techniques used for feature extraction are almost language 
dependent, and in fact differ dramatically from language to language. For example, 
Chinese do not have word boundaries explicitly in texts. In fact, word segmentation 
itself is a difficult problem in Chinese languages. So feature extraction methods for 
Chinese documents are different to other language such as English and other Indo-
European languages. Furthermore e-mail documents are one especial form of text 
documents. E-mail documents are generally brief and to the point. Similar to written 
letter, the writing should obey some form of formats, though some authors ignore 
them, which just can be represented as a sort of features. So in this paper, Features 
exaction methods that adapt to Chinese e-mail documents were presented to 
investigate the methods for identifying Chinese e-mail documents’ authorship. The 
support vector machine was adopted as learning algorithm. Experiments were made to 
validate the feasible of the methods to computer forensic. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the related work 
involving authorship identification. Section 3 describes the methods of Chinese e-mail 
authorship identification. Section 4 provides our experimental methodology and 
analysis the experimental results. Section 5 is the conclusion of the paper. 
2   Related Works 
Stylometry is a burgeoning interdisciplinary research area that integrates literary 
stylistics, statistics and computer science. The origins of stylometry can be traced 
back to the mid 19th century, where the English logician Augustus de Morgan 
suggested word length could be an indicator of authorship. The real impact did not 
come until 1964, when two American statisticians Mosteller and Wallance decided to 
use word frequencies to investigate the mystery of the authorship of The Federalist 
Papers [1].  
Stylometry has been used in a small but diverse number of application areas. 
Examples include identifying authors in literature, in program code, and in forensic 
 Identifying Chinese E-Mail Documents’ Authorship 253 
analysis for criminal cases. Perhaps the most extensive and comprehensive 
application of authorship analysis is in literature. Several studies attempts to resolve 
Shakespeare’s works date back many years[2]. Specific author features such as 
unusual diction, frequency of certain words, choice of rhymes, and habits of 
hyphenation have been used as testing for authorship attribution. Program code 
authorship has been researched in the context of software and plagiarism, software 
author tracking and intrusion detection. Some features such as typographical 
characteristics, stylistic metric, and programming structure metrics have been 
researched [3][4][5]. The forensic analysis attempts to match text to authors for the 
purpose of a criminal investigation[6]. Currently forensic analysis has become 
increasingly popular in identification of online messages due to augmented misused 
of the Internet[7][8].  
Recently, e-mail authorship analysis begins to draw researchers’ attention. De Vel 
attempted to identify and attribute authorship of e-mail messages using support vector 
machine by using a collection of typical stylistic features such as structural 
characteristic and linguistic evidence for the purpose of computer forensic. Promising 
results were achieved, but the approach used was limited and far from 
optimized[9][10]. Tsuboi studied authorship attribution of e-mail messages and World 
Wide Web documents written in Japanese[11]. He used the sequential word patterns 
or word n-grams with n=2 and 3 from each sentence in the documents as features set. 
Good classification performance was gained. But Chinese is different from English, 
and a much lesser different from Japanese, therefore techniques developed in English 
and Japanese, especially the former, may not be directly applicable to Chinese. 
Statistical and machine learning techniques constitute the two most common 
analytical approaches to authorship attribution. Many multivariate statistical 
approaches such as principal component analysis have shown a high level of 
accuracy. However, these approaches also have some pitfalls, including the need for 
more stringent models and assumptions. Machine learning techniques emerged from 
the drastic increases in computational power over the past several years. These 
techniques include support vector machine(SVM), neural networks, and decision 
trees. They have gained wider acceptance in authorship analysis studies in recent 
years because they provide greater scalability than statistical techniques for handling 
more features, and they’re less susceptible to noisy data. These benefits are important 
for working with authorship identification, which involves classification of many 
authors and a large features set[7][10][11]. 
3   The Methods of Chinese E-Mail Authorship Identification 
Figure 1 provides the process design of the methods of Chinese e-mail authorship 
identification. The process was divided into three steps. The first was feature 
extraction step. The purpose of the step was extraction writing style features from e-
mail set and representing these features by vector space model. The second was 
training step. In this step, support vector machine algorithm was used to learn the 
features set and transformed into classifier. The third was categorizing step. The 
unknown classificatory e-mail documents could be categorized into some authors list 
automatically by the classifier that was trained in training step. The following are the 
methods described in detail. 
254 J. Ma, Y. Li, and G. Teng 
 
Fig. 1. Authorship identification process design 
3.1   The Feature Extraction and Representation Methods 
The optimum feature extraction methods contribute to the categorization accuracy. As 
to Chinese e-mail documents, linguistic features, structural characteristics and format 
features were extracted.  
Linguistic features can be word based. That is to say, the features are that 
somebody has a preference for usage of some specific words unconsciously. The 
statistic of the frequencies of the words can be computed and represented as linguistic 
features, which is similar to lexical features in some studies.  
Because Chinese text does not have a natural delimiter between words, the 
frequencies of words cannot be computed until Word segmentation methods are 
available in china, which is necessary to the research of Chinese text process. In the 
research, the word segmentation software named ICTCLAS developed by Chinese 
academy of Sciences was used for word segmentation and part of speech tagging of 
Chinese e-mail text. 
We adopted Vector Space Model (VSM) to represent the linguistic features. The 
vector space model has been widely used in the traditional Information Retrieval 
field. The basic idea is to represent each document as a vector of certain weighted 
word frequencies. In VSM, text-based documents are represented as vectors in a high-
dimensional vector space where the value of dimensions is based on the feature in that 
document. Each document is represented as a vector of term and weight pairs. 
Namely document d will be represented by a vector )),(,),,(),,(( 2211 nnd wtwtwtV L= . We 
calculate the weight of the vector by the common technique idftf • (term frequency-
inverse document frequency) value: 
Feature Set 
Feature Extractor 
Support Vector 
Machine 
Classifier 
 Training 
E-mail set 
The new e-mail documents 
Category 
Training Process Feature Extraction 
Feature 
Representation 
Feature 
Representation 
Categorizing Process 
 Identifying Chinese E-Mail Documents’ Authorship 255 
∑ →∈
→
→
→
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+×
+×
=
dt t
t
n
Ndttf
n
Ndttf
dtW
2
)01.0log(),(
)01.0log(),(
),(
 
(1) 
Where ),(
→
dtW  is the weight of term t in document d, ),(
→
dttf is the frequency of term t in 
document d, N is the total number of documents, nt is the number of documents that 
contain term t. 
It is not necessary to extract all the words as the linguistic features, because some 
words contain little information. Too many dimensions may cost computation time, 
and may have negative effect on categorization results. So dimension reduction is 
essential. Document frequency (DF), information gain (IG), mutual information (MI), 
term strength (TS), the x2-test (CHI) are the common feature selection methods. Yang 
has compared the various methods and found IG most effective[12]. So we adopted 
IG as the feature selection criteria. 
)/(log)/()(
)/(log)/()()(log)()(
1
11
wcPwcpwP
wcPwcpwpcPcpwGain
i
m
i
i
i
m
i
ii
m
i
i
∑
∑∑
=
==
++−=  
(2) 
)(wGain denotes the information gain of term w. miic 1}{ = denotes the set of categories in 
the target space. 
Structural characteristics deal with the text’s organization and layout. The body of 
e-mail documents sometimes is short. There are a few sentences and paragraphs. The 
authors can write at will. Therefore, based on e-mail’s writing characteristics, we 
extracted 32 structural characteristics. The examples are listed in table 1. 
Table 1. E-mail documents’ structural characteristics 
Attribute type 
Mean sentence length 
Mean paragraph length 
Number of blank lines/total number of lines 
Number of space/total number of words 
The rates of English words 
The rates of digital  
The rates of punctuation  
Table 2. E-mail documents’ format features 
Attribute type 
With or without have attachments 
With or without have reply 
With or without have date 
With or without have appellation 
Uses a greeting acknowledgement 
Uses a farewell acknowledgement 
Contain signature text block 
256 J. Ma, Y. Li, and G. Teng 
Similar to common letters, e-mail documents have some writing formats, Such as 
greeting, attachment, signature, farewell etc. we extracted 21 format features. The 
examples are listed in table 2. 
3.2   Support Vector Machine Classifier  
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a relatively new class of machine learning 
techniques first introduced by Vapnik[13]. Based on the structural risk minimization 
principle of the computational theory, SVM seeks a decision surface to separate the 
training data points into two classes and makes decisions based on the support vectors 
that are selected as the only effective elements from the training set. 
The idea of the Support Vector Machine is to find a model for which we can 
guarantee the lowest true error by controlling the model complexity (VC-dimension). 
This avoids over-fitting, which is the main problem for other learning algorithm. So 
the distinctive advantage of the SVM is its ability to process many high-dimensional 
applications, such as text classification and authorship categorization. So in this study, 
we adopted SVM algorithm as learning algorithm. 
4   Experiments 
4.1   Experiments Methods  
To validate the methods, experiments were made on limited dataset, which included 
150 e-mail documents that were written by five persons. Each person had 30 e-mail 
documents. 20 e-mail documents were selected as training set. And other 10 e-mail 
documents were selected as testing set. Since there were only a small amount of data 
to produce a model of authorship, the performance of each feature was measured by 
3-fold cross-validation to provide a more meaningful result. We wanted to do two 
experiments. The purpose of the first experiment was to validate the effect of different 
features set combination on results. 1000 linguistic features mainly including some 
words and phrases were extracted. Moreover 32 structural characteristics and 21 
format features were extracted. To experiment how many dimensions of linguistic 
features were optimum, we have done the second experiment on different number of 
linguistic features. 
To evaluate the experimental performance on the e-mail document corpus, macro-
averaged F1 statistic F1 (M) was calculated, where: 
AC
N
i ACM
N
F
F
AC
i∑ == 1 ,1)(1  (3) 
Where NAC is the number of author category and 
iAC
F,1 is the per-author-category F1 
statistic for author category ),,2,1( ACi NiAC L= : 
)(
2
,1
ii
ii
i
ACAC
ACAC
AC RP
RP
F
+
=
 
(4) 
 Identifying Chinese E-Mail Documents’ Authorship 257 
The classifier used in the experiments was the Support Vector Machine classifier 
Libsvm2.8.4. Libsvm is a simple, easy-to-use, and efficient software for SVM 
classification and regression. In our experiments we used the linear kernel function 
and the balance parameter value C was set to 1.0.  
4.2   Experiments Results and Discussions  
After extracting the feature values, we have done the first experiment to test the affect 
of the three types of features on the results respectively. The first set (F1) consisted of 
linguistic features, and the second (F2) denoted structural characteristics. (F3) was the 
format features. Table 3 and figure 2 summarize authorship identification accuracy 
results for the comparison of the different features set combination.  
Table 3. The experimental results of different features set combination 
Features set F1 
F1 83.04% 
F1+F2 92.88% 
F1+F3 96.59% 
F2+F3 97.59% 
F1+F2+F3 98.36% 
75
80
85
90
95
100
F1 F1+F2 F1+F3 F2+F3 F1+F2+F3
 
Fig. 2. The experimental results of different features set combination 
From table 3 and figure 2, we could see that the best results were gained if we 
combined linguistic features, structural characteristics and format features together. 
The result of F1 was 98.36%. This was a satisfying result. The worst results were 
gained if we experimented on linguistic features solely. The result of F1 was 83.04%. 
We could get better results if we combined linguistic features and other two kinds of 
features.  
To experiment how many dimensions of linguistic features were optimum, we have 
done the second experiment on different number of linguistic features. Table 4 and 
figure 3 show the affect of different number of linguistic features on results.  
258 J. Ma, Y. Li, and G. Teng 
Table 4. The effect of different dimensions of linguistic features on experimental results 
dimensions 100 300 400 500 600 700 1000 
F1(%) 64.2 86.9 87.1 87.5 85.7 86.6 83 
0
20
40
60
80
100
100 300 400 500 600 700 1000
 
Fig. 3. The effect of different dimensions of linguistic features on experimental results 
From Table 4 and figure 3, we could see that about 500 dimensions of linguistic 
features were optimum. Too few features could not express the author’s features 
adequately. Too many features may result in features redundancy and have negative 
effect on categorization results. So the optimum features selection for linguistic 
features were essential. 
5   Conclusion 
In this paper, the computer forensic methods for identifying e-mail documents’ 
authorship automatically were provided. Various features including linguistic 
features, structural characteristics and format features were analyzed. Support vector 
machine algorithm was adopted as learning algorithm. To validate the effects of 
different features on results, different features combination was experimented. The 
conclusions were made that the best results were gained if the linguistic features, 
structural characteristics and format features were combined together. The F1 was 
98.36%. Furthermore we have drawn the conclusion that about 500 dimensions of 
linguistic features were optimum. The results were satisfying, which proved that the 
methods were feasible to apply for computer forensic. 
References 
1. Mosteller, F., Wallace, D.L.: Inference and Disputed Authorship. Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Inc., Reading (1964) 
2. Elliot, W., Valenza, R.: Was the Earl of Oxford the true Shakespeare? Notes and 
Queries 38, 501–506 (1991) 
 Identifying Chinese E-Mail Documents’ Authorship 259 
3. Krsul, I.: Authorship analysis: Identifying the author of a program. Technical report, 
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University (1994) 
4. Krsul, I., Spafford, E.: Authorship analysis: Identifying the author of a program. 
Computers and Security 16, 248–259 (1997) 
5. Sallis, P., MacDonell, S., MacLennan, G., Gray, A., Kilgour, R.: Identified: Software 
Authorship Analysis with Case-Based Reasoning. In: Proc. Addendum Session Int. Conf. 
Neural Info. Processing and Intelligent Info. Systems, pp. 53–56 (1997) 
6. Crain, C.: The Bard’s fingerprints. Lingua Franca, pp. 29–39 (1998) 
7. Abbasi, A., Chen, H.: Applying Authorship Analysis to Extremist-Group Web Forum 
Messages. IEEE Intelligent System 20(5), 67–75 (2005) 
8. Zheng, R., Qin, Y., Huang, Z., Chen, H.: A Framework for Authorship Analysis of Online 
Messages: Writing-style Features and Techniques. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology 57(3), 378–393 (2006) 
9. de Olivier, V.: Mining E-mail Authorship. In: KDD 2000 Workshop on Text Mining, 
ACM International conference on knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Boston, MA, 
USA (2000) 
10. de Olivier, V., Anderson, A., Corney, M., Mohay, G.: Multi-Topic E-mail Authorship 
Attribution Forensics. In: ACM Conference on Computer Security - Workshop on Data 
Mining for Security Applications, Philadelphia, PA (2001) 
11. Tsuboi, Y.: Authorship Identification for Heterogeneous Documents. Nara Institute of 
Science and Technology, University of Information Science, Japanese (2002) 
12. Yang, Y.: An evaluation of statistical approaches to text categorization. Journal of 
Information Retrieval 1, 67–88 (1999) 
13. Vapnik, V.: The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley, New York (1998) 
