Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review
M.B. Malyutov
Abstract. We survey the authorship attribution of documents given
some prior stylistic characteristics of the author’s writing extracted from
a corpus of known works, e.g., authentication of disputed documents
or literary works. Although the pioneering paper based on word length
histograms appeared at the very end of the nineteenth century, the reso-
lution power of this and other stylometry approaches is yet to be studied
both theoretically and on case studies such that additional information
can assist finding the correct attribution.
We survey several theoretical approaches including ones approximat-
ing the apparently nearly optimal one based on Kolmogorov conditional
complexity and some case studies: attributing Shakespeare canon and
newly discovered works as well as allegedly M. Twain’s newly-discovered
works, Federalist papers binary (Madison vs. Hamilton) discrimination
using Naive Bayes and other classifiers, and steganography presence test-
ing. The latter topic is complemented by a sketch of an anagrams ambi-
guity study based on the Shannon cryptography theory.
Keywords: micro-style, macro-style analysis, anagrams presence testing
and ambiguity.
1 Micro-style Analysis
1.1 Introduction
The importance of dactyloscopy (fingerprint) and DNA profiling in forensic and
security applications is universally recognized after successful testing of their res-
olution power and standardization of analyzing tools. Much less popular so far is
a similar approach to the attribution of disputed texts based on statistical study
of patterns appearing in texts written by professional writers. The best tests and
their power are yet to be estimated both theoretically and by intensive statistical
examination of stylometric differences between existing canons. If this work will
prove that conscious and unconscious style features of different professionals can
be discriminated as well or nearly as well as fingerprints of different persons,
stylometry will change its status from a hobby to a forensic tool of compara-
ble importance to those mentioned above. One obstacle for implementing this
program is the evolution and enrichment of styles during professional careers of
writers. Thus plots of style characters vs. time of production seem more relevant
tools than constant characters. Rates of change for characters may vary. Also,
authors can work in several forms, for instance, prose and verse which may have
different statistical properties. Therefore, an appropriate preprocessing must be
applied to the texts analyzed to avoid heterogeneity of forms in, for example,
R. Ahlswede et al. (Eds.): Information Transfer and Combinatorics, LNCS 4123, pp. 362–380, 2006.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 363
parts of a dramatic corps. Finally, a reliable stylometry analysis should take into
account all available information about a disputed work, say time of its prepa-
ration, and thus teams of ”classifiers” should consist of specialists in different
fields, certainly including literary experts.
Especially appealing are those case studies where the stylometric evidence
helps to identify an otherwise unexpected candidate for authorship or deny a
popular candidate, if this attribution is confirmed later by credible evidence.
One example of such success is the denial of Quintus Curtius Snodgrass articles’
attribution to Mark Twain, later confirmed by credible documents, see section 1.
A recently discovered play ”Is he dead” was also attributed to Mark Twain. Why
not study this play by tools of stylometry before claiming its attribution?
Much more dramatic is the famous Shakespeare controversy with the attri-
bution result so far unavailable. Various stylometry and other tests point to the
same person, although much more careful testing is needed. It would be extreme-
ly encouraging if credible evidence would prove one day the correctness of the
stylometry results in this case study.
1.2 Survey of Micro-stylometry Tools
The pioneering stylometric study (Mendenhall, 1887, 1901) was based on his-
tograms of word-length distribution of various authors. These papers showed
significant difference of these histograms for different languages and also for dif-
ferent authors (Dickens vs. Thackeray) using the same language. The second
paper describes the histograms for Shakespeare contemporaries commissioned
and supported by A. Hemminway. This study demonstrated a significant dif-
ference of Shakespearean histogram from those of all but one contemporaries
studied (including the Bacon’s), and at the same time it called attention to
the practical striking identity of Shakespearean and C. Marlowe’s histograms
(Marlowe allegedly perished two weeks before the first Shakespearean work was
published). The identity was shown by a method close to the contemporary
bootstrap. However, Williams (1975) raised some doubts about the validity of
the Bacon-Shakespeare divergence of styles, pointing to the lack of homogene-
ity of the texts that were analyzed (Bacon used different literary forms, which
in my opinion only strengthens discrepancy of their styles). This objection de-
serves careful statistical analysis; its cost is now minor (hours vs. months before)
because of the availability of software and texts in electronic form. Stability of
word-length distribution for a given author also deserves further statistical study.
Ever since T. Mendenhall’s pioneering work, word-length histograms have
become a powerful tool that has been used to attribute authorship in several
case studies including an inconclusive one over a disputed poem (Moore vs.
Livingstone) controversy, and a successful rejection of Quintus Curtius Snodgrass
articles’ attribution to M. Twain, as described in Brinegar, 1963.
The frequencies and histograms mentioned above characterize the stationary
distribution of words or letters when an author has a large body (canon) of
known work. Another popular attribution tool of this kind is a Naive Bayes
(NB) classifier of Mosteller and Wallace (1964) developed during their long and
364 M.B. Malyutov
very costly work over binary authorship attribution (Madison vs. Hamilton) of
certain Federalist papers supported by federal funding.
Fig. 1. Histograms of word length in Mark Twain and Quintus Curtius Snodgrass
After fitting appropriate parametric family of distributions (Poisson or nega-
tive binomial), they follow the Bayes rule for odds (posterior odds is the product
of prior odds times the likelihood ratio )when multiplying the odds: Madison vs.
Hamilton, by the sequence of likelihood ratios corresponding to the frequencies of
a certain collection of relatively frequent function words, obtaining astronomical
odds in favor of Madison.
This classifier presumes independence of function words usage, which is obvi-
ously false. This premise should be kept in mind when estimating significance
of similar studies (see, for example, the attribution study of certain Shakespeare
works as a byproduct of cardiac diagnosis software, well-advertised by the Boston
Globe on August 5, 2003, or certain Moliere-Corneille controversy studies). The
NB-attribution can often be confirmed by other stylometric tests, although the
NB-likelihood ratios cannot be taken seriously. The NB-classifier is routinely
used also for screening out bulk or junk e-mail messages, see Katirai, 1999, De
Vel et all, 2001.
In contrast, Thisted and Efron, 1987, use the new words usage distribution in
a newly discovered non-attributed anapest poem ”Shall I die, shall I fly?”, found
in the Yale University library, 1985.
I will touch on only one detail in their application of a popular estimation
method for the number of unseen biological species (first invented by Turing
and Good for breaking the Enigma code), namely neglecting the enrichment of
an author’s language with time. Thus the distribution of new words in a disputed
work preceding the canon of an author and that for a text following the canon,
can be significantly different, for example if Marlowe or Shakespeare wrote the
poem. Therefore, this particular application of the Turing-Good method seems
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 365
inappropriate. Also, the comparative power of their inference in appropriate
cases seems unknown.
More promising and popular now tools use modeling of long canons as Markov
chains of some order composed of English letters and auxiliary symbols. Given a
non-attributed text T and a collection of firmly attributed (to author k) canons
T(k) of approximately the same length for training the Markov model of, say,
order 1, with transition probabilities P (k, i, j) between symbols i and j, k=1,...,
M, the log likelihood of T being written by the k-th author is
∑
log(p(k, i, j))N(i, j) + log πk(x(1)),
where the sum is over all i and j, N(i, j) is the frequency of i followed by j, πk
denotes the stationary probability of the k-th Markov chain, and x(1) is the first
symbol in T. Second order Markov chain modeling admits similar expressions
for the likelihood. The author with maximal likelihood is chosen, which is practi-
cally equivalent to minimizing the cross entropy of empirical and fitted Markov
distributions and to minimizing the prediction error probability of a next symbol
given the preceding text (Rosenfeld, 1994, 1996, Zhao, 1999), see also Khmelev,
2000, who considers his work as an extension of the classical approach of A.
Markov, 1913, 1916. Markov, 1916 applies Markov modeling to the authorship
attribution, improving an earlier less satisfactory approach by Morozov, 1915.
The power of this inference can be approximated theoretically for large sizes of
canons T(k) and T under rather natural conditions of asymptotic behavior of
their sizes (Kharin and Kostevich, personal communication). Some regulariza-
tion of small transition frequencies is worthwhile.
In a canon apparently written jointly by several authors (say, the King James
English bible), a Hidden Markov modeling is more appropriate.
Even better attribution performance in certain tests is shown in Kukushki-
na et al, 2001, by the now very popular conditional complexity of compression
minimizing classifier discussed also by Cilibasi and Vitanyi, 2003, available from
the web-site of the first author. There, the idea (approximating a more abstract
Kolmogorov conditional complexity concept which may appear theoretically the
best authorship classifier) is the following: every good compressor automatically
adapts to patterns in the text which it is compressing, reading the text from
its beginning (some compressors use various extensions of the Markov model-
ing described above, including those based on the variants of the Lempel-Ziv
algorithm). Let us define concatenated texts C(k) = T (k)T as texts starting
with T (k) and proceeding to T without stop, and corresponding compressed
texts T ′(k) and C′(k). Define the conditional compressing complexity (CCC)
to be the difference between the lengths of compressed texts |C′(k)| − |T ′(k)|
and choose the author with minimal CCC. Certainly, this definition depends on
the compressor used. In the tests described in Kukushkina et al, 2001, the best
attributing performance was shown to be that of the compressor rar.
A comparable performance is shown by some ad hoc classification methods
such as Support Vector Machines, (see Bosh and Smith, 1998, Burges, 1998).
366 M.B. Malyutov
These methods are based on sets of characters chosen ad hoc and not unified
between different applications which does not permit a valid comparison.
I skip also any discussion of methods based on grammar parsing since these
methods are yet not fully automated. Also, their application for classifying
very old texts, such as those written by Shakespearean contemporaries, seems
doubtful.
2 Shakespeare Controversy
2.1 Introduction
Controversy concerning authorship of the works traditionally attributed to W.
Shakespeare dates back several centuries. A bibliography of material relevant to
the controversy that was compiled by J. Galland in 1947 is about 1500 pages
long (see Friedmans, 1957). A comparable work written today might well be
at least four times as large. Resolving the controversy would certainly aid our
understanding of what the author intended to convey in his works and thus would
contribute to a better insight into the history of culture. Methodology developed
during this investigation would also be useful in other applications, including the
attribution of newly discovered non-attributed texts. The goal of this part of our
rather personal overview is to stimulate further research by scholars with diverse
areas of expertise in order to resolve the Shakespeare authorship mystery. My
own contribution is minor and concerns the existence of certain steganography
in the sonnets and plausibility of longer messages hidden there. I review in
more detail the arguments in favor of only one alternative candidate, whom I
personally regard as the most likely one.
If additional incentive to undertake this study is needed, note that the Calvin
Hoffman prize, presently worth about one million British pounds, will be awarded
to the person who resolves this controversy.
The orthodox side, consisting of those who believe the traditional figure to
be the true author of these works or simply of those who find it appropriate to
maintain this version, mostly keeps silent about arguments put forth against the
authorship of W. Shaxpere (W.S.) from Stratford on Avon (this one of several
spellings of the name is used to distinguish the traditional figure from the as
yet undecided author of the Shakespeare canon). When not silent, the orthodox
accuse the heretics of being lunatics or snobbish. A collection of their arguments
can be found in Matus, 1994.
2.2 Documentary and Literary Arguments
Anti-Stratfordian snobbish lunatics (including to some extent M. Twain, S.
Freud, Ch. Chaplin, Ch. Dickens, B. Disraeli, J. Galsworthy, V. Nabokov, W.
Whitman, R. Emerson, J. Joyce, and H. James: ”divine William is the biggest
and most successful fraud ever practiced”) point out numerous documentary and
literary reasons for rejecting or doubting the authorship of W.S.
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 367
One early survey of these grave doubts in several hundred pages was written by
a US presidential hopeful Donnelly, 1888. Similar doubts were expressed in many
subsequent books including recent ones, see Mitchell, 1996, and Price, 2001.
Scarce documents related to W.S. revealed there allow the following scenario of
his career.
His education in Stratford or any literary work there is not documented. A
rather ambiguous record about his marriage is kept in the local church. Aban-
doning Stratford just after the birth of his twins and being warned of severe
persecution over next stealing rabbits in the woods of his landlord, he apparent-
ly wandered for several years in constant fear of a severe punishment imposed
on tramps in the Elizabethan time. Eventually, he was employed in valet horse
parking at one of London theaters, later on he was apparently promoted to its
security (since he is mentioned in several complaints over his part in assaults
against alternative theaters: these were also centers of criminal activities such
as gambling, prostitution, etc., there were frequent fights between them which
forced the London mayor to transfer them out of City). Being a talented organiz-
er, W.S. has later become an ambitious administrator, producer and shareholder
of the theater occasionally performing secondary scenic roles,, and likely also an
informer of the ESS (he seems to be the only theater functionary avoiding ar-
raignment after the Essex revolt involving a performance of an allegedly W.S.’
play!). W.S. has probably bought a respect of censors for popular plays to pass
smoothly. He used to make around a thousand pounds a year for his apparent-
ly mostly undercover activity (compare this to only a twice larger sum which
was paid by Elizabeth to her prime minister W. Cecil!). He argued fiercely with
dramatists for changes in their plays to make them more popular, and he was
not sensitive to authors’ rights in publications which brought him pennies as
compared to his other activities. Thus he apparently cared little if any plays
were published under his name (if he could fluently read at all). His Last Will
clearly shows that he did not keep any printed matters, without mentioning
manuscripts. His death was not even noticed by contemporary poets.
There is evidence that W.S. lent money to dramatists for writing plays per-
formed and published under his name and ruthlessly prosecuted those failing to
give the money back in time. This is revealed by Mitchell and Price in their dis-
cussions of Groatsworth of Wit published in 1592 after the death of well-known
dramatist R. Green, where apparently W.S. is called Terence and Batillus with
the obvious meaning of appropriating somebody else’s plays. In a recently found
manuscript (see
http://ist-socrates.berkeley.edu/˜ahnelson/Roscius.html)
written during W.S.’s retirement in Stratford prior to 1623 (First Folio) he was
called our humble Roscius by a local educated Stratfordian author, meaning a
famous Roman who profited from special laws allowing him to hawk or sell seats
in the theater, and who was not known as an actor/playwright, merely as a
businessman who profited on special favor1.
1 A possible visual pattern for W.S. is father Doolittle from ”My fair lady”, who also
did little for creating the treasure of arts bearing his name.
368 M.B. Malyutov
As a Russian scholar, I knew several Russian Terences in Math Sciences who
used their Communist party privileges to produce remarkable lists of publica-
tions ”borrowed” from others, say persons condemned as dissidents or enemies
of the State, who were meant to be forgotten in the Soviet Union, and for whom
any reference to their work was strictly forbidden. It is not sufficiently remem-
bered that Elizabethan England was an equally closed society with its ruthless
censorship and persecution. Well-known, Oscar-winning scenarios written dur-
ing the McCarthy era in the US by blacklisted authors under false names were
milder similar stories.
This concise overview cannot touch on the hundreds of grave very different
questions raised in the books mentioned above2. W.S.’s authorship (WSA) of a
substantial part of Shakespeare is hardly compatible with any of them and my
subjective log likelihood of WSA to answer all of them does not exceed negative
40 (compare with naive Bayes classifier discussed before). In my experience as a
statistical consultant in forensic cases (especially a disputed paternity) involving
DNA profiling, a much milder mismatch would be sufficient for a court to reject
paternity. Some scholars would prefer an explanation of the existing documents
not to be based on miracles as holds for WSA. Forensic (in addition to literary)
experts must play a decisive role in resolving the controversy as shown further.
The major issues for anti-Stratfordians to resolve are: whose works were pub-
lished under the Shakespeare name, and why this disguise of authorship hap-
pened in the first place and then remained hidden for such a long time.
Francis Bacon became the first candidate for an alternate author, probably
because his knowledge of vast areas of culture matched well with that shown in
the Shakespeare works.
(a) Francis Bacon (b) Ignatius Donnelly
Fig. 2.
2 See also a vast recent collection in http://www2.localaccess.com/marlowe/
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 369
The pioneering stylometric study (Mendenhall, 1901) of Shakespeare contem-
poraries using histograms of their word-length distribution demonstrated the
unlikelihood of Bacon’s authorship of Shakespeare.
Century-long fruitless mining for cryptography in Shakespeare, allegedly in-
stalled there by F. Bacon, and multi-million expenditures for digging the ground
in search of the documents proving that F. Bacon wrote Shakespearean works,
are brilliantly analyzed in Friedmans, 1957. The father of American military
cryptography William Friedman and his wife started their careers in cryptogra-
phy assisting the deceptive (by their opinion) Bacon cryptography discovery in
Shakespeare by E. Gallup (which was officially endorsed by general Cartier, the
head of the French military cryptography those days!). This amusing book, full
of historic examples, exercises and humor, should be read by everyone studying
cryptography!
Up to now, one of most attractive alternative candidates has been Edward de
Vere, 17th earl of Oxford. De Vere’s life seems by many to be reflected in the
sonnets and Hamlet. Both de Vere and F. Bacon headed branches of the English
Secret Service (ESS). De Vere was paid an enormous sum annually by Queen
Elizabeth allegedly for heading the Theater Wing of the ESS, which was designed
in order to prepare plays and actors to serve the propaganda and intelligence
collecting aims of the Queen’s regime3. De Vere’s active public support of the
corrupt establishment of the official Anglican church in the dramatic Marprelate
religious discussions confirms him as one of the principal Elizabethan propaganda
chiefs.
(a) Mary Sidney Herbert, countess
of Pembroke
(b) William Friedman
Fig. 3.
3 See www.shakespeareauthorship.org/collaboration.htm referring to Holinshed’s
chronicles commissioned by W. Cecil, the head of Elizabethan Privy Council.
370 M.B. Malyutov
Other major candidates for Shakespeare authorship include R. Manners, 5th
earl of Rutland, W. Stanley, 6th earl of Derby and several other members of an
aristocratic Inner Circle surrounding the Queen and including F. Bacon, Edward
de Vere and Mary Sidney Herbert (who ran a literary academy at her estate in
Wiltshire for the University Wits) together with her sons. Judging by the works
that were firmly attributed with reasonable certainty to each of them, none seems
to have been a genius in poetry.
Some from this circle might have been able to produce plots and first versions
of plays, but these attempts would need a master in order to be transformed
into masterpieces. Some of these people may in fact have done the editing work
on some of the Shakespeare works (Mary Sidney and her sons). One should also
consider that the voluntary hiding of authorship on any of their parts seems
unlikely. Due to the wide extent of the Inner Circle, authorship information
would inevitably have become known to everyone. And yet, to the true author
of the plays and poems there should have been dramatic reasons to not claim
the works universally recognized as ”immortal”. Note also that the author of the
works mastered more than 30,000 English words (as estimated by Efron and
Thiested (1975)) compared to about 3000 words used by an average poet. He
had also mastered Greek, Latin and several contemporary European languages.
In addition, he must have had a profound knowledge of classical literature, phi-
losophy, mythology, geography, diplomacy, court life and legal systems, science,
sport, marine terminology and so forth.
The role of paper Mendenhall, 1901, may be informally compared with that
of a hunting dog. Due to the discovery contained in it, a famous poet, translator
and playwright Christopher Marlowe emerged as one of main candidates. In an
unprecedented petition by Elizabethan Privy Council Marlowe’s important
service on behalf of the ESS was acknowledged, and granting him Masters degree
by Cambridge University was requested in spite of his frequent long absences (see
Nicholl, 1992.). His blank iambic pentameter, developed further in Shakespearean
works, remained the principal style of English verse for several centuries. In 29,
ambitious Marlowe was among the most popular London dramatists during his
allegedly last 5 years.
Arraigned into custody after T. Kyd’s confessions under torture, and let out
on bail by his ESS guarantors, Marlowe was allegedly killed by an ESS agent (in
the presence of another one responsible for smuggling agents to the continent)
at their conventional departure house in Deptford, owned by a close associate of
Elizabeth, almost immediately after a crucial evidence of Marlowe’s heresy was
received by the court, implying an imminent death sentence. There is evidence
of Marlowe’s involvement in the Marprelate affair which made him a personal
enemy of the extremely powerful ruthless archbishop Whitgift of Canterbury, who
did everything possible to expose Marlowe for ages as a heretic and eliminate him
(see the well-known anathema written by cleric T. Bird, O. Cromwell’s teacher,
in Nicholl, 1992).
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 371
A Marlowe’s friend T. Penry, publisher of the Marprelate pamphlets, was
hanged previous evening two miles from Deptford and his body has never after
been accounted for, in spite of many petitions by Penry’s relatives.
Then, two weeks after Marlowe’s supposed demise, the manuscript of the poem
Venus and Adonis, which had been anonymously submitted to a publisher some
months before, was amended with a dedication to the earl of Southampton that
listed for the very first time the name of W. Shakespeare as author (any link
between the earl and W.S. seems unlikely, Marlowe was likely the earl’s tutor in
Cambridge).
There are numerous documentary and literary reasons to believe that Mar-
lowe’s death was faked by his ESS chiefs (who expected further outstanding ser-
vice from him) in exchange for his obligation to live and work forever after under
alternate names. These arguments are shown on the intelligent and informative
web-site http://www2.prestel.co.uk/rey/ of a popular Shakespearean actor
and former top manager of British Airlines, P. Farey. One of them is obvious :
spending the whole last day in Deptford (apparently, awaiting the companion),
Marlowe defied a strict regulation of daily reporting to the court, hence he knew
beforehand that he would never come back under his name.
Farey also reviews extracts from the sonnets and other works of Shakespeare
hinting at their authorship by Marlowe after the Deptford affair. He gives the
results of various stylometric tests, showing that the micro-styles of Marlowe and
Shakespeare are either identical, or else the latter’s style is a natural development
and enrichment of the former. The micro-style fingerprint would give strong ev-
idence for Marlowe’s authorship of Shakespearean work, if further comprehen-
sive study confirms that their style patterns are within the natural evolutionary
bounds while other contemporary writers deviate significantly in style4.
Some scholars believe that the ingenious propaganda chiefs of the ESS part-
ly inspired and paid for the production of C. Marlowe, and perhaps of some
other politically unreliable dramatists, and directed this production using the
Shakespeare pipeline to avoid problems with scrupulous censorship proceedings
and also convert dissidents into a kind of unnamed slaves (an early prototype of
Stalin labor camps for researchers).
During O. Cromwell puritan revolt in forties-fifties of 17th century all theaters
were closed, many intelligence documents were either lost or burnt, and the
revival of interest to the Shakespearean creative work came only in 18th century
making the authorship attribution problematic.
2.3 Micro-style Analysis
The stylometric tables in the section Stylometrics and Parallelisms, Chapter
Deception in Deptford, found on the Farey’s website include convincing tables
of word-length usage frequencies, including those made by T. Mendenhall, as
4 Imagine James Bond let out on bail and reported killed by his colleague soon after
a DNA test proved his unauthorized crime. Will you believe in his death if his DNA
was repeatedly found later on his victims?
372 M.B. Malyutov
well as of function words, feminine endings, run-on lines, etc., in both Mar-
lowe and Shakespeare as functions of presumable dates of writing corresponding
texts.
Again, more careful statistical study of these and more powerful micro-style
tests described in section 1 is desirable. Farey’s plots clearly show the evolution of
styles, which has not been taken into account (or even denied) in many previous
studies. For example, some Russian linguists have claimed that the proportion of
function words is constant inside the canon during the whole writer’s life. This
claim was used by them to reject Sholokhov’s authorship of the first part of his
Nobel prize-winning novel.
2.4 Macro-style Analysis
An interesting controversial comparative study of Shakespeare’s and Marlowe’s
macro-styles5 exists on the web-site of late Alfred Barkov
http://www.geocities.com/shakesp marlowe/
Barkov’s analysis of the inner controversies in Marlowe’s and Shakespeare
works including Hamlet, well-known for a long time, enables him to claim that
the texts were intentionally used to encode the story in such a way that the
authors’ actual messages remain misunderstood by laymen while being under-
standable to advanced attentive readers. Barkov calls this style menippea, con-
sidering it similar to the satira menippea, a style found in many classical works
and discussed by prominent Russian philosopher M.Bakhtin (1984). Menippeas
often appear in closed societies, since authors tend to use Aesopian language
to express their views. This language was very characteristic for Marlowe: he
used his poetic genius to provoke Elizabethan enemies by his ambiguous state-
ments to expose their views for subsequent reporting to the ESS (see Nicholl,
1992).
Barkov’s analysis of the inner controversies in Hamlet is parallel to the inde-
pendent analysis of other authors. For instance, the well-known contemporary
novelist publishing under the nickname B. Akunin, presented recently his ver-
sion of Hamlet in Russian (available in the Internet via the search inside the
web-library www.lib.ru) with a point of view rather similar to that of Barkov,
including the sinister decisive role played by Horatio.
2.5 Cryptpgraphy Mining
In November 2002, a Florida linguist, R. Ballantine, sent me her decipherment
of Marlowe’s anagrams in consecutive bi-lines (that is, pairs of lines) of most
of Shakespeare and also of some other works, revealing the author’s amazing
life story as a master English spy both in Britain and overseas up to 1621.
Her stunning overview with commentaries based also on her previous 20 years of
documentary studies is almost 200 pages long. Her novels covering Marlowe’s life
5 Namely, a sophisticated architecture of their works and well-known ambiguity of
many statements inside them.
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 373
Fig. 4. Roberta Ballantine
until the Deptford affair are more than thousand pages long. I was challenged to
make a judgment about the validity of her findings, which stimulated my interest
in the topic.
Irrespective of the authenticity of the historic information conveyed in her
overview, the story is so compelling that it might become a hit of the century
if supplied with dialogues and elaboration and published as a fiction novel by a
master story teller (see several chapters of her unpublished novels and anagram
examples on the web-site:
http://www.geocities.com/chr marlowe/
Barkov claims that Ballantine’s deciphered anagram texts follow the menippea
macro-style of Marlowe’s works. If established as true, this story will constitute
a bridge between golden periods of poetry and theater in the South-Western
Europe and Britain because in it C. Marlowe is revealed as a close friend of such
leading late Renaissance figures as M. Cervantes and C. Monteverdi, as well as
the main rival in love and theater of Lope de Vega.
It is almost unbelievable that the author of Shakespearean works could pur-
sue additional goals while writing such magnificent poetry. However, caution
is needed: Thompson and Padover, 1963, p. 253, claim that Greek authors of
tragedies used to anagram their names and time of writing in the first lines of
their tragedies (a kind of water marking), which Marlowe could well learn from
his best teachers in the King’s school, Canterbury and University of Cambridge; a
similar tradition was shared by Armenian ancient writers as a protection against
plagiarism of copyists, as described in Abramyan, 1974. Also, first announcing
discoveries by anagrams was very popular in those times (Galileo, Huygens, Ke-
pler, Newton among other prominent authors); anagrams were certainly used by
professional spies.
Attempting to establish cryptographic content in Shakespeare after the dis-
couraging book Friedmans, 1957, is very ambitious. Moreover, serious doubts
remain concerning the appropriateness of anagrams as a hidden communication
(or steganography) tool, as will be discussed further.
374 M.B. Malyutov
It is natural to consider two stages in the analysis of the validity of deciphered
anagrams. The first question to address is the existence of anagrams in the texts.
This we have attempted to test statistically starting from our observation that
all the anagrams deciphered in Shakespeare contain various forms of Marlowe’s
signature at the beginning.
R. Ballantine has considered bi-lines as suitable periods for anagramming
case-insensitive letters. After deciphering an initial bi-line, she proceeds to the
very next one, and so on, until the final signature. In a given play, the first bi-line
that begins an anagramming is usually at the beginning of a dialogue, or after
a special, but otherwise meaningless sign, a number of which appear in early
editions of Shakespearean works.
Following Thompson and Padover, 1963, we mine for Marlowe’s signature in
the first bi-lines of sonnets, which makes for an easier test, since a disastrous
multiplicity-of-decisions problem is avoided in this way. Besides, 154 sonnets,
with only a small part of them deciphered so far, constitute a homogeneous
sample of 14 lines (7 bi-lines) each (with a single exception). Hence we chose
to focus on the sonnets for statistical testing of the presence of anagrams leav-
ing aside almost all other Shakespearean works, which allegedly also contain
anagrams.
An important requirement is a careful choice of an accurate published version
which has varied over time. I was fortunate to find help from an expert in the
field, Dr. D. Khmelev, University of Toronto, who was previously involved in a
joint Shakespeare-Marlowe stylometry study with certain British linguists.
For a given bi-line b, let us introduce the event M = {b contains the set of
case-insensitive letters M,A,R,L,O,W,E } (event M is equivalent for this name
to be a part of an anagram) Using a specially written code, Khmelev showed (by
my request):
Proposition 1. The numbers of first, second, etc. bi-lines in the sonnets for
which event M occurs are respectively 111, 112, 88, 98, 97, 101, 102 out of 154
sonnets.
Our first corollary follows:
Proposition 2. Let us test the null hypothesis of homogeneity: event M has
the same probability for all consecutive bi-lines in sonnets versus the alter-
native that the first bi-line contains this set of letters more often than subse-
quent ones. It is also assumed that these events for all bi-lines are independent.
Then the P-value of the null hypothesis (i.e. the probability of the frequency
deviation to be as large or more under the null hypothesis) is less than four
per cent.
Proof.We apply a standard two-sample test for equality of probabilities based on
the normalized difference between frequencies fi, i = 1, 2, of containing the case-
insensitive set of letters ’m’, ’a’, ’r’, ’l’, ’o’, ’w’, ’e’ inside the first and all other bi-
lines respectively which has approximately standardnormal distribution for such a
big sample; f1 is near 72.1 per cent, f2 is almost 65 per cent. Thus the approximate
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 375
normalized difference of frequencies (f1 − f2)/
√
f̄(1 − f̄)(1 + 1/6)/154 is around
1.78, where f̄ := (f1 +6f2)/7, and the normal approximation to the binomial prob-
ability of this or larger deviation (P-value) is near 3.75 per cent which is a rather
unlikely event.6
Apparently, this anomaly in homogeneity of bi-lines signals that the first bi-
lines were specially designed to include this set of letters as part of an anagram
signature. Note that signatures may vary over sonnets. Thus our estimate is an
upper bound for the P-value of bi-lines homogeneity versus several variants of
Marlowe’s signature in the first bi-line.
Thus, the existence of anagrams hidden by Marlowe in Shakespeare looks
rather likely.
Of course, other explanations of this statistical anomaly might also be possible.
To deal with this possibility, I applied to a recognized expert in statistics on
Shakespeare and on English verses in general who is with the University of
Washington. Unfortunately, she turned out to be a Stratfordian, and so she
chose not to reply at all.
A much more difficult task is to study the authenticity (or uniqueness) of the
anagrams deciphered by R. Ballantine. This is due to a notorious ambiguity of
anagrams which seems to be overlooked by those who have used anagrams to
claim priority, see above. An amazing example of this ambiguity is shown on pp.
110-111, Friedmans, 1957, namely: 3100 different meaningful lines-anagrams in
Latin exist for the salutation ”Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum”. These
are referred to a book published in 1711.
A theory of anagram ambiguity can be developed along the lines of the fa-
mous approach to cryptography given in C. Shannon’s Communication Theory
of Secrecy Systems written in 1946 and declassified in 1949. An English text is
modeled in it as a stationary ergodic sequence of letters with its entropy per letter
characterizing the uncertainty of predicting the next letter given a long preced-
ing text. The binary entropy of English turns out to be around 1.1 (depending
on the author and style), estimated as a result of long experimentation.
Shannon showed that this value of the entropy implies the existence of around
21.1N meaningful English texts of large length N . Due to the ergodicity of long
texts, the frequencies of all letters in all typical long messages are about the
same, and so all typical texts could be viewed as almost anagrams of each
other. Thus, the number of anagrams to a given text seems to grow with the
same exponential rate as the number of English texts. We can prove this plau-
sible conjecture in a more artificial approximation of English text as an i.i.d.
multinomial sequence of symbols. Let us first further simplify the setting for
transparency:
6 A more detailed study of numbers in Proposition 1 ignoring the multiplicity of hy-
potheses shows that the case insensitive set ’marlowe’ is located anomalously often in
the first two bi-lines of the sonnets (the homogeneity P-value is around 0.2 per
cent). Another popular (according to Ballantine) signature ’Kit M.’ turns out to be
found unusually often (the homogeneity P-value is around 5 per cent) in the last two
bi-lines concluding the sonnets.
376 M.B. Malyutov
Proposition 3. Consider an i.i.d. three-nomial N -sequence of three letters A, B
and C with rational probabilities p(A) = L(A)/N, p(B) = L(B)/N such that
Np(A) := L(A) and Np(B) := L(B) are integers. Our claim is: Number N(A, B)
of N -sequences with L(A) letters A and L(B) letters B satisfies:
log N(A, B)/N = H(A, B) = −[p(A) log p(A) + · · · + p(C) log p(C)](1 + o(1)).
Proof. Follows immediately from the method of types (see e.g. Cover and
Thomas, 1991). The fraction above is asymptotically the number of typical N -
sequences as we stated above.
A generalization to a general multinomial case without the condition of all
probabilities being multiples of 1/N is straightforward. A generalization to a
model of stationary ergodic source can be formulated and proved using the tech-
niques also developed in Cover and Thomas, 1991, say their sandwich argument,
in proving the equipartition theorem.
Thus the number of meaningful English anagrams for n bi-lines is the n-th
power of that for a single bi-line, if deciphering is independent for subsequent
bi-lines, and also exponential in the length of text. This is a discouraging result
for considering anagrams as a communication tool beyond other disadvantages
of anagrams, namely excessive complexity of encoding and decoding. Moreover,
the aim of putative anagrams that would become known to an addressee only
after the long process of publication is unclear, unless an ESS editor would
pass it directly to an addressee. Again a parallelism: many of M. Bulgakov’s
menippeas with hidden anti-Soviet content were prepared for publication by an
active informer of the Stalin secret police!
There still remains hope that R. Ballantine’s claim about the uniqueness of
the anagrams she deciphered may prove correct due to the following reasons:
Every one of her deciphered anagrams starts with one of the variants of Mar-
lowe’s signature, which restricts the remaining space on the first bi-line, and
makes the combination of remaining letters atypical, thereby narrowing the set
of meaningful anagrams. Furthermore, the names and topics conveyed by Mar-
lowe in the hidden text, may be familiar to his intended receiver (say, the earl
of Southampton or M. Sidney Herbert with her sons), who might decipher the
anagrams using a type of Bayesian inference, looking for familiar names and
getting rid of possible anagrams that did not make sense for him/her. Existence
of other keys unknown to us is also possible.
It should also be noted that the hidden sentence on the first bi-line is usually
continued on the next bi-line (run-on line) giving the decipherer additional infor-
mation as to how to start deciphering the next bi-line, and so forth. Surely, these
arguments are rather shaky. Only a costly experimentation in deciphering
anagrams by specially prepared experts can lead to sound results about the
authenticity of anagrams deciphered from these texts. Various types of software
are available to ease the deciphering of anagrams, although it is questionable if
any of them is suitable for these archaic texts.
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 377
In summary, the anagram problem in Shakespeare remains unresolved, al-
though I regard it as worthy of further study.
C. Shannon himself developed an important theory for breaking codes. His
Unicity theory specifies the minimal length of encoded messages that admit a
unique decoding of a hidden message by a codebreaker due to the redundancy
of English. Unfortunately, his main assumption of the key and message inde-
pendence, crucial for his results about unicity in cryptography, is obviously not
valid for anagrams, which use special keys for each bi-line depending on the
combination of letters in the bi-line.
Our statistical result on the special structure of the first bi-lines shows that
the encoding (if it took place at all!) had to be iterative: if the poetic bi-line
was not suitable for placing Marlowe’s anagram-signature there, the line and
hidden message were to be revised in order to make the enciphering possible.
This is exactly a situation where knowledge of an incredible number of English
words, demonstrated by Shakespeare, could have been put to perfect use permitting
flexibility in the choice of a relevant revised text!
2.6 Hopes for Genetic Evidence
It turns out that the critical argument against Marlowe’s authorship of Shake-
speare is the inquest by Queen Elizabeth’s personal coroner found in 1935 (made
in violation of several instructions) stating that Marlowe was killed on May 30,
1593. The question of the validity of this inquest is discussed by Farey and
Nicholl, 1992 in detail. If the inquest was faked and C. Marlowe’s survival for
several more years is proved, then his authorship of Shakespearean works be-
comes very likely: Marlowe could have written these masterpieces with abundant
features to be ascribed to him, and he had more than enough reasons to hide
under a fictitious name.
One long-shot way to prove Marlowe’s survival is as follows. A mysterious
posthumous mask is kept in Darmstadt, Germany, ascribed to Shakespeare by
two reasons: The Encyclopaedia Britannica states that it matches perfectly the
known portraits of the bard (which are likely actually versions of Marlowe’s
portraits as shown brilliantly, say, on the title page of the web-site of a recent
award-winning documentary film Much ado about something. A second reason is
the following: this mask was sold to its penultimate owner-collectioner together
with a posthumous portrait of apparently the same dead man in laurels lying in
his bed.
The mask contains 16 hairs that presumably belonged to the portrayed per-
son. A specialist from the University of Oxford has claimed in a personal letter
to me his ability to extract mitochondrial DNA from these hairs and match it
with that from the bones of W.S. (or W.S.’s mother Mary Arden) and Mar-
lowe’s mother Kate or any of W.S.’s or Marlowe’s siblings. As is well-known,
mtDNA is inherited strictly from maternal side since sperm does not contain
mitochondria. This study is in the planning stage, and serious legal, bureaucrat-
ic, financial and experimental obstacles must first be overcome before the study
can proceed.
378 M.B. Malyutov
A fragment of the title page of the web-site
www.muchadoaboutsomething.com
The posthumous mask ascribed
to Shakespeare
Fig. 5.
3 Conclusion
The problem of Shakespeare authorship is old, and the documents are scarce.
Therefore, only a statistical approach, e.g., comparing the likelihoods of hy-
potheses based on the fusion of all kinds of evidence, seems feasible in trying to
resolve it.
An explosion in computing power, emergence and development of new meth-
ods of investigation and their fusion let me believe that in this framework the
Shakespeare controversy will eventually be resolved with sufficient conviction in
spite of the four-century long history of puzzles and conspiracies.
The methods that are now developing are promising and could also very well
apply in other similar problems of authorship attribution, some of which might
even have significant security applications.
Acknowledgements
This study was proposed to the very obliged author by R. Ahlswede at the be-
ginning of the author’s two-month stay with the program Information transfer
at ZIF, University of Bielefeld. The author thanks many colleagues (especially
R. Ballantine!) for their helpful remarks, E. Haroutunian for citing Abramyan.
I am extremely grateful to E. Gover, D. Massey and I. Malioutov for consider-
able improvement of my English and style and to D. Malioutov for TEX-nical
help.
Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review 379
References
1. A. Abramyan, The Armenian Cryptography (in Armenian), Yerevan University
Press, 1974.
2. M. Bakhtin, Problemy Poetiki Dostoevskogo, English translation, University of
Minnesota Press, 1984.
3. R. Bosch and J. Smith, Separating hyperplanes and the authorship of the disputed
Federalist Papers, American Mathematical Monthly 105, 7, 601-608, 1998.
4. C. Brinegar, Mark Twain and the Quintus Curtis Snodgrass Letters: A statistical
test of authorship, Journal of American Statistical Association 58, 301, 85-96,
1963.
5. R. Cilibasi and P. Vitanyi, Clustering by compression, CWI manuscript, 2003,
submitted.
6. C. Burges, A Tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition, Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2, No. 2, 955-974, 1998.
7. T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, Wiley, N.Y., 1991.
8. I. Donnelly, The Great Cryptogram, 1, 1888, reprinted by Bell and Howell, Cleve-
land, 1969.
9. B. Efron and R. Thisted, Estimating the number of unseen species; How many
words did Shakespeare know? Biometrika 63, 435-437, 1975.
10. R. Thisted and B. Efron, Did Shakespeare write a newly discovered poem? Bio-
metrika 74, 445-455, 1987.
11. W. Friedman and E. Friedman, The Shakespearean Ciphers Exposed, Cambridge
University Press, 1957.
12. H. Katirai, Filtering junk e-mail, 1999, see his web-site
http://members.rogers.com/hoomank/
13. D. Khmelev and F.J. Tweedy, Using markov chains for identification of writers,
Literary and Linguistic Computing 16, No. 4, 299-307, 2001.
14. O. Kukushkina, A. Polikarpov, and D. Khmelev, Text authorship attribution using
letter and grammatical information, Problems of Information Transmission 37, 2,
172-184, 2001.
15. A. Markov, On application of statistical method, Comptes Rendus of Imper. Acad-
emy of Sciences, Ser. VI, X, 153, 1913; 239, 1916.
16. I. Matus, Shakespeare, in Fact, Continuum, N.Y., 1994.
17. T.A. Mendenhall, The characteristic curves of composition, Science 11, 237-249,
1887.
18. T.A. Mendenhall, A mechanical solution to a literary problem, Popular Science
Monthly 60, 97-105, 1901.
19. J. Mitchell, Who Wrote Shakespeare, Thames and Hudson Ltd., London, 1996.
20. F. Mosteller and D. Wallace, Inference and Disputed Authorship, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, 1964.
21. Ch. Nicholl. The Reckoning, second edition, Chicago University Press, 1992.
22. D. Price, Shakespeare’s Unorthodox Biography, Greenwood Press, London,
2001.
23. R. Rosenfeld, A maximum entropy approach to adaptive statistical language, Mod-
eling. Computer, Speech and Language 10, 187–228, 1996, a shortened version of
the author’s PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 1994.
24. J.W. Thompson and S.K. Padover, Secret Diplomacy; Espionage and Cryptogra-
phy, F. Ungar Pub. Co., N.Y, 1500-1815, 1963.
380 M.B. Malyutov
25. O. De Vel, A. Anderson, M. Corney, and G. Mohay, Multi-Topic E-mail Authorship
Attribution Forensics, Proc. Workshop on Data Mining for Security Applications,
8th ACM Conference on Computer Security (CCS’2001), 2001.
26. C. Williams, Word-length distribution in the works of Shakespeare and Bacon,
Biometrika 62, 207-212, 1975.
27. J. Zhao, The impact of cross-entropy on language modeling, PhD thesis, Missis-
sippi State University, 1999.
http://www.isip.msstate.edu/publications/courses/ece 7000 speech
/lectures/1999/lecture 06/paper/paper v1.pdf
