 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
118 
 
Postal Automation System for Mail Sorting 
Manjunatha V.G
1
 
1
Student, Dept of Instrumentation & Technology, Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bengaluru, India
       
Abstract— Our proposed work is to design the mail sorting 
automation system using Optical Character Recognition 
technique. It can sort the mails using the pincode, without the 
human intervention. It removes the hassle of two-step process 
of barcode encoding and decoding, resulting in a clean, 
effective postal system. Hence we propose to design a sorting 
machine that will remove the above mentioned constraints 
and thus sort the mails easily. The principle used for sorting is 
the Optical Character Recognition using MATLAB software. 
Camera, placed over the slide unit captures the image of the 
address. The pin code is selected and compared with a set of 
characters in the data base. On finding a positive match, 
based on the pin code, the mail is segregated by the MATLAB 
program involving OCR technique. The processed data is sent 
to the microcontroller, which activates the actuating arm 
(servo motor) to allow the letters to move to the respective 
stack (zone) and thus sorting the mails automatically, 
reducing the human effort and errors..   
Keywords—Mail Sorting, MATLAB, Optical Character 
Recognition, PIC microcontroller, Postal Automation. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Indian post is the most widely distributed postal network 
in the world. With its service for over 150 years old, it has 
been the backbone of the nation‟s communication and has 
played a crucial role in the country‟s socio-economic 
development. It touches the lives of Indian citizens in many 
ways: delivering mails, accepting deposits under Small 
Savings Schemes, providing life insurance cover under 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural Postal Life Insurance 
(RPLI) and providing retail services like bill collection, 
sale of forms, etc. 
India has the largest Postal Network in the world with 
over 1, 55,015 Post Offices (as on 31.03.2009) of which 1, 
39,144 (89.76%) are in the rural areas. At the time of 
independence, there were 23,344 Post Offices, which were 
primarily in urban areas. Thus, the network has registered a 
seven-fold growth since Independence, with the focus of 
this expansion primarily in rural areas. On an average, a 
Post Office serves an area of 21.21 Sq. Km and a 
population of 7175 people. 
 
Figure 1:-  Current sorting method 
The manual labor used in this wide and intense network 
of services is very less, for example in Chennai where they 
receive lakhs of mails every single day. To sort these mails, 
on an average Chennai has only about 30 people to do the 
job. 30 people to sort numerous mails is a very tedious job 
to do. The figure 1 shows the current manual sorting 
method. It consumes a lot of time and has an adverse effect 
on the health of the people sorting the letters. With the 
responsibility of delivering the letters on time, comes the 
duty of working fast. 
The sorting has to be done as fast as possible to be 
received by the recipient on time.  This method can  
include some  human errors like  misreading  the pincodes, 
misplacing the letters in the wrong stacks, etc. It can also 
affect the eyes due to constant vigilance on the pincode. To 
meet the demands, a huge number of people should be 
employed by the post offices. However, the numbers of 
people for doing the job are very few. The Indian postal 
system lacks in the human labor. Hundreds of human 
beings are required for the task but in reality, only thirty 
percent of that are available for the job. This increases the 
labor, fatigue, errors, etc. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Mani, et.al [1] proposed many artificial neural network 
models have been proposed to mimic the human brain in 
solving problems involving human-like intelligence. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
119 
 
An application of an artificial neural network approach 
for optical character recognition (OCR) is discussed in this 
paper. We examine a simple pattern- recognition system 
using an artificial neural network to simulate character 
recognition. 
Young-Mo Kim, et.al [2] proposed many practical 
factors that need to be considered for a reliable character 
recognition system in 3D space, the location of the visual 
angle of a camera might play a crucial role. Different 
viewpoints in 3D space produces distorted license plate 
images in a camera. For this reason, a method is developed 
to segment and to recognize characters of license plate 
objects undergoing variant perspective view. A method for 
segmenting license plate characters on a moving vehicle in 
actual outdoor environment is based upon object contours. 
And this method for recognizing is constructed from a 
feature-based approach, parameterized by an affine 
invariant parameters and the affine invariant features. 
Experimental results show that the performance of the 
proposed method is simple and robust, particularly when 
objects are heavily distorted with strong perspective view. 
Birch, et.al [3] proposed an algorithmic architecture for a 
high-performance OCR system for hand-printed and 
handwritten addresses is proposed. The architecture 
integrates syntactic and contextual post processing with 
character recognition to optimize postcode recognition 
performance and verifies the postcode against simple 
features extracted from the remainder of the address to 
ensure a low error rate. An initial implementation of all 
parts of the proposed system is reported, showing an 
overall postcode recognition rate of 44% and correct 
extraction of verification information for 24% of upper-
case addresses and 27% of mixed-case addresses. 
Kavallieratou, et.al [7] proposed this paper deals with 
the discrimination between machine-printed and 
handwritten text, a prerequisite for many OCR applications. 
An easy-to-follow approach is proposed based on an 
integrated system able to localize text  areas and split  them 
in text-lines. A set  of simple structural characteristics that 
capture the differences between machine-printed and 
handwritten text-lines is presented and preliminary 
experiments on document images taken from databases of 
different languages and characteristics show a remarkable 
performance.  
Hidayatullah, et.al [8] proposed automatic license plate 
recognition which is useful in a lot of applications. There 
are a lot of methods used for that purpose and one of which 
is Optical Character Recognition (OCR).   
 
OCR in this paper is used to recognize optically 
processed printed character in license plate number which 
is based on template matching. We found some factors that 
affect the effectiveness of template matching based Optical 
Character Recognition in recognizing the license plate 
number. Those factors are font type, template resolution, 
noise, tilting and the painting. We have done some 
improvement for the Indonesian condition by using a more 
relevant font type, construction a new template with higher 
resolution, and removing more noise. 
III. FLOW CHART AND FUNCTIONAL BLOCK DIAGRAM 
 
Figure 2:- Flow Chart of Mail Sorting System 
The Postal Automation System for Mail Sorting works 
as the flow chart is shown in figure 2, Initially image of 
letter is captured using camera and processed individually.  
The captured image is sent to MATLAB for feature 
extraction and pattern recognition. After recognition is 
carried out, it is compared with the data base to identify the 
alphabets and numbers. Here we are only using the 
extracted six digit number i.e. pincode for further 
implementation.  
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
120 
 
Once the pincode matches with the data base, the motors 
are actuated the hardware unit using PIC microcontroller. 
 
Figure 3:- Functional Block Diagram 
The block diagram consists of the following 
components: 
A. Envelope 
The inland letters of dimensions 6x4” are designed such 
that the State name and pincode are written together on the 
fifth line of the address. It is placed on the movable sliding 
plate at a predefined position. 
B. Camera 
12 Mega pixel USB camera fixed to the Sliding 
Structure takes an image of the envelope 
C. Sliding Unit 
After a delay of 5 seconds, movable plate lifts up and the 
envelope falls onto the conveyor belt. This is run by a 12V 
DC Motor of 30 rpm 
D. Conveyor Belt  
Run by a 12V DC Motor of 60 rpm, through a pulley 
system, the belt transports the envelope to the collection 
unit. By this time the software code would have processed 
the image and detected the zone it belongs to. 
E. Collection Unit 
It is operated by a high torque VS5 Servo Motor. Based 
on the zone detected, it rotates to align the respective box 
to the conveyor 
F. PIC Microcontroller 
PIC is a modified Harvard architecture microcontroller‟s 
family made  by  Microchip  Technology,  derived  from  
the  PIC1650  originally  developed by General 
Instrument's Microelectronics Division.  
The name PIC initially referred to "Peripheral Interface 
Controller". PICs are popular with both industrial 
developers and hobbyists alike due to their low cost, wide 
availability, large user base, extensive collection of 
application notes, availability of low cost or free 
development tools, and serial programming (re-
programming with flash memory) capability. 
G. Computer 
A computer is used for programming for the 
computation of arithmetic and logical operations and run 
many applications compatible with the application platform 
and its processor. MATLAB is one such application which 
runs on MICROSOFT WINDOWS environment. The 
memory unit and the processor of the computer used here is 
choose to meet the specifications and minimum 
requirements of MATLAB such that the application runs 
smoothly. 
IV. SOFTWARE WORKING 
The hardware works as explained later in the hardware 
implementation. The main program for the algorithm is 
written in MATLAB which analyze the pattern comparing 
with the different pre-loaded images of the fonts in 
greyscale JPEG format as shown in figure 4. 
 
Figure 4:- Grayscale Images store in database 
Using these images, the patterns of the scanned image or 
the image captured from the camera is matched to get the 
required characters present in the image. For an optimum 
result the captured image in first oriented in such a way that 
the characters are aligned on to zero degree line. 
The detailed software working is explained below. 
 The input image is given to the MATLAB and is stored 
in terms of matrix in it. 
 The image is then processed to align the characters to 
zero degree line using the page alignment algorithm. 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
121 
 
 After the alignment process, each character is segmented 
in the image by analyzing the intensity levels between 
the characters and also by comparing with the images of 
the characters loaded in the data base. 
 After recognition of all similar patterns and assigning the 
characters to it, the extracted text is stored in a text file. 
This can be also seen in the Command Window of 
MATLAB. 
 Each Pincode is assigned with a value based on the sub 
divisional zone it belongs. The sub divisional zones are 
Bangalore North, Bangalore south, Bangalore East, 
Bangalore West, and Bangalore Rural. If the Pin code 
doesn‟t match with the database of the mentioned 
subdivisions, it is considered that the pincode belongs to 
other region. 
 The target device is programmed to read the transmitted 
data and control the motors attached to it to sort the 
mails. 
 Here the target device used is PIC 18f452 
microcontroller and the IDE tool used to program is 
MPLAB. 
 The microcontroller controls the rotation of the 
servomotor connected to the sorter by giving a required 
pulse width modulated (PWM) signal so that the servo 
rotates to the particular angle and the conveyer belt 
drops the mail to the box located at that particular angle. 
Here each box is used for each zone in Bangalore. When 
the data is received from MATLAB, the controllers 
generates a pulse signal to rotate the motor present 
below the rotating plate to align to the particular angle. 
For each value received the sorter positions to the 
assigned value. 
 The complete system has 2 more separate models, a 
conveyer belt and a sliding unit. The sliding unit is 
where the letters or mails are placed. Here the images of 
mails are captured and they are mad to side down to the 
conveyer belt. The conveyer belt drops each mail to the 
sorter. During this movement on the belt, the servo 
aligns. 
V. HARDWARE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The detailed description of hardware that has and its 
working. The hardware includes the electronic components, 
the electromechanical instruments and the mechanical 
hardware model. 
 
 
A. Electronic Components 
The electronic components consists of the PIC 18F452 
microcontroller, the development board which supports the 
integration of microcontroller with other hardware 
components, the motor driver circuit  for  interfacing dc 
motors with the microcontroller. The description of each 
electronic component is described below 
1) PIC18F452 Microcontroller: The PIC 18F452 
Microcontroller is a 40 pin, high performance RISC CPU. 
The Microcontroller has 32 kilobytes of flash memory, 
1536 bytes of on-board RAM and 256 bytes of data 
EEPROM. The source code is backward compatible with 
PIC16 and PIC 17 instruction sets. This microcontroller has 
5 I/O ports and 4 Timers. This microcontroller has one 
serial communication port and one parallel slave port. Its 
instruction set consists of 75 pre-defined instructions. It 
also has a 10-bit A/D module with 8 input channels. The 
PIC Processor has a Harvard architecture, i.e. separate 
instruction memory and data memory. The figure 5, shows 
the pin diagram of PIC 18F452. 
 
Figure 5:- PIC 18F452 Pin Diagram 
2) Motor Driver Circuit: The motor driver circuit is a 
board consisting of a L293D IC used to provide the 
necessary current required for a DC motor connected to 
it. This circuit is used as the output current of a 
microcontroller board is not sufficient to drive a motor. 
The figure 6 shows the circuit connections of a motor 
drive board. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
122 
 
 
Figure 6:- L293D Board and its Connections 
B. Electromechanical Instruments 
The electromechanical instruments are the ones used for 
the purpose of obtaining mechanical motions and 
actuations by providing electrical impulses. Here in our 
prototype, we use DC motor and the Servo motor 
controlled by the Microcontroller. The detailed descriptions 
of these elec1tromechanical instruments are explained 
below. 
1) Metal Geared Servo Motor:  Servomotor has three 
inputs Vcc (red wire), GROUND (brown wire- GND) and 
PWM control coming from the Microcontroller (orange 
wire). We connect the 7V DC power supply to the Vcc, 
ground pin of the servomotor to ground of the controller 
board and the remaining PWM input pin is connected to the 
Port D.4 of the microcontroller. The figure 7, represents the 
servo motor. The system runs inside a timed loop because 
we need to keep generating a pulse at least every 20ms to 
keep the servomotor in position. For a servomotor to move 
to a particular position we need to give the appropriate duty 
cycle and frequency 
2) Dc motor: A DC motor is a two terminal 
electromechanical device that converts electrical energy 
into useful mechanical energy like a mechanical 
movement. The figure 8 represents the High torque DC 
Motor. This motor works on the basis of Faraday‟s Law. 
 
Figure 7:- Servo Motor Diagram 
 
 
Figure 8:- DC Motor 
C. Mechanical Hardware Model 
The hardware model consists of mainly three parts, they 
are  
1) Sliding Unit: The Sliding unit is a structure in which 
the postal letters are placed in the horizontal sliding tray. 
The Figure 9(a) and Figure 9(b) shows the basic hardware 
structure of the sliding unit. A horizontal sliding plate is 
attached to this structure so that it can freely move with one 
end soldered to the model using hinges. Sliding unit is a 
structure constructed using Aluminum sheet of thickness 
1mm and aluminum bars and beams to hold the structure. 
Sliding unit comprises of two plates. A movable Base 
plate made of metal sheet of length 11.5” and width 5.5”. 
Fixed Slide metal plate is cut of length 13.5” and width 
5.5”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
123 
 
A guide of 1” is made on either side of the sheet by 
folding it twice by half, i.e. 0.5”. This serves the purpose of 
guiding the letters and preventing them from slipping off 
the slide unit. A hinge is welded between the two plates. A 
base plate made of reinforced iron of length 19” and width 
9” is used as the primary base of the structure. Rectangular 
aluminum rods are cut to lengths of 11.5”, 18”, 18” and 18” 
and attached to the base at distances of 3”, 8.9”, 12” and 
18” respectively. With respect to these offset rods are cut. 
Aluminum rectangular rod of 13” is cut and bent at 1.5” 
and 5” using a HBM. It is then fixed to the base plate and 
the fixed slide plate using 6mm bolts. Aluminum 
rectangular rod of 19” is cut and bent at 2.75” and 6.8” 
using a HBM. It is then attached to fixed slide plate and 
base plate using 6mm bolts. 
Two Aluminum rectangular rod of 25” is cut and bent at 
7” and 10” using a HBM. It is then attached to fixed slide 
plate and base plate using 6mm bolts. Aluminum L-Bend 
are then attached across the above rods, thus forming a base 
for the movable slide base plate to rest and move freely up 
to an angle of 45 degree upwards. Two horizontal rods are 
attached across the structure to provide it more stability 
using 6mm bolts and drilling machine. The 12V 30 rpm DC 
motor is then attached to a sheet metal plate using 1mm 
screws. This plate is then bent across the edges to form a U 
bend plate which is then attached to the rods supporting the 
movable plates. A T bend is attached to the underside of 
the movable base plate. A lever system is then made by 
using 3 slotted rods linked to each other at the ends by 
using 4mm screws fixed to the T bend and the motor shaft. 
The assembly is shown in figure 9 (c). 
 
Figure 9(a):-  3-D Model structure of the Sliding Unit 
 
Figure 9(b):-  Basic Hardware Structure of Sliding Unit 
 
Figure 9 (c):-  Front View and Side View of Lever Structure 
A cylindrical rod is used across the two slotted angles 
and fixed using stoppers to maintain the angle and 
alignment of the lever system. A normally closed switch is 
fixed on the underside of the movable slide plate close to 
the hinge to restrict the movement of the plate beyond 45 
degrees, failing which the motor might be pushed the 
restrictions and can fail.  
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
124 
 
The motor wire is connected to the „C‟ (common) 
terminal of the switch. The other wire from the motor and 
the „NC‟ (normally closed) terminal of the switch is given 
to the two ends of 12v adapter. 10 mega pixel camera is 
then mounted above the sliding plate from where it can 
take images of the envelope address. 
Sliding unit is used to push the mails placed on it to the 
conveyor belt. A digital camera is placed on the sliding unit 
for image capturing.  The captured image is processed the 
DC motor in this unit is actuated using the microcontroller. 
Now the lever structure push the horizontal plate upwards 
and the postal letter slides to the conveyor belt unit, this 
mechanism is shown in figure 9(d). 
 
Figure 9(d): Sliding Unit Mechanism 
2) Conveyor Belt Unit: Conveyor belt unit is used for the 
task of delivering the letter into the collection unit. This 
runs by a 12V DC Motor of 60 rpm, through a pulley 
system, the belt transports the envelope to the collection 
unit. The figure 10 shows the conveyor belt used in our 
prototype.  
This is constructed by aluminum sheet cut into L-Bends 
of length 26” (2pieces) and 7” (2 pieces) and V-shape on 
shorter pieces at distances 1” and 5” and make U- Bends. 
Attach all the pieces to make a base. Fix the wheels onto 
the cylindrical rods at distance of 3.5” and put  the 
conveyor  belt  around  them.  Now place the circular 
cardboards at all 4 corners to avoid slipping of the 
conveyor belt. Sheet metal guides of length 27” on both 
sides are placed to help guide the letters along. Attach the 
belt system to the base using the 6.5” rods at distances with 
respect to the length of the belt system. Use the slotted 
angles to provide stability to the structure. Use sheet metal 
of length 6” to fix the DC Motor between the 6.5” rod and 
the 4” rod. Attach one gear to the cylindrical rod and one to 
the shaft of the motor. Make a dip at the middle of the 
gears circumference using a file. Now using a rubber belt 
make a pulley system. 
 
Figure 10:- Conveyor Belt Arrangement 
3) Collection Unit: The Collection unit is a sorter which 
collects the letters from the conveyor belt. It is operated by 
a high torque VS5 Servo Motor. This consists of 4 boxes 
indicating North, South, and East, West based on the 
subdivision of the district and others for other regions 
outside the district. This unit rotates on a servo motor 
depending on the zone the envelope is recognized to align 
the respective box to the conveyor belt unit.  The figure 11 
shows the side view and the top view of the collection unit. 
The collection unit is built by cutting a slot in the metal 
plate such that it can accommodate the servomotor and 
provide the whole structure stability and grip. The spikes of 
the servomotor are then fixed on to the chassis which 
provides the primary base to mount the thermocol. After 
the thermocol is mounted on the chassis, the four zonal 
boxes are then placed at angles 45, 90, 135, 180 degrees for 
west, east, south and north zones respectively. 
 
Figure 11:- Collection Unit 
D.  Functionality of the Hardware 
The figure 12 shows the hardware model setup which 
has mainly three separate sub designs namely identification 
unit, the conveyor belt and the collection unit. 
Letters are placed on the movable slide plate. Image of 
the address is taken and MATLAB software determines 
which zone it belongs to using Optical Character 
Recognition technique and matching with the data form the 
database of pincodes divides based on zones.  
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
125 
 
Now the counter output from the microcontroller to the 
DC Motor (12V 30rpm) based on the serial communication 
from the software results in the movement of the movable 
sliding plate in upwards direction up to 45 degrees and 
returns back to its initial position after a small delay of 
time. After the sliding plate reaches 45 degree, it can no 
longer move. Hence the push switch is used to breaks the 
circuit and avoids damage to the motor. 
 
Figure 12: Complete Hardware Module 
The letter slips onto the conveyor belt. Here another DC 
motor is used for its continuous rotation. The belt transfers 
the letter to the collection unit. Depending on the digital 
output sent to the servo motor from the software through 
microcontroller, it rotates by the corresponding duty cycle 
and falls into the particular zone box. 
E. Hardware Circuit diagram 
The circuit is constructed as show in the figure 13. The 
input signal is given from the computer to PIC 
Microcontroller through UART communication. Based on 
the input, the motors are actuated to control the hardware. 
Here we are using L293D modules for controlling speed 
and direction of DC motors. 
 
Figure 13: Circuit Diagram of PIC controller with DC and Servo 
Motor 
VI. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION 
A. Results 
The Postal Automation System was tested with different 
envelops for different localities. The system was tested for 
efficient running for different pincode and also envelops 
placed at different orientations. The output is obtained as 
shown on Command Window of MATLAB as shown in 
figure 14. 
 
Figure 14:- Output in MATLAB 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
126 
 
The approximate time consumed is about 4 seconds by 
MATLAB and the complete time consumed is less than 7 
seconds so that the mails can be sorted on an average of 
500 to 800 mails per hour depending on the feeder. The 
model works on the principle of Optical Character 
Recognition hence the requirement of barcodes or RFID 
tags are not needed. Depending on the zip code detected by 
MATLAB, the servo motor gets actuated by PIC 18F452 to 
rotate the collection tray to the required collection box. 
 
Figure 14(b):- Mail Sorting in Collection Unit 
We have also found out the exact pulse width of the 
servo motor for its positioning to a particular value. The 
values for the pulse width and its corresponding angle is 
mentioned in Table I. 
TABLE I 
 Positive Pulse Width For Each Degree Of Motion Of Servo Motor 
Angle (in   
degrees) 
Pulse width 
(in ms) 
Angle ( in 
degrees) 
Pulse width 
(in ms) 
0 0.44 100 1.44 
10 0.55 110 1.545 
20 0.64 120 1.65 
30 0.74 130 1.76 
40 0.84 140 1.86 
50 0.93 150 1.97 
60 1.02 160 2.08 
70 1.12 170 2.18 
80 1.23 180 2.28 
90 1.33   
 
 
B. Conclusion 
Application of modern control mechanism on mail 
sorting system may be an efficient approach of reducing the 
delays and mismanagements, experienced in our traditional 
postal system. Since the existing postal system is time 
consuming and prone to human errors, it is high time that 
the Indian Postal Department is upgraded to new 
technology as soon as possible. Adoption of the evolving 
technology will find India a place in the list of fast 
developing countries, with a highly efficient and fast postal 
system in India. 
Hence Postal Automation System for Mail Sorting is the 
first step towards such technological advancement. „Mail 
Sorter using LABVIEW‟ segregates printed letters on zonal 
division basis by using the highly advanced technology of 
OCR and software MATLAB powered by MATHWORKS. 
It is gaining popularity because of its flexibility in 
programming approach and hardware simulation. This 
method is highly efficient in sorting printed mails. 
Hardware that comprises this project is extremely sturdy, 
occupies very little space and is one time investment that 
provides invaluable future returns. Thus we have devised 
an efficient and smart mail sorting machine using OCR and 
MATLAB technology along with a well-equipped and 
modernized hardware structure consisting of Sliding Unit, 
Conveyor belt and Collection Unit. Integration of above 
software and hardware provides us with the “Postal 
Automation System for Mail Sorting”. 
The major importance and advantage of this system is 
that it is small and compact and space occupied by the 
setup is very less of few meters square feet, unlike the 
existing automatic sorting machines. This also avoids 
human intervention since the sorting is done by the 
program, thus preventing damages to the human eye. It also 
errors like misreading the pincode, misplacing the letters 
are impossible. The major constraint is time which is 
overcome using this as machine oriented tasks are always 
fast, faster than the man can think of. Unlike the bar code 
method, there is no 2-step procedure: bar code generation 
and sorting according to the generated bar code are the 2 
steps in bar code process, which is absent in this operation. 
Any color envelope can be used: unlike the bar code 
method, envelope color requirement is not an issue. 
VII. FUTURE SCOPE 
Automatic mail sorting operation opens a wide scope for 
future development. The technique can be extended to read 
handwritten mails using neural networks and fuzzy logic.  
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 3, March 2015) 
127 
 
Owing to the fact that every individual in the world has 
unique handwriting, setting the character training for every 
handwriting is beyond our imagination. Neural network 
and fuzzy logic works on artificial intelligence. The 
algorithm behind this will identify any type of handwriting. 
So this method can be extended from printed official letters 
to any handwritten unofficial letters. If trained further, 
fuzzy logic can help identify and read different languages 
so that language will not be a barrier in receiving the 
messages from the loved ones. 
One can further automate, variable masks by installing 
and programming variable ROI by scanning. Further 
sorting can be carried out up local district and main road 
level by updating and widening the data base. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Mani,  Nallasamy,  Srinivasan,  B.,  "Application  of artificial  neural  
network model for optical character recognition," Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 1997. Computational Cybernetics and Simulation., 
1997 IEEE International Conference on , vol.3, no., pp.2517,2520 
vol.3, 12-15 Oct 1997, doi: 10.1109/ICSMC.1997.635312. 
[2] Mi-Ae Ko, Young-Mo Kim, "A simple OCR method from strong 
perspective view," Information Theory, 2004. ISIT 2004.  
Proceedings. International Symposium on , vol., no., pp.235,240, 13-
15 Oct. 2004, doi: 10.1109/AIPR.2004.8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3] Kabir, E., Downton, A.C., Birch, R., "Recognition and verification 
of postcodes in handwritten and hand-printed addresses," Pattern 
Recognition, 1990. Proceedings. 10th International Conference on , 
vol.i, no., pp.469,473 vol.1, 16-21 Jun 1990, doi: 
10.1109/ICPR.1990.118148 
[4] Ahmadi, A., Ritonga, M.A., Abedin, M.A., Mattausch, H.J., Koide, 
T., "A Learning OCR System Using Short/Long-term Memory 
Approach and Hardware Implementation in FPGA," Evolutionary 
Computation, 2006. CEC 2006. IEEE Congress on , vol., no., 
pp.687,693, 0-0 0, doi: 10.1109/CEC.2006.1688378 
[5] Cannon,  M.,  Fugate,  M.,  Hush,  D.R.,  Scovel,  C.,  "Selecting  a  
restoration technique to minimize OCR error," Neural Networks, 
IEEE Transactions on , vol.14, no.3, pp.478,490, May 2003, doi: 
10.1109/TNN.2003.811711 
[6] Alon,  Jonathan,  Athitsos,  V.,  Sclaroff,  S.,  "Online  and  offline  
character recognition using alignment to prototypes," Document 
Analysis and Recognition, 2005. Proceedings. Eighth International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.839,843 Vol. 2, 29 Aug.-1 Sept. 2005, 
doi: 10.1109/ICDAR.2005.177 
[7] Kavallieratou, E., Stamatatos, S., Antonopoulou, H., "Machine-
printed from handwritten text discrimination," Frontiers in 
Handwriting Recognition, 2004. IWFHR-9 2004. Ninth International 
Workshop on , vol., no., pp.312,316, 26-29 Oct. 2004, doi: 
10.1109/IWFHR.2004.65 
