© Oxford University Press 2002 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 181
1 ‘Theory’
When Mosteller and Wallace published their widely acknowledged Infer-
ence and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist in 1964, there was little
doubt in their minds as to what constituted an author. Either Hamilton 
or Madison or Jay was the author of the disputed Federalist Papers with
which they were concerned. Madison was fingered as the true author of
papers Nos 49–58, 62, and 63, with a possible question mark hanging over
No. 55.
In 1968, however, Roland Barthes proclaimed the death of the author
in an essay of that name. The author’s death entailed the birth of ‘reader-
response’ for which the very nature of authorship was problematical
Barthes (1999).
In an essay the following year entitled ‘What is an author?’, Michel
Foucault declared that the author was a ‘certain functional principal 
by which, in our culture, one limits, excludes, and chooses’ (Foucault, 
1969). In other words, authorship was a social construct assigned texts 
by authenticating agencies made up of editors, producers, publishers,
printers, and ultimately purchasing readers. As such, the author is seen 
as distinct from the writer who physically put words on paper. (See
‘authorship’ and ‘ascription’ in Section 2.)
The distinction may be partly illustrated in the context of celebrity
pronouncements. In an article entitled ‘Nobody’s words are now their
own’, Stan Hey (2001) describes the way in which speeches, including
Correspondence:
Thomas Merriam, 
35 Richmond Road, 
Basingstoke RG21 5NX, UK.
E-mail:
tom@merriam.freeserve.co.uk
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow
of Postmodernism
Thomas Merriam
Basingstoke, UK
Abstract
Determination of authorship, using methods such as those of Mosteller and
Wallace, has been obliquely criticized by literary scholars for years. However,
the most radical critique of these methods has, under the umbrella term ‘theory’,
emerged since the 1960s in the writings of Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida.
Thanks to their influence, authorship attribution is now distinguished from
authorship ascription with only the latter applying to literary and linguistic
computing. Various criticisms are examined in detail. Useful as these criticisms
are, the philosophical roots of the postmodernist critiques are destructive of any
attempt to discover who wrote what.
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 181
182 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
even apparent off-the-cuff ripostes, are commonly pre-fabricated by teams
of commissioned speechwriters. The authorial ‘personality’ associated
with the words and thoughts expressed is, in effect, the brand-name by
which they are identified and find their intended lodging place in the
popular mind. The ghost writers are not authors because their words have
no ‘significance’ outside connection with the celebrities whose names are
known.
Authorship becomes branding, and branding is a vital part of market-
ing.1 In the process of branding, however, the author, mirroring the
unseen ghost writers lurking in the wings, assumes a ghostly identity,
dissociated from his or her ‘own’ spoken or written words.
However, the most outlandish element of this summer’s fall-out
between the English rugby player Austin Healey and the manage-
ment of the British Lions was not just the timing of his written
criticisms, released on the morning of the crucial test match against
Australia. Nor was it the fact that they were ghostwritten. What was
weird, and alarming, was that he had not bothered to check what
the ghost had put into his mouth (Hey, 2001).
Such an eventuality was not foreseen by Mosteller and Wallace.
Madison’s words could have been Hamilton’s thoughts and vice versa,
thus making the distinction between the two pointless. Furthermore, 
if the intentions of either author, according to Jacques Derrida, can be
deconstructed in such a way as to lead to self-contradiction, the matter of
whether Madison wrote the disputed Federalist Papers is both irrelevant
and detrimental to an emancipated reading of the entire Federalist col-
lection.
Since the late 1960s, the academic study of English literature has been
influenced by the ideas of Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida.
2 Implications of ‘Theory’ with Respect to
Shakespearean Authorship
One scholar has suggested that ‘whereas ascription is finally a matter of
historical fact (and therefore often frustratingly indeterminate), author-
ship can become an attributed quality, awarded most readily to those plays
that conform to the current critical construction of the writer in question’
(italics mine).2 According to this view, the authorship of a Shakespeare
play is determined by its conformity to the construction of what charac-
terizes Shakespeare in the eyes of the critical consensus of the day.3
Unstated are the determinants of current critical consensus, their
methodological procedures and criteria, the relationship between ‘attrib-
ution’ and ‘ascription’ (with attention to the role played by external evi-
dence), the breadth and independence of agreement required for an
attributed construction to attain the status of being well justified, and an
acknowledgement of the concomitant relativism of the notion of author-
ship.4 Consensus entails intersubjective agreement. Such agreement is 
1 Displayed on the rear window
of a contemporary car are the
words, ‘It’s a Škoda. Honest’;
the controlling engineering is
Volkswagen’s.
2 Seminar Discussion Paper,
Ascription uncertain, 2001
3 In the words of one authority,
‘the bardbiz construct’.
4 Writing in the early twentieth
century, C. F. Tucker Brooke
said that within the
Shakespeare scenes in The Two
Noble Kinsmen there was ‘no
spark of psychological insight
or philosophy of life which can
in sober moments be thought
either worthy of the mature
Shakespeare or even suggestive
of him’ (Brooke, 1908). In
terms of the quotation above,
the attribution of authorship
and therefore the authorship
of the play have changed in the
course of the twentieth
century, as The Two Noble
Kinsmen is now regarded as
partly by Shakespeare.
T. Merriam
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 182
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 183
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow of Postmodernism
a far cry from Samuel Schoenbaum’s statement that: ‘Intuitions, con-
victions, and subjective judgments generally, carry no weight as evidence’
(in authorship attribution) (Schoenbaum, 1966).
Ascription is seen as ancillary to attribution.5 It is implied that, like the
quicksand of historical fact with which it is engaged, ascription is for all
practical intents and purposes indeterminate, and must be regulated by
‘the current critical construction of the writer in question’.
‘The requirement of intersubjectivity’, according to one of the 
most influential of contemporary philosophers, . . ., ‘is what makes
science objective.’ This means, I suppose, that the criteria of experi-
mental demonstration by which scientific opinions are validated
have no ultimate justification except that scientists agree to accept
them. But how wide does agreement have to be before an opinion
qualifies as objective? (Fernandez-Armesto, 1997, p. 221, quoting
Quine, 1992).
What Quine says of science is pertinent to attribution and ascription. It
could read in present context: ‘Intersubjective agreement as to what
constitutes an author, is what accords objectivity to ascriptions in agree-
ment with that construction.’
The obverse is that arguments for a researcher’s ascriptions are con-
structed rationalizations for previously arrived at, pejoratively personal
convictions, lacking justification unless in accord with the intersubjective
agreements of the day. Hence the caveat: ‘Many difficulties in ascription
studies arise from the desire to rationalize backwards from the conviction
of authorship towards the construction of arguments for ascription.’
In this view, ascription and attribution are constructions alike, assured
of objectivity only when harmonizing with the greater construct of what
constitutes an author. In effect, there is and can be no objective truth in
the ordinary sense of the word. All that is, vis-à-vis texts, is subjective
construction. As previously stated, the author is ‘a certain functional
principle by which, in our culture, one limits, excludes, and chooses’
(Foucault, 1969). Unlike Quine (and Richard Rorty), however, Foucault
does not approve of the construction of the ‘functional principle’ of
authorship. He sees it as a collective pretence, geared to a supporting
power structure. For him the edifice of authorship, attribution, and
ascription is ripe for deconstruction.
When objectivity becomes an attributed quality, deconstruction is
only a matter of time.
As an illustration of how attribution, distanced from ascription and
historical fact, can be ‘awarded most readily to those plays that conform to
the current critical construction of the writer in question’, the editor of
the 3rd Arden Henry VIII writes,
The play is Shakespeare’s in the sense that it has, at least since the
publication of the First Folio, been read, performed and witnessed
in a Shakespearean context, with all the professional, cultural and
political implications of that context, and in the sense that it
5 The distinction between
ascription and attribution
appears to parallel a
distinction made by Foucault
between the literal act of
writing on paper and
‘authorship’ as a cultural
construct. The difference in
meaning between attribution
and ascription has no
historical lexical basis in
English.
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 183
184 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
engages with, and has a particular place among, the other plays of
the Shakespeare canon (McMullan, 2000, p. 198).
No mention of whether Shakespeare actually wrote the play. The
support of ‘all the professional, cultural and political implications’ of 
the Shakespearean context is the essential validation of the attribution. In
Foucault’s eyes, on the other hand, it would have evidenced the falsifying
influence of the power elite. McMullan goes on to consider Fletcher as
collaborator.
It is Shakespeare and Fletcher’s, on the other hand, (as the title page
of this edition claims), in the sense that a certain amount of 
evidence, mainly circumstantial, strongly suggests that, contrary to
the impression given by its inclusion in the First Folio, the play 
was the product of two playwrights, William Shakespeare and John
Fletcher, working together, and that to treat the play as a col-
laboration in this restricted sense is to complicate its canonic status
in a potentially productive manner (McMullan, 2000, p. 198).
It is strange that ‘a certain amount of evidence, mainly circumstantial’
can strongly suggest an attribution. In less auspicious circumstances, such
an argument for attribution would be rejected.
It is also strange that entertaining the notion of a Shakespeare–Fletcher
collaboration, in the restricted sense of its being the product of Shake-
speare and Fletcher working together (as opposed to the non-restricted
sense, presumably Shakespeare and another playwright), complicates the
play’s canonic status (as opposed to the play’s authorship) in such a way
that the manner of doing so is potentially (as opposed to actually) more
productive. Was Fletcher essential to the manner alone? Had another
collaborator been hypothesized, would the manner of complicating the
play’s canonic status have been potentially unproductive? And how would
one know?
One would, of course, not know. ‘To treat the play as a collaboration in
this restricted sense is to complicate its canonic status in a potentially
productive manner’ deconstructs what it appears to construct. It effect-
ively undermines the awarding of authorship ‘to those plays that conform
to the current critical construction of the writer in question’. It makes
sense as a partial disclaimer of editorial responsibility or ‘intentionality’
for the title page’s claim, William Shakespeare and John Fletcher. The
editor, like the author, is an anonymous murmur (Foucault, 1969). None
the less, the 3rd Arden title page displays the editor’s name in upper case
letters and in a font larger than the lower case of the authors, implying that
the editor is of greater consequence than the authors.6
A discussion of authorship today should acknowledge Quine and
Foucault, and their effective dismissal of experimental determination of
authorship. According to Quine, the search ‘for responsible modes 
of argument for ascription’ is a search for constructs in agreement with
prior constructs—an effort resulting only in superfluous rationalizations.
According to Foucault, the endeavour is not only redundant, but motiv-
6 This contrasts with the New
Penguin, the Signet, and the
Oxford Shakespeare, in which
the playwrights’ names are
larger than the editors’.
T. Merriam
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 184
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 185
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow of Postmodernism
ated in the interests of repression and falsity. Within the framework of
such philosophical positions, any attempt to find empirical evidence for
writer or composer ascription is in the correct parlance, ‘naive’.
This is clear and yet is obscured by critics of ‘ascription’ maintaining
that their real objections are restricted to its claims of certainty. An editor
has written,
since ascription is finally and objectively impossible (you can never
know, though most of the time you can have a damn good idea, who
the playwright was), what is left is attribution, which is by definition
provisional and incomplete. I fear that you and I will never agree on
this, because I have a sense that you believe your attributional
methods can ‘definitely’ determine who wrote what. I don’t think
they, or any other attributional method, can do that.7
3 Literary and Linguistic Computing
Linguistic and literary computing in authorship studies has travelled a
separate road. Determination of authorship by these means is often seen
as a forensic science, carrying with it the positivist connotations of applied
mathematics and computer science. These have conveyed to literary
critics the idea that computer authorship determination aspires to the
certainty that characterized nineteenth-century science. The subtitle of 
A. Q. Morton’s Literary Detection is How to Prove Authorship and Fraud 
in Literature and Documents (Morton, 1978) Irrespective of its logical
impossibility, the aspiration to prove authorship appeared to followers of
Barthes and Foucault as sufficiently naive as to discredit the whole enter-
prise.
For the most part, quarantine has been observed between the factual
emphasis of computational ascription, and postmodernist considerations
of authorship attribution. They belong to separately demarcated aca-
demic disciplines.
But not entirely.
4 Some Literary Objections
Who wrote Shakespeare? What did Shakespeare write? These ques-
tions are seldom asked in English Departments these days. They are
treated with the same kind of bristly nervousness that science
departments show toward the UFO Question. Outside English
Departments, however, they remain an obsession (Elliott and
Valenza, 1996).
If the objections of literary ‘theory’ towards Shakespeare attribution by
computer constitute an increasingly influential critique, more practical
and mundane objections by literary scholars have hitherto held sway.
Pride of place goes to the scholars’ distaste for the obsessiveness that
characterizes advocates of Francis Bacon, and, more recently, the Earl of
Oxford. Although claims for Bacon and the Earl of Oxford as Shakespeare
7 In private correspondence
with the author. Attribution
pending, 2001
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 185
186 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
have not applied the techniques of Mosteller and Wallace (or Burroughs),
the question of what Shakespeare wrote in the eyes of literary scholars has
been conflated with that of who was Shakespeare—to the former’s
disadvantage.
The definitive academic retort to Shakespeare obsessions was Samuel
Schoenbaum’s Shakespeare’s Lives. The author demolished a succession of
enthusiasts dedicated to their own perceptions of Shakespeare’s identity.
If they were not amateurs before Schoenbaum turned his attentions to
them, they were indelibly marked as such by the time he had finished. As
Distinguished Professor of Renaissance Studies, Schoenbaum spoke for
the professorate in saying that only professionals could be trusted to
handle sanely the facts about William Shakespeare.
In his Internal Evidence and Elizabethan Dramatic Authorship, 
Schoenbaum looked at several hundred attributional studies, which he
pronounced the products of ‘the bedlamite antics of the wildmen’
(Schoenbaum, 1966, p. 107). The tone of Schoenbaum’s approach to
Shakespeare attribution is apparent in his eight principles of attribution:
(1) External evidence cannot be ignored, no matter how incon-
venient such evidence may be for the theories of the investigator.
(2) If stylistic criteria are to have any meaning, the play must be
written in a style.
(3) The investigator must always work with the most reliable texts,
preferably directly with the early prints or manuscripts.
(4) Textual analysis logically precedes stylistic analysis.
(5) Plays of which all the early printed or manuscript texts are
continuously defective offer no fit quarries for evidence and are no
fit subjects for canonical investigation.
(6) For any author proposed, a reasonable amount of unchallenged
dramatic writing, apart from collaboration must be extant.
(7) Intuitions, convictions, and subjective judgments generally,
carry no weight as evidence.
(8) Whenever possible, stylistic evidence should be supported by
bibliographic evidence (Schoenbaum, 1966)
Schoenbaum’s preference was for external textual and bibliographic
evidence over internal evidence of the sort used by Mosteller and Wallace.
Principle 2 speaks of style as a matter of fact, without need of clarification.
Principle 7 would favour, only as a last resort, the use of word counts
and statistical arguments when solid external evidence is missing.
Schoenbaum’s position was ‘modernist’ in its preference for positivist
fact. His own biography of Shakespeare was significantly subtitled ‘A
Documentary Life’.
Notable among Schoenbaum’s grounds for discrediting internal evi-
dence was the previously widespread use of ‘parallel passages’ with which
to attribute authorship.
Trifles light as air are, to the zealous, confirmations strong as proofs
of holy writ. Among such trifles few are more airy or more exhil-
T. Merriam
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 186
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 187
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow of Postmodernism
arating than isolated parallels—salmons in both, or Coventrys and
Albermarles in both, or caudles or amorous ditties in both, or hearts
with bended knees in both (Fogel, 1966).
For many scholars, internal evidence for Shakespeare attribution was
lastingly compromised by the use of parallel passages. A recent prac-
titioner of the method is Eric Sams in Shakespeare’s Edmund Ironside and
Shakespeare’s Edward III.
With regard to so-called stylometry, one scholar expressed an objec-
tion thus:
The strength of stylometric analysis lies in its speed and its power
over large quantities of material (its development has depended on
the ability of computers to handle those quantities); its weakness, in
a much-voiced criticism, is that it doesn’t know what it is counting
(Proudfoot, 2001).
The origin of this criticism lies in the comment by Furbank and Owen
that stylometry entailed the ‘spectre of the meaningless’. The pattern of
author-discriminating word counts had little or no basis in an under-
standing of ‘the nature of the object being measured’. It was a metric and
nothing else.
Hope (1994) cited a quotation from A. Q. Morton from which Fur-
bank and Owen’s ‘spectre of the meaningless’ sprang:
The question which now arises naturally is, if it is not the gram-
matical, linguistic, or philological role of words which is being
investigated, what is it that is being studied? To this reasonable
request the only reasonable reply is that we do not know (Morton,
1978).
Hope did not extend the quotation to include Morton’s apologia:
fingerprinting itself was developed as a method of identification a century
before the discovery of DNA’s underpinning of the uniqueness of finger-
prints. Fingerprinting at first was ridiculed because it was unable to
explain why it worked.
Although unproven, the weight of evidence suggests that DNA coding
for persons other than identical twins is unique. This assumption has led,
besides much else, to a greater number of prison releases on grounds of
miscarriage of justice than any other forensic method. Yet the rationale of
DNA patterning is not yet fully understood.
Morton’s disclaimer in not knowing ‘what it is that is being studied’
was arguably misconstrued (‘much-voiced criticism’) as a declaration
that stylometric analysis did not know what it was counting. In the ordin-
ary sense of the word, Mosteller and Wallace knew what they were
counting.
On the other hand, the later development of Morton’s ‘Q-sum’
method has confirmed suspicions of literary critics that the ‘black box’ of
authorship ascription had been carried to an extreme.
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 187
188 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
5 More Generalized Critiques
Interdisciplinary misconceptions are inevitable. What is of interest here is
that the misconceptions by literary scholars generally avoid specific
referencing in their criticisms of non-traditional methods of attribution/
ascription.
As I pointed out in my review of Jonathan Hope’s pioneering essay
in socio-historical linguistics, The Authorship of Shakespeare’s Plays
(TLS, December 22, 1995), the use of high-powered computer
programmes to produce quantitative evidence of such things as the
frequency of occurrence of selected words, of the percentage of four
letter words, depending as it does on an atomistic notion of style,
has produced bewilderingly conflicting results (Vickers, 1996)
Hope’s summary of his authorship findings pertain to the following
plays: Henry VIII, The Two Noble Kinsmen, Double Falsehood, Timon of
Athens, Pericles, The London Prodigal, Thomas, Lord Cromwell, Sir John
Oldcastle, The Puritan, A Yorkshire Tragedy, Locrine, Arden of Faversham,
The Birth of Merlin, Edward III, Edmond Ironside, and Sir Thomas More
(Hope, 1994).
Of the sixteen plays that Hope includes in his summary, I have looked
at the following fourteen with quantitative methods, using the Micro-
Oxford Concordance Programme of 1988: Henry VIII, The Two Noble
Kinsmen, Double Falsehood, Timon of Athens, Pericles, The London
Prodigal, Sir John Oldcastle, The Puritan, A Yorkshire Tragedy, Locrine,
Arden of Faversham, Edward III, Edmond Ironside, and Sir Thomas More.
In Tables 1 and 2, entire agreement is rated as 1.0, entire disagreement
as zero. Uncertainty as to agreement or disagreement is rated as 0.5.
Of the fourteen plays, there are two conflicting results (zero), Arden of
Faversham and Edmund Ironside. (For Pericles the divergence concerns
mainly Acts I and II.) With Edmund Ironside, the consensus of scholarly
opinion favours non-Shakespearean authorship, with Donald Foster
committing himself to a Greene attribution.
T. Merriam
Table 1 Comparison of Hope’s and Merriam’s authorship ascriptions
Play Hope’s verdict Merriam’s verdict Agreement rating
Henry VIII Shakespeare–Fletcher Shakespeare–Fletcher 1.0
TNK Shakespeare–Fletcher Shakespeare–Fletcher 1.0
Double Falsehood Shakespeare–Fletcher? Shakespeare–Fletcher 0.8
Timon of Athens Shakespeare–Middleton? Shakespeare–Middleton 0.8
Pericles Shakespeare–Wilkins Shakespeare(?) 0.6
London Prodigal Fletcher–Another? Fletcher 0.7
Sir John Oldcastle More than one hand Munday and others 0.9
The Puritan Middleton? Middleton 0.9
A Yorkshire Tragedy Middleton? Middleton 0.9
Locrine Marlowe? Marlowe 0.8
Arden of Faversham Inconclusive Kyd? 0
Edward III Shakespeare–Another? Marlowe–Shakespeare 0.7
Edmund Ironside Shakespeare? Greene? 0
Sir Thomas More Another–Shakespeare? Shakespeare? 0.5
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 188
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 189
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow of Postmodernism
The comparisons may appear confusing at first sight. If, however, the
degrees of agreement are taken into consideration (9.6/14  0.69), agree-
ment is greater than disagreement (0.69  0.5). ‘Bewilderingly conflicting
results’ is an exaggeration for the failure of total agreement.
In their extensive analysis of the literature connected with the Shake-
speare claimants, Elliott and Valenza excluded several works belonging to
the Shakespeare canon as not solely written by Shakespeare. They were: 
1 Henry VI, 3 Henry VI, Titus Andronicus, Timon of Athens, Pericles I & II,
Henry VIII, The Two Noble Kinsmen, and Sir Thomas More (Hand D).
Table 2 indicates comparisons similar to those of Table 1.
There is one entirely conflicting result, Sir Thomas More (D). Scholarly
consensus would favour my finding over Elliott and Valenza’s. The other
conflicting result is that for Pericles I & II; here scholarly consensus would
favour Elliott and Valenza (Wells et al., 1987). The total agreement score is
5.5. The average score is 5.5/8 or 0.69, coincidentally the same as in Table 1.
Agreement is greater than disagreement, although short of being total. My
interpretation of the complaint as to ‘bewilderingly conflicting results’ is
that it expresses an assumed basic requirement for the acceptance of
‘quantitative evidence’ . . . ‘depending as it does on an atomistic notion of
style’ by literary scholars—namely absolute and entire agreement between
‘statisticians’.
6 Catch 22
A further general criticism levelled at statistical methods of authorship
determination is that they are incomprehensible in published form.
But the investigation of authorship of disputed and apocryphal
works relies increasingly on statistical tests that take their exponents
into the realms of higher mathematics. Their works are packed with
tables, charts and statistical analysis which many of those most
interested in the works investigated have neither the inclination nor
even the intellectual ability to understand, let alone to assess (Wells,
1996).
Having been accused of writing incomprehensibly, I appreciate the
cogency of this criticism, coming as it does from an intelligent and highly
experienced Shakespeare editor.
Table 2 Comparison of Elliott and Valenza’s and Merriam’s ascriptions
Play Elliott and Valenza’s Merriam’s Agreement
verdict verdict rating
1 Henry VI Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Others 1
3 Henry VI Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Marlowe 0.9
Titus Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Marlowe? 0.8
Timon Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Middleton 0.9
Pericles I & II Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare? 0.1
Henry VIII Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Fletcher 0.9
Two Noble Kinsmen Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare–Fletcher 0.9
More (D) Not all Shakespeare Shakespeare 0
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 189
190 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
It must be said that Mosteller and Wallace were not concerned to make
their work comprehensible to historians knowledgeable with and inter-
ested in the Federalist Papers. Their purpose was to vindicate theoretical
Bayesian statistics. The documentary material was, in a sense, canon
fodder with which to furnish their study. Had the issue of whether Hami-
lton or Madison wrote the disputed papers been of vital interest to the
citizens of the USA, the study would have been tainted by special interests,
rendering it of doubtful use as an unbiased test-bed for theoretical
statistics.
In many ways Professor Wells’ criticism is unanswerable. If an analysis
is painstaking and accurate, it will be too lengthy for the non-specialist to
assimilate within the limits of the concentration and understanding—to
say nothing of commercial viability.
Paradoxically, for purposes of concise expression a presentation may
at the same time have to gloss over various matters as understood which
cannot be assumed as part of a general background knowledge. Such
omissions would have to be fully explained for a general readership, and
this would lengthen an article in such as way as to alienate the non-literary
specialist for whom the explanation is not needed.
This Catch 22 aspect of authorship ascription is illustrated in the words
of a respected Shakespeare editor. In attempting to summarize Elliott and
Valenza’s ascriptive study of Elizabethan and Jacobean drama, he wrote:
Of course, the results as formally presented are less crude and more
carefully qualified than my tabloid reduction suggests. Those
results, published in Computers and the Humanities in 1996, were
simple . . .
Their article bore the felicitous title ‘And Then There Were
None’. Though undogmatic about the significance of their results
and open to rejection by better methodology, Elliott and Valenza
reasonably concluded:
It is hard now to believe either that [Shakespeare] could have
been a committee, or that any claimant’s poem or corpus, or any
Apocrypha poem or play, or any play from the Dubitanda, now
augmented by 3H6 and Titus Andronicus, could have been written
by him solo.
They did not claim equal confidence in their results for texts 
of collaborative authorship. Their criteria admitted the Jacobean
Henry VIII and Timon of Athens, including the sections attributed
to Fletcher and Middleton, but rejected overall Shakespearean
authorship of two much disputed early plays. They conceded that
this outcome might result from something not being ‘quite right’,
either in the conventional authorship divisions or in their own tests
(Proudfoot, 2001, p. 91).
Although the summary is eminently understandable and is exemplary
in its conciseness, it achieves clarity at the expense of accuracy. Without
the essential of defining Elliott and Valenza’s ‘Dubitanda’ in relation to
the commonly understood Shakespeare canon, the reader is led to believe
T. Merriam
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 190
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002 191
Linguistic Computing in the Shadow of Postmodernism
that their study failed to exclude Henry VIII and Timon, which, as shown
above, it did.
That something might not be ‘quite right’ more correctly refers to
Elliott and Valenza’s puzzlement over the fact that parts of Timon, Henry
VIII and Two Noble Kinsmen, designated as Shakespearean, were excluded
rather than included by their tests (Elliott and Valenza, 1996, p. 195).
These confusions ironically confirm Vickers’ observation of ‘bewilder-
ingly conflicting results’.
What is instructive here is not that the author of the summary got it
wrong,8 but that he was the only literary Shakespearean to engage with the
substance of quantitative ascriptive analysis. In so doing, he highlighted
the Catch 22 aspect of such studies, which characterizes the difficulty,
familiar in journalism, that the priority given to clear and economical
presentation conflicts with the requirement of accurate statement.
7 Conclusion
The central issue is that of the validity of the search for objective truth in
the matter of authorship ascription/attribution. Postmodernist critiques
play a valuable role in counteracting the overconfidence of positivist
attempts at ‘proving authorship’. As do the literary critiques seen above.
None the less, the underlying subjectivism of modern philosophy is
ultimately corrosive of the engagement of reason with everything—not
merely authorship ascription/attribution. Reason, by its intrinsic nature,
requires a recognized benchmark of meta-linguistic reality. ‘Whoever
appeals to reason purports to discover a source of authority within
himself that is not merely personal, or societal, but universal—and 
that should persuade others who are willing to listen to it’ (Nagel, 1997).
The currents and cross-currents of philosophical ‘idealism’ have deeply
influenced the study of literature in a direction opposed to the ‘naive
realism’ of the majority of mankind.
Real authors exist and have real intentions, no matter how often 
their traces have been mediated, diluted, and obscured in the process 
of transmission, no matter how contradictory their original expression,
and no matter how great the creative freedom on the part of the reader 
to interpret them. ‘Theory’s’ prior belief that ‘the author is dead’ pre-
determines the indeterminacy of authorial identity, and provides its own
self-fulfilling prophecy. Unless this feature is taken into account, mis-
understandings like those sketched above are relegated to the purely
personal level where little progress can be made.
References
Barthes, R. (1999). The death of an author. In: Lodge, D. and Woods, N. (eds),
Modern Criticism and Theory: a Reader. Harlow: Longman.
Brooke, C. F. (1908). The Shakespeare Apocrypha. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. xi–xiv.
8 The passage has been corrected
in the second printing.
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 191
192 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2002
Elliott, W. E. Y. and Valenza, R. (1996). And then there were none: winnowing the
Shakespeare claimants. Computers and the Humanities, 30: 191–245.
Fernandez-Armesto, F. (1997). The Truth: a History. London: Bantam, p. 221.
Fogel, E. G. (1966). Salmons in both, or some caveats for canonical scholars. In
Fogel, D. and Fogel, E. G. (eds), Evidence for Authorship: Essays on Problems of
Attribution. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, p. 100.
Foucault, M. (1969). What is an author? In Harari, J. V. (ed.), Textual Strategies:
Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
pp. 141–60.
Hey, S. (2001). Nobody’s words are now their own. The Independent Monday
Review, 22 October 2001, 5.
Hope, J. (1994). The Authorship of Shakespeare’s Plays: a Socio-linguistic Study.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 150–5.
McMullan, G. (ed.) (2000). King Henry VIII (All is True). William Shakespeare.
London: Arden Shakespeare, pp. 180 and 198.
Morton, A. Q. (1978). Literary Detection: How to Prove Authorship and Fraud in
Literature and Documents. London: Bowker, p. 15.
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed Authorship.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Nagel, T. (1997). The Last Word. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 3–4.
Proudfoot, R. (2001). Shakespeare: Text, Stage & Canon. London: Arden Shake-
speare, pp. 91 and 93.
Quine, W. V. (1992). The Pursuit of Truth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Schoenbaum, S. (1966). Internal Evidence and Elizabethan Dramatic Authorship.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, pp. 107 and 162–83.
Vickers, B. (1996). Whose thumbprints. Times Literary Supplement, 4849: 16.
Wells, S. (1996). In memory of Master William Peter. Times Literary Supplement,
4843: 28.
Wells, S. and G. Taylor, with J. Jowett and W. Montgomery (1987). William
Shakespeare: a Textual Study. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
T. Merriam
Lit&Ling 17/2 pp.181-192 Final  29/10/02 3:05 pm  Page 192
