Chapter 35
The Affects of Demographics Differentiations
on Authorship Identification
Haytham Mohtasseb and Amr Ahmed
Abstract There is lots of previous studies concern the language difference in text
regarding the demographics attribute. This investigation is different by presenting a
new question: is male style more consistent than female or the opposite? Further-
more, we study the style differentiation according to age. Hence, this investigation
presents a novel analysis of the proposed problem by applying authorship identifica-
tion across each category and comparing the identification accuracy between them.
We select personal blogs or diaries, which are different from other types of text such
as essays, emails, or articles based on the text properties. The investigation utilizes
couple of intuitive feature sets and studies various parameters that affect the identi-
fication performance. The results and evaluation show that the utilized features are
compact while their performance is highly comparable with other larger feature sets.
The analysis also confirmed the usefulness of the common users’ classifier, based
on common demographics attributes, in improving the performance for the author
identification task.
Keywords Web mining  information extraction  psycholinguistic  machine
learning  authorship identification  demographics differentiation
35.1 Introduction
Blogs are one of the most popular forms of users’ contribution to the web contents.
There are many categorizations of blogs which are differing in the content, publish-
ing methodology, and even in the type of readers. Personal blog, or online diary, is
the most famous category in which the blogger expresses his feelings, show creativ-
ity, and communicate with other people faster than emails or any other media. In
addition, there are some targeted or focused blogs which focus on a specific subject
H. Mohtasseb () and A. Ahmed
School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, Brayford Pool, Lincoln, LN1 1LH, UK
e-mail: hmohtasseb@lincoln.ac.uk; aahmed@lincoln.ac.uk
S.-I. Ao and L. Gelman (eds.), Electronic Engineering and Computing Technology,
Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 60, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-8776-8 35,
c Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010
409
410 H. Mohtasseb and A. Ahmed
such as news blogs, political blogs, and educational blogs. Our research is focused
on the personal blogs category. We selected one of the famous personal blog sites,
namely the “LiveJournal”1. LiveJournal is a free personal blog website forming a
community on the internet that contains millions of users publishing their own on-
going personal diaries.
The misuse of online messaging is getting increased as the users could be anony-
mous and hidden in the cyberspace. This encourages the harmful behavior and
publishing illegal contents. The need to authenticate those texts is being more im-
portant and raises the call for new techniques that can capture the identity regardless
the IP address or any other information that could be not true. Authorship identifi-
cation is a good solution and able to discover the author of anonymous message via
modeling the stylistic attributes of previous known messages of the author.
Authorship identification in blogs has various motivations and challenges. Iden-
tifying the author of anonymous blog posts could be useful in various applications.
This includes online security where it is valuable to extract the patterns of authors
who may participate in different blog sites with different identities. However, the
task has its associated challenges. The large number of authors is one of the key
factors in authorship identification. In particular, scaling existing solutions with the
huge, and increasing, number of authors is a challenge. Moreover, there are many
factors that have important roles and affect the performance of identification process
such as the text length, the number of posts per author, and the type of authors.
In this study, we address the above issues by applying authorship identification
on online diaries corpus using a different type of linguistic features and analyze the
affects of demographics attributes on the identification results. The remainder of the
chapter is organized as follows. In the next section, we review the existing related
work in authorship identification. The following section describes the utilized fea-
ture sets. Our main work follows in Section 35.4, with the proposed framework and
experiments. Results and discussions come next. Finally, the chapter is concluded,
and future work is also highlighted.
35.2 Related Work
Early work on authorship identification, on the Federalist Papers, is back to 1964 [1].
In this early work, a set of function words, which were not topic-related features,
were utilized. Since then, Authorship identification has been researched in various
text domains, such as emails, forums, and books as discussed below.
De Vel analyzed stylistics attributes to discover forensics in emails [2]. Although
they achieved relatively good results, this may not be applicable straight-forward
on the blogs due to the different nature of the text in emails and blogs. Generally,
email text is shorter than diaries text and it is usually a topical dialogue between
1 http://www.livejournal.com
35 The Affects of Demographics Differentiations on Authorship Identification 411
two authors, while online diaries text is from the author to the public, at least the
intended group. Also in books and literature, Gamon [3] utilized the part-of-speech
(POS) tri-grams and other features to find out the correspondent author out of just
three writers. The main differences from our work are the smaller number of authors,
and the nature of book text. Text in books is normally too long compared to text in
diaries. And usually, there is a specific topic in the book. Books are also expected to
be well written and proof read, which results in much less grammatical and syntac-
tical errors than the case in personal blogs.
In the domain of web forums, Abbasi et al. [4] used a collection of lexical, syn-
tactical, structural, and content-specific features to find out the extreme patterns of
writing on web forums. It may look that the text in web forums is similar to that
in the personal blogs. But regularly there is a subject to be discussed in the forum,
which in contrast to diaries that contains usually general ideas and thoughts on var-
ious and mixed issues.
Recently, Abbasi et al. [5] presented the “Writeprints” technique, which sepa-
rately model the features of each individual author, instead of using one model for
all the authors. They build a writeprint for each author using the author’s key fea-
tures. Authorship attribution was also manipulated also in probabilistic approaches
using Markov chains of letters and words [6]. The above two methodologies are
different in which they need to build an individual model for each author instead of
just one model that classify all the authors. Although one model for each author will
best represent the author style, this requires comparing the features from the new
text against all the authors’ models rather than testing through just one classifica-
tion model.
From the above, it can be seen that author identification in personal blogs or
diaries has received little attention. Consequently, no specific standard features are
confirmed or solidly recommended due to the differentiation in the properties of text
in each context. In the work presented in this paper, we address the above issues by
applying authorship identification on an online diaries corpus using a different type
of linguistic features and analyze those factors that affect the identification results.
35.3 Feature Set
A very important concern in text classification is the selection of features. In our
investigation, we chose LIWC the Linguistic Inquiry Word Count [7], MRC Psy-
cholinguistic database [8], and a collection of syntactic features. Those feature sets
that have been selected have psychology basis, and known relate well with the
author’s style and/or personality. The properties of diaries text as they contains lots
of feelings, personal activities, and thoughts are more captured using our selected
features sets. The selected 88 LIWC features are grouped into four types:
1. Standard linguistic features (e.g., total word count, word per sentence, pronouns,
punctuations, articles, time)
2. Psychological features (e.g., affect, cognition, biological processes)
412 H. Mohtasseb and A. Ahmed
3. Personal concerns features (e.g., work, sports, religion, sexuality)
4. Paralinguistic features (assents (e.g., agrees, ok), fillers (e.g., err, umm), non flu-
encies (e.g., I mean, you know))
In LIWC, the features are more of categories based on their intuitive meaning,
including psychology and affect. These features (or categories) are evaluated by
calculating scores from a number of related words that are defined in the LIWC dic-
tionary [7]. This means that the calculated word frequency is not used directly, but
rather contributes to the final scores of multiple LIWC features. For example, the
word “cried” is contributing to the calculation of the scores of five features: sadness,
negative emotion, overall affect, verb, and past tense verb. Moreover, the LIWC can
handle the different stems of the word, which is one of the common issues in natural
language processing NLP. So the stem hungr captures the words hungry, hungrier,
hungriest and so on dictionary [7].
The MRC database contains psycholinguistic statistics for over 150,000 words. It
includes frequencies among the Psychology lexicon such as: number of phonemes,
number of syllables, imagebility rating, letters count, part-of-speech information,
and familiarity rating.
35.4 Framework
In this section, we describe the design of the framework and the experiments for
identifying the authors of blog posts. After grabbing the data corpus from the web,
the extraction phase converts each post to a features vector containing the corre-
sponding features values. This changes the input data from unstructured text space
into features vectors space. The setup of our framework is depicted in Fig. 35.1.
First, we divided the input features vectors into groups according to three param-
eters: the post length, the number of authors, and the number of posts per author.
Each group is manipulated individually by the classification algorithm. Support Vec-
tor Machines (SVM) has been selected as the machine learning algorithm in our
framework. SVM is one of the best algorithms in this domain.
Fig. 35.1 Authorship identification framework
35 The Affects of Demographics Differentiations on Authorship Identification 413
For each experiment’s data group, SVM is trained and tested by applying tenfold
cross validation. This means that there are ten cycles of validation and the identifi-
cation accuracy will be calculated among the average of them. In each cycle, 90%
of the dataset is used for training and the remaining 10% is used for testing. We
selected the implemented SVM algorithm (SMO) in the WEKA toolbox with linear
kernel [9] for machine learning algorithms in our framework.
We choose eight different numbers of authors, five different post counts per user,
and 11 different post lengths. This makes 440 groups in total. The second contribu-
tion of this paper is to study the effect of pre-filtering the candidate authors that are
selected in the sampling stage of the classifier. In this study, we present the feasibil-
ity of building a classifier that contains the users which have common demographics
attributes such as personality, gender, and age. We try to find the type of personality
either extraversion or introversion that is more correlated with authorship identifi-
cation. Finally, we compare the identification accuracy between males and females,
and then across three different age groups.
35.5 Results
It should be mentioned that given that we have three parameters investigated
simultaneously, the result would ideally need to be represented in a four dimen-
sional space. However this may not be easy to be visualized. So, Fig. 35.2 depicts a
Fig. 35.2 Identification accuracy (users/post length)
414 H. Mohtasseb and A. Ahmed
selected 3D cube that represents the identification results according to the number of
users and the post length. The results, as presented in Fig. 35.2 justify the effective
parameters ranges in which the identification percentage is more accurate.
The trends in Fig. 35.2 indicate that the identification accuracy is enhanced when
there are more words in the post (post length). Although the selected features are less
effective in short posts, having more posts (posts size) improves the identification
accuracy. This happens because having more posts (post size) provides more text
that the same author has written with different styles and contents, which is in turn
included in the learning process.
35.5.1 Demographics Differentiations
One of the big problems in authorship identification is to identify the author among
large number of authors. Building different classifiers according to the type of users
will decrease the number of the potential authors to be involved in each classifier.
This would help in scaling the solutions with the increase in the number of authors.
In this section, we discuss how the demographics attributes will affect the final iden-
tification result. We start by studying the personality factor and then move toward
gender and age variation.
35.5.1.1 Personality
Writing diaries to be read publicly and describing the details of the private life to
everybody on the internet is an indication that the bloggers are Extraverts [10].
Extraversion is one factor of the Big Five personality traits model [11]. The ex-
travert person could be described for example as sociable, assertive, friendly, and
playful. On the other hand, bloggers can be considered as introverts because they
are writing using nicknames on the blogging site, hiding their real identity [10].
We chose to test the authorship identification for those who are extraverts in
their text. Although the corpus does not contain any tagging for extraversion, we
extracted the extraversion value automatically using a personality recognition soft-
ware system2 which computes estimates of personality scores along the Big Five
dimensions. Figure 35.3 displays the classification accuracy average for five users
in the different post lengths between the extraverts and the corresponding unfiltered
users. The results indicate that those who have a high extraversion score are better
classified in the authorship identification process.
2 http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/	farm2/personality/recognizer.html
35 The Affects of Demographics Differentiations on Authorship Identification 415
Fig. 35.3 Classification accuracy comparison between extraverts and generic users
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
20 17 14 11 8 5
No. Users
A
cc
u
ra
cy
Male Female
Fig. 35.4 Authorship identification comparison between males and females
35.5.1.2 Gender and Age
There are lost of previous studies concern the language difference regarding the
demographics attribute. This experiment presents a novel analysis by applying
authorship identification across each category and comparing the identification ac-
curacy between them. For this experiment we use different data from another corpus
[12] where the gender and age information of authors are available (Figs. 35.4
and 35.5).
416 H. Mohtasseb and A. Ahmed
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
20 17 14 11 8 5
No. Users
A
cc
u
ra
cy
10s 20s 30s
Fig. 35.5 Authorship identification comparison across three age groups
35.6 Conclusion
In this chapter, we presented our investigation of identifying the bloggers in on-
line diaries by mining the diaries text of each blogger. The investigation contains
majorly three contributions. The first one was by utilizing two psycholinguistic fea-
tures, namely the LIWC and MRC feature sets together, on the personal blogs for
blogger/authorship identification. The second one was the analyzing of the effect of
various parameters on the identification performance. This included the number of
authors in the data corpus, the post size or the word count, and the number of posts
for each blogger. Finally, we studied the identification outcome for shared-attribute
authors.
We found that the post length, or the number of words in the text, is highly con-
tributing to the author style attribution. Having more words facilitates more accurate
and stable identification performance as the author style can be more appropriately
captured. The results provided the preferred ranges of those parameters, which can
be used as recommendation for further studies in authorship identification in per-
sonal blogs.
The results of testing authorship identification across common-attribute authors
confirm that the identification accuracy is highly related with the type of users. This
motivated us in future to build multi-layer classification system that includes several
classifiers based on selected demographics attributes.
35 The Affects of Demographics Differentiations on Authorship Identification 417
References
1. Mosteller, F., Wallace, D.L.: Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA (1964)
2. de Vel, O., Anderson, A., Corney, M., Mohay, G.: Mining e-mail content for author identifica-
tion forensics. ACM SIGMOD Record 30, 55–64 (2001)
3. Gamon, M.: Linguistic correlates of style: authorship classification with deep linguistic analy-
sis features. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(2004)
4. Abbasi, A., Chen, H.: Applying authorship analysis to extremist-group web forum messages.
IEEE Intell. Syst. 20, 67–75 (2005)
5. Abbasi, A., Chen, H.: Writeprints: a stylometric approach to identity-level identification and
similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM Trans. Inform. Syst. 26, 29 (2008)
6. Sanderson, C., Guenter, S.: Short text authorship attribution via sequence kernels, markov
chains and author unmasking. In: Proceeding of 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 482–491 (2006)
7. Pennebaker, J.W., Francis, M.E., Booth, R.J.: Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC 2001.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahway (2001)
8. Wilson, M.: MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machine Usable Dictionary, Information Divi-
sion Science and Engineering Research Council (1987)
9. Witten, I.H., Frank, E.: Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Mor-
gan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA (2005)
10. Nowson, S., Oberlander, J.: The identity of bloggers: openness and gender in personal weblogs.
In: Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposia on Computational Approaches to Analyzing
Weblogs (2006)
11. NORMAN, W.T.: Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality attributes: replicated factors
structure in peer nomination personality ratings. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 66, 574–583 (1963)
12. Schler, J., Koppel, M., Argamon, S., Pennebaker, J.: Effects of age and gender on blogging.
2006 AAAI Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches for Analyzing Weblogs (2006)
