  
Abstract—Authorship attribution process helps to identify the 
author of anonymous text by providing the some text samples of few 
authors, assuming that anonymous text is written by one of the author 
of known text samples. Authorship attribution of online messages can 
be useful for mining the writing patterns of authors, which in terms 
helps the forensics investigation process. Basically it is the 
classification problem for identifying the author of a given text. A set 
of documents with known authorship are used for training and aim is 
to automatically determine the corresponding author of an 
anonymous text. Unlike to other classification tasks, feature 
identification process to classify an author is difficult as there are 
different ways of speaking and writing. In recent years, practical 
applications for authorship attribution have grown in areas such as 
intelligence for linking intercepted messages to each other and to 
known terrorists, criminal law for identifying writers of threatening 
mail, civil law for copyright, and computer security for tracking 
authors of computer virus source code. Out of the various approaches 
for Authorship attribution problem, Stylometry is one of the approach 
to solve this problem. A Stylometry uses statistical methods to 
analyze a text to determine the authorship of text. This paper 
investigates the use of stylometry for Authorship Attribution of 
online messages. 
 
Keywords— Authorship Attribution,KNN, Stylometry; SVM   
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
 MAILS blogs, chat rooms, newsgroups are used 
excessively for online communication and have become 
integrated into our everyday lives. Unfortunately these online 
communication mediums are being misused for many 
illegitimate activities. The anonymous nature of these channels 
makes them an ideal source of communication for criminal 
groups and extremist organizations. Authorship analysis of 
online documents (such as e-mails, VoIP segments and instant 
messages,etc.) for prosecuting terrorists, pedophiles, and 
scammers in the court of law, has received great attention in 
different studies [1][2][3]. Authorship analysis problem is 
divided into authorship attribution, characterization/profiling 
and verification or similarity detection. In this paper, focus is 
to explore the authorship attribution problem and stylometry 
approach to this problem. 
Stylometry analysis involves the use of statistical methods 
to attempt to describe authorship to disputed texts. Let’s 
consider a simple example: We have a text t1 that is certainly 
Smita Nirkhi  is with the Ramdeobaba College Of Engineering  
&Management , Nagpur, India. Research Scholar at GHRCE, Nagpur. 
(Email:smita811@gmail.com ).  
Dr.R.V.Dharaskar, Director, MPGI, Nanded, India. 
Dr.V.M.Thakare  is Head of the Depart, Amravati, India. 
by author A1. We have a text t2 that is certainly by author A2 
and we have a disputed text t3 that we know to be either 
written by A1 or written by A2.Then a stylometry analysis test 
will take the three texts and (ideally) inform us whether text t3 
was written by author A1 or by author A2. There are two 
issues associated with online text: 
1. Length of Online documents is generally short and the 
writing styles of online documents are not formal therefore 
vocabulary is less stable. The structure or composition style of 
online documents is often different from normal text 
documents. 
2. Due to the use of cyberspace at global level, multilingual 
problems become a new challenge for authorship  
The aforementioned authorship attribution problem can be 
solved with stylometry. It quantify writing style of author. It is 
a rapidly increasing interdisciplinary research area that 
combines Stylistics, statistics and computer science. 
Stylometry is defined as the statistical analysis of literary style; 
it offers a means of capturing the often elusive character of an 
author's style by quantifying some of its features.  
The theory underlying stylometry studies is that authors 
have an unconscious as well as a conscious aspect to their 
style. The basic assumption here is every author's style has 
certain features, and since these features cannot be consciously 
manipulated by the author. Therefore they are considered as 
reliable data source for a stylometry study. The two primary 
applications of stylometry are attribution studies and 
chronological problems. Variation in style can be caused by 
differences of genus or content, and similarity by literary 
processes such as imitation. By measuring and counting 
stylistic traits, we hope to discover the 'characteristics' of a 
particular author. This paper studies the context of stylometry 
origins and historical development. This paper discusses about 
stylometry methods followed by stylometry using R, Design 
issues for authorship attribution. A section 4 and 5 discusses 
proposed approach and experimentation evaluation. 
Stylometry methods are mainly categorized as writer invariant, 
Neural Networks methods, and Genetic Algorithm methods. 
These are explained as follows. 
A. Writer Invariant 
It is a property of a text which is similar of its author. In 
writer invariant method initially frequency of function words 
used by the writer is analyzed. The text is then divided into 
word chunks and each of the chunks is analyzed to find the 
frequency of those function words in that chunk. This 
generates a unique number (n) of identifier for each chunk. 
Authorship Attribution of online messages 
using Stylometry: An Exploratory Study 
Smita Nirkhi, Dr.R.V. Dharaskar, and Dr.V.M.Thakare  
E 
International Conference on Advances in Engineering and Technology (ICAET'2014) March 29-30, 2014 Singapore
http://dx.doi.org/10.15242/IIE.E0314119 254
Chunk of texts are then represented into a point in n-
dimensional space. This n-dimensional space is flattened into a 
plane using principal components analysis (PCA). This results 
in a display of points that correspond to an author's style. If 
two documents are placed on the same plane, the resulting 
pattern may show if both documents were by the same author 
or different authors. 
B. Neural Networks 
Neural networks can help to analyze authorship of texts. 
Back propagation method can be used to train classifier with 
known training data. The network helps to simplify to new 
items that has not part of training before. From survey it was 
found that, a neural network may reach to 70% of accuracy in 
determining authorship of literary. One problem with this 
method of analysis is that the while selecting authors network 
can become biased based on its training set. 
C. Genetic Algorithms 
Another technique used in stylometry is genetic algorithm. 
This is rule based method. For example rule generation is 
based on frequency of specific word written by that author. 
The program uses text as a input and generates rules to 
determine authorship. Each rule is tested using fitness score. 
The rules with the lowest scores are thrown out. The remaining 
rules are given small changes and few new rules are generated 
until the new rules correctly attribute the texts. 
II. STYLOMETRY USING R 
R provides platform for finding sentence length, word 
length, letter frequencies and writeprint identification 
functionalities by using appropriate package. These are the 
useful style markers for analyzing authorship. 
Sentence Length 
This one is very simple to describe, it is the number of 
words in a sentence averaged out. The measure used is then 
the mean number of words in a sentence used by the author. As 
a one-dimensional measure, this has all the pitfalls that have 
been described above, plus some more. First of all old texts, 
e.g. Shakespeare. Shakespearean texts, for example, were 
edited and very often the punctuation was changed by 
editors/compositors and hence can be unreliable. Modern 
works, particularly very recent works may have been 
influenced by word-processors. Furthermore, sentence length 
should never, ever be used on transcriptions of spoken text 
people don’t speak full-stops. 
Word Length  
Again a very simple measure that needs little explanation. 
Count all the words, find out how long they are and produce a 
distribution. Inevitably word length profiles will be dominated 
by a few frequently occurring words. It is observed that few 
frequently occurring words will dominate the word frequency 
profile. Word length frequency is a rather coarse grained way 
of looking at the frequency of words within texts. 
Letter Frequency  
Letter frequency involves counting the frequencies with 
which letters of the alphabet appear in a text and using this in a 
similar way to word length frequency as a way of comparing 
texts. Not surprisingly, in English, we are likely to find highest 
values at ‘e’ and ‘t’. Once again it is worth considering why 
letter frequencies occur the way they do.  
Word Based Stylometry Analysis 
Writeprint is a term proposed by some forensic linguistics 
researchers to denote a set of distinguishing stylometry 
characteristics of a written text (writer invariants) such as 
"vocabulary richness, length of sentence, use of function 
words, layout of paragraphs, and key words" which allow one 
to identify its author (if written by a single person). 
III. DESIGN ISSUES 
Stylometry provides the way to measure various features 
such as length of sentence, vocabulary richness and word 
frequencies. It provides many practical applications in 
authorship attribution research. These applications are usually 
based on the principle that every individual has certain writing 
style that can help to detect the true author of an anonymous 
text, that there exist stylistic fingerprints that can betray the 
plagiarist, that the oldest authorship disputes (St. Paul’s 
epistles or Shakespeare’s plays) can be settled with more or 
less sophisticated statistical methods. Statistical approaches 
have been offered impressive precision, to identify texts 
written by several authors based on a single example of each 
author’s writing. But the similarity pattern and differences in 
pattern of stylometry uncovers other research issues like 
different books by the same author; between books by 
different authors; between authors differing in terms of 
chronology or gender; between translations of the same author 
or group of authors; helping, in turn, to find new ways of 
looking at works that seem to have been studied from all 
possible perspectives. In this digital era text is available in 
electronic form so we can able to apply stylometry to them for 
experimentation purpose. 
Two critical research issues influence the performance of 
authorship analysis: 
1. Feature selection: - To Find out the effective 
discriminators 
2. Analytical techniques:-Approach to discriminating texts 
by authors based on the selected features 
IV. PROJECTED APPROACHES 
From the existing classification methods, SVM and KNN 
are considered to be part of this study. For evaluating the 
performance of classification method, KNN classifier and 
SVM classification techniques are implemented and evaluated. 
A support vector machine (SVMs) is supervised learning 
methods used for classification. The reason for using SVM as 
a classification method is, it is effective in high dimensional 
spaces and effective in cases where number of dimensions is 
greater than the number of samples. It uses a subset of training 
points in the decision function (called support vectors), so it is 
also memory efficient. Different Kernel functions can be 
specified for the decision function thus versatile. SVM 
International Conference on Advances in Engineering and Technology (ICAET'2014) March 29-30, 2014 Singapore
http://dx.doi.org/10.15242/IIE.E0314119 255
provides Common kernels and we can specify our own kernel 
by custom kernels. Optimal hyperplane for linearly separable 
patterns. Extend to patterns that are not linearly separable by 
transformations of original data to map into new space – 
Kernel function 
In pattern recognition, the k-nearest neighbor’s algorithm 
(k-NN) is a non-parametric method for classification and 
regression. It predicts objects values or class memberships 
based on the k closest training examples in the feature space. 
K-NN is a type of instance-based learning, where the function 
is only approximated locally and all computation is deferred 
until classification. The k-nearest neighbor algorithm is 
amongst the simplest of all machine learning algorithms. An 
object is classified by a majority vote of its neighbors, with the 
object being assigned to the class most common amongst its k 
nearest neighbors (k is a positive integer, typically small). If k 
= 1, then the object is simply assigned to the class of that 
single nearest neighbor. 
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
Experiments are carried out on dataset Reuter_50_50 of 
newsletters. The two classification techniques SVM and KNN 
are implemented and evaluated here .Table1 is showing the 
results for SVM and table two is showing result for KNN. 
Performance indicator considered to evaluate the performance 
are (i) Average Accuracy (ii)Average Precision (iii) Average 
Recall. Table 1 shows values for these measures against two 
classification techniques that is SVM and KNN. Data of 5 
Authors from the dataset are consider for experimentation 
purpose. Equation (1),(2),(3) are used to calculate Average 
Accuracy, Average Precision  and Average Recall 
Table I   
Classification Results 
Dataset Measures Classification(KNN) 
Reuter_50_50 
Data Set 
Average 
Accuracy 80% 
 Average Precision 80% 
 Average Recall 75% 
Dataset Measures Classification(SVM) 
Reuter_50_50 
Data Set 
Average 
Accuracy 92% 
 Average Precision 90% 
 Average Recall 75% 
 
 
                  (1) 
 
 
 
                 (2) 
 
 
 
                 (3)  
VI. CONCLUSION 
 
This paper attempts to recognize authorship of unknown 
text based on their writing style using stylometry. Both SVM 
and KNN yield significantly better results than random guess. . 
We achieved 80% average accuracy on the test set using KNN 
and 92% average accuracy on the test set using SVM. The 
experimental result indicates that we can make use of 
authorship analysis approaches for online messages in 
cybercrime investigation to address the identity-tracing 
problem. Stylometry features are discriminators for online 
documents.SVM techniques achieved high performance .This 
approach may apply for multilingual context. Thus present 
study proves that stylometry provides a way to classifiers that 
require fewer input variables than traditional statistics The 
proven efficiency of the automatic classifiers marks them as 
exciting tools for the future in stylometry’s continuing 
evolution. We consider that the combination of stylometry and 
AI will result in a useful discipline with many practical 
applications 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abbasi ; H. Chen.(2008) Writeprints: A stylometric approach to 
identity-level identification and similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems, 26(2) 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1344411.1344413 
[2] O. de Vel.(2000) Mining e-mail authorship. In proc.Workshop on Text 
Mining, ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining(KDD) 
[3] M. Koppel; S. Argamon,; A.R. Shimoni(2002).Automatically 
categorizing written texts by author gender. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing, 17(4),pp.401–412, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/17.4.401  
[4] Ramyaa; Congzhou He; Khaled Rasheed Using Machine Learning 
Techniques for Stylometry Artificial Intelligence Center 
[5] The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA 
[6] Estival 2008] [Abbasi et. al. 2008] [Koppel et. al. 2003] [De Vel et. al. 
2001].  
[7] Li, J., Chen, H., & Huang, Z. “A Framework for Authorship 
Identification of Online Messages: Writing-Style Features and 
classification Technique”, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 57(3), 378–393. doi:10.1002/asi,2006.  
[8]  Abbasi, A., & Chen, H. “Visualizing Authorship for Identification”, 
English, 60–71, (2006).  
[9] Stańczyk, U., & Cyran, K. A. “Machine learning approach to authorship 
attribution of literary texts”, Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1(4), 
151–158, (2007).  
[10] Pavelec, D., Justino, E., & Oliveira, L. S. “Author Identification using 
Stylometric Features”,Inteligencia Artificial, 11(36), 59–65. 
doi:10.4114/ia.v11i36.892, (2007). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4114/ia.v11i36.892  
[11] Stamatatos, E. “Author identification: Using text sampling to handle 
the class imbalance problem”, English, 44, 790–799. 
doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2007.05.012, (2008). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2007.05.012  
[12]  Iqbal, F., Hadjidj, R., Fung, B. C. M., & Debbabi, M. “A novel 
approach of mining write-prints for authorship attribution in e-mail 
forensics”, Information Systems, 5, 42–51. 
doi:10.1016/j.diin.2008.05.001, (2008). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2008.05.001  
[13] Iqbal, F., Binsalleeh, H., Fung, B. C. M., & Debbabi, M. “Mining 
writeprints from anonymous e-mails for forensic investigation”, Digital 
Investigation, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.diin.2010.03.003, (2010). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2010.03.003  
[14]  Mikros, G. K., & Perifanos, K. “Authorship identification in large 
email collections: Experiments using features that belong to different 
linguistic levels, (2011).  
messages ofnumber  Total
 identifiedcorrectly  author was  whosemessages ofNumber Accuracy =
author  the toassigned messages ofnumber  Total
author    the toassignedcorrectly  messages ofNumber Precision =
author by the written messages ofnumber  Total
author   the toassignedcorrectly  messages ofNumber  Recall =
International Conference on Advances in Engineering and Technology (ICAET'2014) March 29-30, 2014 Singapore
http://dx.doi.org/10.15242/IIE.E0314119 256
[15] Tanguy, L., Sajous, F., Calderone, B., & Hathout, N. “Authorship 
attribution: using rich linguistic features when training data is scarce”, 
(2012).  
 
International Conference on Advances in Engineering and Technology (ICAET'2014) March 29-30, 2014 Singapore
http://dx.doi.org/10.15242/IIE.E0314119 257
