(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 4, No.5, 2013 
32 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Comparative study of Authorship Identification 
Techniques for Cyber Forensics Analysis
Smita Nirkhi 
Department of Computer Science & Engg 
G.H.Raisoni College of Engineering 
Nagpur, India 
Dr.R.V.Dharaskar 
Director 
MPGI 
Nanded, India 
 
 
Abstract—Authorship Identification techniques are used to 
identify the most appropriate author from group of potential 
suspects of online messages and find evidences to support the 
conclusion. Cybercriminals make misuse of online 
communication for sending blackmail or a spam email and then 
attempt to hide their true identities to void detection.Authorship 
Identification of online messages is the contemporary research 
issue for identity tracing in cyber forensics. This is highly 
interdisciplinary area as it takes advantage of machine learning, 
information retrieval, and natural language processing. In this 
paper, a study of recent techniques and automated approaches to 
attributing authorship of online messages is presented. The focus 
of this review study is to summarize all existing authorship 
identification techniques used in literature to identify authors of 
online messages. Also it discusses evaluation criteria and 
parameters for authorship attribution studies and list open 
questions that will attract future work in this area. 
Keywords—cyber crime; Author Identification; SVM 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Cyber crime is also known as computer crime, the use of a 
computer to further illegal ends, such as committing fraud, 
trafficking in child pornography and intellectual property, 
stealing identities, or violating privacy.  
Cybercrime, especially through the Internet, has grown in 
importance as the computer has become central to commerce, 
entertainment, and government. Senders can hide their 
identities by forging sender’s address; Routed through an 
anonymous server and by using multiple usernames to 
distribute online messages via different anonymous channel. 
Author Identification study is useful to identify the most 
plausible authors and to find evidences to support the 
conclusion. 
Authorship analysis problem is categorized as [13] 
1) Authorship identification (authorship attribution): It 
determines the likelihood of a piece of writing to be produced 
by a particular author by examining other writings by that 
author. 
2) Authorship characterization: It summarizes the 
characteristics of an author and generates the author profile 
based on his/her writings like Gender, educational, cultural 
background, and writing style 
3) Similarity detection: It compares multiple pieces of 
writing and determines whether they were produced by a 
single author without actually identifying the author like 
Plagiarism detection. To extract unique writing style from the 
number of online messages various features need to be 
considered are Lexical features, content-free features, 
Syntactic features ,Structure features ,Content-specific 
features  
Although authorship attribution problem has been studied 
in the history but in the last few decades, authorship 
attribution of online messages has become a forthcoming 
research area as it is confluence of various research areas like 
machine learning, information Retrieval and Natural Language 
Processing. Initially this problem started as the most basic 
problem of author identification of anonymous texts (taken 
from Bacon, Marlowe and Shakespeare) [1], now has been 
grown for forensic analysis, electronic commerce etc. This 
extended version of author attribution problem has been 
defined as needle-in-a-haystack problem in [2]  
When an author writes they use certain words 
unconsciously and we should able to find some underlying 
pattern for an authors style. The fundamental assumption of 
authorship attribution is that each author has habit of using 
specific words that make their writing unique Extraction of 
features from text that distinguish one author from another 
includes use of some statistical or machine learning 
techniques. 
Rest of the Paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
Reviews existing techniques used for Authorship Analysis 
along with their classification. Section 3 explains basic 
procedure for authorship analysis. Section 4 summarizes 
Comparisons of various techniques since year 2006 till 
2012.Section 5 Reviews performance evaluation parameters 
required for Authorship Analysis Techniques followed by 
section 6 which is conclusion. 
II. STATE OF THE ART OF CURRENT TECHNIQUES 
This section gives fundamental idea on existing 
Authorship Attribution Techniques followed by their 
comparison in next section. In literature, this problem was 
solved using statistical Analysis and Machine learning 
techniques. These are mainly categorized as shown in Figure 
1. 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 4, No.5, 2013 
33 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
Fig. 1. Authorship Attribution Techniques 
STATISTICAL UNIVARIATE METHODS 
A) Naive Bayes classifier: In this Classifier Learning and 
classification methods based on probability theory. In 
Literature it is found that Bayes theorem plays a critical 
role in probabilistic learning and classification. It uses 
prior probability of each category given no information 
about an item. 
B) B.CUSUM statistics procedure: In stastical analysis the 
cusum called cumulative sum control chart, the CUSUM is 
a sequential Analysis technique used for  onitoring change 
detection. As its name implies, CUSUM involves the 
calculation of a cumulative sum.  
C) Cluster Analysis: Cluster analysis is an exploratory data 
analysis tool for solving classification problems.  Its 
purpose is to sort cases (people, things, events, etc) into 
groups, or clusters, so that the degree of association is 
strong between members of the same cluster and weak 
between members of different clusters.   
III. MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES 
A. Feed-forward neural network : 
A feed forward neural network is an artificial neural 
network where connections between the units do not form 
a directed cycle. This is different from networks. The feed 
forward neural network was the first and arguably simplest 
type of artificial neural network devised. In this network, the 
information moves in only one direction, forward, from the 
input nodes, through the hidden nodes (if any) and to the 
output nodes. There are no cycles or loops in the network. 
B. Radial basis function network:  
A radial basis function network is an artificial neural 
network that uses radial basis functions as activation 
functions. The output of the network is a linear combination of 
radial basis functions of the inputs and neuron parameters. 
Radial basis function networks are used for function 
approximation, time series prediction, and system control. 
C. Support Vector Machines:  
In machine learning, support vector machines (SVMs, 
also support vector networks are supervised learning models 
with associated learning algorithms that analyze data and 
recognize patterns, used for classification and regression 
analysis. The basic SVM takes a set of input data and predicts, 
for each given input, which of two possible classes forms the 
output, making it a non-probabilistic binary linear classifier. 
IV. CLASSIC PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORSHIP 
IDENTIFICATION 
Figure 2 shows classic approach to model authorship 
identification problem. 
 
Fig. 2. Typical Procedure for Authorship Identification 
Step1: Data collection:-Collect online messages written by 
potential authors from online communication. 
Step2: Feature Extraction:-After extraction, each 
unstructured text is represented as a vector of writing-style 
features 
Step3: Model Generation:-Dataset should be divided into 
training and testing set. Classification techniques should be 
applied. An iterative training and testing process may be 
needed 
Step4: Author Identification:-Developed model can be 
used to predict the authorship of unknown online messages  
V. COMPARISON OF VARIOUS TECHNIQUES 
This section compares the various techniques used for 
authorship identification research forum since 2006 to 
2012.History of studies on authorship attribution problems 
presented in tabular format and year wise. For each method, 
we identify the corpus on which methods were tested, the 
feature types used and the categorization method used, size of 
Training set. Table 1 represented the comparative study of all 
authorship techniques.[5][6][7][8][9][10]. 
Authorship Attribution 
Techniques 
Statistical univariate methods 
Naïve Bayes Classifier 
Cusum Stastics Procedure 
Cluster Analysis 
Machine learning techniques 
Feed-forward neural network 
Radial basis function  
Support Vector Machine 
 
network 
Support Vector Machines 
Data 
Collection 
Feature 
Extraction 
Model 
Generation 
Authorship 
Identification 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 4, No.5, 2013 
34 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
  
YEAR/AUTHORS FEATURES 
TECHNI
QUES 
CORPUS 
NUMBER 
OF 
AUTHORS 
TRAINING SET 
(2006) 
Rong Zheng, 
Jiexun Li, Hsinchun Chen,  Zan Huang 
Lexical, 
syntactic, 
structural, 
content Specific 
SVM 
English Internet 
newsgroup 
messages & 
Chinese Bulletin 
Board System 
(BBS) messages. 
20 
48 for English 
37 (Chinese) 
2006 
Ahmed Abbasi and Hsinchun Chen 
Lexical, 
syntactic, 
structural, 
content Specific 
PCA 
USENET forum, 
Yahoo group 
forum , 
website forum for 
the White Knights 
10 30 msgs per forum 
2007 
cyran 
Lexical, 
syntactic, 
 
ANN 
Novels of two 
famous Polish 
writers, Henryk 
Sienkiewicz and 
Bolesław Prus 
2 168 
2007 
Daniel Pavelec, Edson Justino, and Luiz S. 
Oliveira 
Linguistic Features SVM 
Our sources were 
two dif- ferent 
Brazilian 
newspapers, 
Gazeta do Povo 
(http://www.gazet
adopovo.com.br) 
and Tribuna do 
Paran´ 
10 150 
2008 
EFSTATHIOS STAMATATOS 
Stylistic Fearures SVM 
Corpus Volume 1 
(RCV1) 
Arabic Corpus: 
10 1000 
Kim Luyckx and Walter Daelemans Syntactic Features 
Memory 
based 
learning 
approac 
Personae corpus 145 1400 words 
 
2008 
Chun Wei 
Email features 
clusterin
g 
Email dataset 42 4200 
2008(Hamilton) Syntactic Features 
Stylomet
roy 
 145 2000 
2008 
Farkhund Iqbal, Rachid Hadjidj, Benjamin 
C.M. Fung, Mourad Debbabi 
Stylometric Features 
Frequent 
Pattern  
Enron Dataset 158 200399 
2008(M.Connor) Syntactic 
 
Decision 
Trees/KN
N. 
Emails collected 
from users 
12 120 
2009 
Rachid Hadjidj, Mourad Debbabi, Hakim 
Lounis, Farkhund Iqbal,Adam Szporer, 
Djamel Benredjem 
Stylometory 
Features 
Stastical 
Analysis, 
Machine 
Learning 
Enron Dataset 158 200399 
2011 
George K. Mikros1 and Kostas Perifanos 
Linguistic features 
Regulariz
ed 
Logistic 
Regressio
n (RLR) 
SVM 
Dataset - - 
2012 
Ludovic Tanguy, Franck Sajous, Basilio 
Calderone,  
Linguistic 
Features 
Machine 
Learning 
Tool 
Dataset 10 100 words 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 4, No.5, 2013 
35 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The complexity level of aforementioned problem is 
determined by the various parameters like the number of 
authors and size of training set. This both the parameters play 
vital role to determine prediction accuracy. Although these 
parameters are considered critical to the complexity of the 
problem and therefore the prediction accuracy, there are no 
studies examining their impact on the authorship-identification 
performance in a systematic way. The problem of authorship 
attribution is explored well in the area of literature, 
newspapers etc but limited work has been done for the 
authorship identification of online messages like blogs, emails 
and chat. This comparative study concluded that if number of 
author’s increases and size of training sets decreases then 
performance degrades. Thus, by considering all these 
parameters further research direction is to improve prediction 
accuracy. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Estival 2008] [Abbasi et. al. 2008] [Koppel et. al. 2003] [De Vel et. al. 
2001]. 
[2]  Li, J., Chen, H., & Huang, Z.  “A Framework for Authorship 
Identification of Online Messages: Writing-Style Features and 
classification Technique”, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 57(3), 378–393. doi:10.1002/asi,2006. 
[3]  Abbasi, A., & Chen, H. “Visualizing Authorship for Identification”,  
English, 60–71, (2006). 
[4]  Stańczyk, U., & Cyran, K. A. “Machine learning approach to authorship 
attribution of literary texts”, Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1(4), 151–
158, (2007). 
[5]  Pavelec, D., Justino, E., & Oliveira, L. S. “Author Identification using 
Stylometric Features”,Inteligencia Artificial, 11(36), 59–65. 
doi:10.4114/ia.v11i36.892, (2007). 
[6]  Stamatatos, E. “Author identification: Using text sampling to handle the 
class imbalance problem”, English, 44, 790–799. 
doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2007.05.012, (2008). 
[7]  Iqbal, F., Hadjidj, R., Fung, B. C. M., & Debbabi, M. “A novel approach 
of mining write-prints for authorship attribution in e-mail forensics”, 
Information Systems, 5, 42–51. doi:10.1016/j.diin.2008.05.001, (2008). 
[8]  Iqbal, F., Binsalleeh, H., Fung, B. C. M., & Debbabi, M. “Mining 
writeprints from anonymous e-mails for forensic investigation”, Digital 
Investigation, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.diin.2010.03.003, (2010). 
[9]  Mikros, G. K., & Perifanos, K. “Authorship identification in large email 
collections: Experiments using features that belong to different linguistic 
levels, (2011). 
[10]  Tanguy, L., Sajous, F., Calderone, B., & Hathout, N. “Authorship 
attribution: using rich linguistic features when training data is scarce”, 
(2012). 
 
                             
