Jagiellonian University 
Institute of English Studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeremi K. Ochab 
 
 
Computational stylistics and 
authorship attribution: 
what it measures and why it works 
 
 
 
 
Thesis presented in part fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree 
of Master of Arts at 
 the Jagiellonian University of Kraków 
 written under the supervision of 
 dr Jan Rybicki 
 
 
 
Kraków 2014 
Uniwersytet Jagielloński 
Instytut Filologii Angielskiej 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeremi K. Ochab 
 
 
Stylometria i atrybucja autorska: 
co mierzy i dlaczego działa. 
 
 
 
 
 
Praca napisana pod kierunkiem 
 dra Jana Rybickiego 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kraków 2014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  
. 
. 
. 
myself 
. 
. 
. 
so that you do not forget 
about your dreams 
dear old friend
 
 
4 
 
  
 
 
5 
 
Table of contents 
 
Table of contents ........................................................................................................ 5 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................... 6 
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 7 
1. Stylometry........................................................................................................... 9 
1.1. Methods ................................................................................................... 12 
1.2. Burrows’s Delta ....................................................................................... 14 
1.3. Stylometry of translation ......................................................................... 16 
2. Disentangling grammar, topic, translation ........................................................ 18 
2.1. Methods: hybrid randomised texts .......................................................... 18 
2.2. Results: Hybrid computer-generated texts .............................................. 20 
2.3. Results: Translatorial traces or the influence of the original language ... 25 
3. Using methods of community detection to attribute authorship ....................... 31 
3.1. Methods: graphs and clustering ............................................................... 32 
3.2. Results: community detection algorithms versus the Delta .................... 33 
Discussion ................................................................................................................ 39 
Bibliography ............................................................................................................ 41 
Appendix A: Corpora ............................................................................................... 45 
A.1. English benchmark corpus small............................................................. 45 
A.2. English benchmark corpus 100 ............................................................... 47 
A.3. English corpus 500 .................................................................................. 51 
A.4. Polish corpus 100 .................................................................................... 71 
A.5. EN-PL parallel corpus ............................................................................. 75 
Appendix B: Software and parameters .................................................................... 76 
B.1. Tag-sets .................................................................................................... 76 
B.2. English PoS taggers ................................................................................. 78 
B.3. Polish PoS tagger .................................................................................... 79 
B.4. Stylo R package ....................................................................................... 79 
B.5. Community detection algorithms ............................................................ 80 
Abstract .................................................................................................................... 81 
Streszczenie ............................................................................................................. 82 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
First and foremost, I do thank all the Anglicists with whom I had the privilege to 
study and, in truth, share a third of my life – their names are legion; I try to remember You 
all. 
Second, but still foremost, I would like to thank Mrs Kamila Dudzińska, THE 
secretary, for all these long years. 
Third, but fairly above all, I express my gratitude to the Abbott and Costello of 
stylometry: dr hab. Maciej Eder and my supervisor dr Jan Rybicki, for their guidance, 
precious remarks, and believing in and bearing with me in general. I cry of fright at the 
mere thought of what this thesis would have to look like, should it not be for them. 
Special thanks go to Michał Strojek (for the Discworld novels), Jakub Szpak, Anna 
Filipek, Paulina Wątor and others who shared with me their corpora 
– it’s a pity I haven’t been able to use them all at this time – and a translatorial catfish. 
Many thanks to José Calvo, who provided me with a lavish selection of inspiring 
quotations from Mary Shelley. I am grateful to Prof. Dr. Heike Zinsmeister for providing 
me with the relevant information on universal tag-sets, and to Aaron Plasek for inspiring 
discussions and some additional references. 
 
Lastly, I owe greatly to prof. dr hab. Zdzisław Burda, a mentor and the advisor of 
my doctoral thesis in physics, who turned a blind eye to my unworthy linguistic 
inclinations. 
 
 
7 
 
I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with 
more languages than that of my native country. Now I am 
twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many 
schoolboys of fifteen. 
 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
 
Introduction 
  
No matter how much I would try, my introduction to the history and scope of the field, to 
which this thesis is intended to contribute, could not possibly be more concise than what 
has already been written: 
computational text analysis has been used to study problems related to style and authorship for 
nearly sixty years. As the field has matured, it has incorporated elements of some of the most 
advanced forms of technical endeavor, including natural language processing, statistical computing, 
corpus linguistics, and artificial intelligence. It is easily the most quantitative approach to the study 
of literature, the oldest form of digital literary study, and, in the opinion of many, the most scientific 
form of literary investigation. (Ramsay 2008) 
Indeed, in this thesis I used natural language processing (NLP) tools, statistical computing, 
and machine learning techniques, but all these might be perceived as a far-flung corner of 
the realm usually associated with “literary investigation.” Although I strive mainly for 
methodological improvements, the ultimate motivation for the thesis extends over a whole 
range of hermeneutical questions that can be asked (but not necessarily answered!) with 
the computational stylistics tools. 
Whether there is a common ground of literary criticism and computational tools, 
pertaining not only to their aims but also their means, can be inferred from the judgement 
that: 
The critic who endeavors to put forth a "reading," puts forth not the text, but a new text in which the 
data has been paraphrased, elaborated, selected, truncated, and transduced. … In every case, what is 
being read is not the "original" text, but a text transformed and transduced into an alternative vision, 
in which, as Wittgenstein put it, we "see an aspect" that further enables discussion and debate. 
(Ramsay 2008) 
The quote elucidates just as much the nature of computational stylistics – it is not a 
computer juggling abstract numbers, but a way of reading and transforming a text, not 
dissimilar to the selective processing a human mind. 
Ramsay (ibidem) further discusses the viability of computational, data driven 
methods for literary criticism, and sets some tenets of the form they should take. Whereas 
the general attitude towards the scientific method is encouraging, the author points to 
instances of when such methods fail, and is of the opinion that “for most forms of critical 
endeavour, however, appeals to ‘the facts’ prove far less useful.” I would hope that such 
statement is not so absolute as to mean uselessness to “critical endeavour” but rather to the 
“endeavours of  critics,” which might have been spawned by lack of understanding and 
collaboration between communities of researchers: 
As has often been noted, quantitative analysis has not had much impact on traditional literary 
studies. Its practitioners bear some of the responsibility for this lack of impact because all too often 
 
 
8 
 
quantitative studies fail to address problems of real literary significance, ignore the subject-specific 
background, or concentrate too heavily on technology or software.” (Hoover 2008) 
Unfortunately, I do subscribe my name to such bad practices, somewhat wilfully, since 
developing and testing efficient and rigorous tools is needed in order to ask questions of 
real significance. The reader is humbly asked to turn a blind eye to the shortcomings 
quoted above and present in this thesis. 
Henceforth, I will not develop an argument for the cause of digital humanities, 
computational stylistics, etc. other than just showing my recent work in this field, the 
results of which will speak for themselves, and for better or worse. I do hope it is but a 
prelude to a more comprehensive research – in the meanwhile, what is presented is mainly 
case studies, which just perhaps are a tiny step in making it to the “the ‘accelerated 
writing’ paradigm [from which] will come the next generation of word processors — true 
text processors — that will give us advanced tools for automatic generation of text” 
(Winder 2008). 
 
The thesis is structured in the following way: 
 Chapter 1: “Stylometry” briefly discusses why quantifying text may be 
revealing in the first place and it frames the main foci of this work; its sections 
provide necessary background as to what can be measured, how it is measured 
here, and what happened to results from such measurements that could be 
relevant to translation studies.  
 Chapter 2: “Disentangling grammar, topic, translation” presents a simple 
generic framework of how to measure the contribution of various factors to the 
authorial style, and contains sample results for grammatical and lexical factors 
followed by an exploratory study of whether language transfer can be 
computationally traced in translation. 
 Chapter 3: “Using methods of community detection to attribute authorship” is 
rather technically oriented, with a short introduction to how graphs can 
represent data, and how a relatively new family of unsupervised clustering 
methods compare to other methods in the service of authorship attribution. 
 Descriptions of the corpora analysed in this thesis, as well as listings of the 
novels they contain can be found in Appendix A, whereas the technicalities 
concerning NLP, stylometry, and clustering software in the Appendix B. 
 
 
 
9 
 
I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless 
grandeur for realities of little worth. 
 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
 
1. Stylometry 
 
Before increasingly narrowing down the discussion to the detailed means that stylometry 
uses, I would like to share a few thoughts, mostly those of other people’s, on what 
stylometry is or strives to be and what are its intricacies. It seems that stylometry is an 
extension of modern authorship attribution studies in terms of its tools, and of stylistic 
analysis in terms of its aims, and so is also dubbed computational stylistics, perhaps for 
politeness’s sake to distinguish itself from the traditional stylistics scholars. The difference, 
nevertheless, rather seems to be the methodologies and the areas fruitfully annexed by 
them, because in the end: 
Stylistic analysis is open-ended and exploratory. … Authorship studies aim at "yes or no" 
resolutions … Yet stylistic analysis needs finally to pass the same tests of rigor, repeatability, and 
impartiality as authorship analysis if it is to offer new knowledge. And the measures and techniques 
of authorship studies must ultimately be explained in stylistic terms if they are to command assent. 
(Craig 2004) 
That is, phrasing it differently, it is rather the authorship attribution methods that actually 
utilise or are part of stylometry, because supposedly they distinguish between authors 
based on their style, measured in a somewhat abstract way. The reason for such a hierarchy 
has also been expressed by Hoover (2008): 
Authorship attribution and statistical stylistics (or stylometry), currently two of the most important 
areas of quantitative analysis of literature … share many basic assumptions and methods, though 
some techniques that are effective in distinguishing authors may have no clear interpretive value. … 
literary attribution is often only a first step, so that methods easily turned to stylistic or interpretive 
purposes tend to be favored. 
Then, of course, it is a well posed question, how does or can stylometry contribute 
to stylistics, and whether the new methods are enough to make a qualitative jump. 
In such work, a little paradoxically, one wants to be reassured by seeing patterns already familiar 
from the way the texts are usually discussed, yet also to be surprised so that they seem more than a 
restatement of the obvious. (Craig 2004) 
which means that we hope stylometry will not only provide a firm methodological 
foundation for stylistics, but also raise new question and “boldly go where no stylists has 
gone before.” Debatable as these issues are, we need to engage into some more applicable 
methodological ponderings. 
Craig (2004) provides a much broader historical and scholarly background (with a 
strong Anglo-Saxon perspective, one must note) in the short introduction to authorship 
attribution and stylometry and the relationship between the two. He mentions various 
premises concerning why we can expect to distinguish writers based on statistical variation 
of their writing or what the social and cognitive circumstances that lead to this variation 
are. Among others, he cites some of the reservations about the methods. In this thesis, at 
least partly or parenthetically I will address some of the pitfalls that he mentions: 
 
 
10 
 
1. Assuming that, if groups separate according to author, the separation is authorial. 
… 
4. Assuming that an author cannot vary from his or her normal style when carrying out a 
particular assignment, or under a particular internal or external influence. (Craig 2004) 
To make the first assumption valid one would need to control for all the other factors like 
genre, topic, etc., and only then what is left is the authorial; the fourth assumption, in turn, 
is crucial in the study of pastiches, translations, etc. 
In his Principal Component Analysis of 25 Shakespeare’s plays, on seeing some 
patterns Craig (ibidem) notes that “one would want to know how constant these patterns 
are when a play is added to the set or taken away, for instance, or if different variables are 
used, for instance by splitting to into infinitive, prepositional, and adverbial uses,” which 
are recurring nightmares of a stylometrists, i.e., dependence of the results on the corpus 
and on the set of features comprising the basis (incidentally, even the exact mathematical 
sense of the word would be correct here) for the analysis. Many such problems are shortly 
exemplified in the following passage: 
Beyond these are questions of the design of the experiment. Why choose words, and why these 
words? Why choose plays, when one might choose oeuvres or periods as larger aggregations, or 
characters or scenes as segmentations, or some combination? How would the main lines of 
differentiation in a larger set of Elizabethan and Jacobean plays, going beyond Shakespeare, 
compare? (Craig 2004) 
Chapter 2 will orbit around the first of these whys, which is irrevocably married to the 
questions posed by Craig a bit further: 
What, for example, is the status and nature of the axes of differences that the procedure has derived? 
They have a precise definition – each variable and each case has a score for each vector – but this 
says nothing about the stylistic context. (ibidem) 
I tend to think about these fundamentals in terms of a cooking recipe metaphor: the 
style, as seen by the present computational methods, in not just a layered hamburger – 
rather, it is a dough with its ingredients combined and blended, and chemically and 
physically bonded. What stylometry strives and struggles to achieve requires more 
knowledge than just the right proportions of words to mix; like a true alchemist we need to 
know what reactions take place. How can you make a golem from perfectly weighted 
amounts of oxygen (32500 g), carbon (9250 g), hydrogen (4750 g), nitrogen (160 g), etc., 
or how can you make a Frankenstein’s living human from eyeballs, arms, and livers, for 
that matter? Both physical and biological and linguistic structures are emergent (Anderson 
et al. 1972), and unfortunately only the higher-level ones are interpretable – or rather have 
meaning – for us. Even such a view can be contested: 
 A central problem for [Stanley] Fish is the assumption that meaning resides within the text rather 
than being created as it is read. He argues that the formal features described by stylisticians are 
meaningless except in relation to the reader's perception of them within a reading situation. (Craig 
2004)  
Hence, instead of discussing further whether computational stylistics is  
at best, a powerful new line of evidence in long-contested questions of style; [or] at worst, an 
elaborate display of meaningless patterning, and an awkward mismatch between words and numbers 
and the aesthetic and the statistical (ibidem)  
in the next chapters I will aspire to make the first expression a step closer to the truth and 
the second one leap farther. 
 
 
11 
 
 
The aims, or hopes, as to what can be evidenced by the means of quantitative 
approaches “are most naturally associated with questions of authorship and style, but they 
can also be used to investigate larger interpretive issues like plot, theme, genre, period, 
tone, and modality” (Hoover 2008). Also Burrows (2004) makes it explicit that the 
different textual levels can be traced in such an analysis: 
Differences in level of discourse (as in the wide-ranging contrasts between Latinate forms like 
ascend and Germanic equivalents like go up); in genre (as between the past-tense verbs of 
retrospective narrative and the present tense of most disquisitory writing); and in historical 
provenance (as in the shift from thou to you) – all these and many more are reflected in systematic 
relationships among the frequencies of the very common words.  
Choosing subsets of word frequency lists, as Burrows did, is a way of disentangling such 
different factors. Indeed one can choose an optimal subset of features that generate the best 
authorial or other distinction. 
Since this pattern is certainly not author-driven, the question is whether other inferences can be 
drawn. A close study of the way the poems cluster offers rough but suggestive distinctions between 
predominantly monologic, dialogic, narrative, and reflective forms of rhetoric. 
I would like to make these observations, though, a little less anecdotal. The problem 
with authorship attribution often is that the interpretation of what made two texts or groups 
of texts close or distant (or further, clustered together or not) is made a posteriori, e.g., 
“Charles Cotton's A Voyage to Ireland in Burlesque, is isolated by its narrative mode and 
its colloquial speech-register” (Burrows 2004) or “Why do they cross the border between 
verse and prose? The best explanation, I believe, is that Stapylton favors a dialogue of 
brief, deictic interchange and only rarely offers a large, poetic set-speech” (ibidem; 
emphasis mine). In fact, Burrows already knows such high-level characteristics like 
narration and register and after seeing the result he assumes these are the characteristics 
that made the author different. This is possible, but in principle we do not know what the 
precise connection between word frequencies and register or narration is, and then how the 
clustering is affected (well, this is known a little better). [Some of the pitfalls of authorship 
attribution based on Nearest Shrunken Centroids, but valid in general, are discussed at 
length by Fields et al. (2011).] 
I seek to find this connection from the corpus data itself. How much is it the 
register or narration, and how much is it some other idiosyncrasies of that particular author 
that made him stand out. Frankly speaking – as one should not in a master’s thesis, – 
without answering that question usually no new insights can be gained, but only previous 
intuition are confirmed, such as: these pieces are by the same author, these pieces are the 
same genre, etc. Of course, even such results are valuable when comparison is made 
between texts that have not been previously read (which is exactly my case in the next 
chapters), e.g., because “computers obviously surpass our unassisted powers in managing 
large textual corpora, singling out unique forms or gathering all the instances of common 
ones” (Burrows 2004). Such assistance is irreplaceable in performing a very large-scale 
analysis of hundreds books, or millions for that matter, for which one does not have human 
work power to obtain any intuition. 
To cherish even a little more hope in computational methods, if the algorithms of 
authorship attribution are not 100% accurate, this may be good news, for it may point to 
the fact that some book of an author is indeed different in some respect (which can be 
observed, e.g., for Virginia Woolf). This, in turn, might confirm the facts already known, 
but might just as well be a new unknown.  
 
 
12 
 
1.1.  Methods 
 
Stylometry is about measuring style. Thus, before performing a stylometric experiment we 
need to decide precisely what observable quantity we want to measure. Hoover (2008) 
makes an introductory overview of what can or has been counted in texts: 
Almost any item, feature, or characteristic of a text that can be reliably identified, can be counted, 
and most of them have been counted. Decisions about what to count can be obvious, problematic, or 
extremely difficult, and poor initial choices can lead to wasted effort and worthless results. 
Stamatatos (2009) also presents a catalogue of stylometric features and the tools needed for 
their measurement. I list some of them below, leaving aside the semantic and most of the 
syntactic ones: 
 characters, 
 character n-grams, 
 word/clause/sentence/paragraph/text lengths, 
 words, 
 word n-grams, 
 type-to-token ratio (i.e., the number of different words in a text divided by the 
number of their occurrences in a text), 
 part-of-speech (PoS) tags. 
As one might expect, the character counts are not too informative; characters have no 
meaning by themselves; but let us assume for a moment that there are two identical-twin 
authors, and one overuses the word “undoubtedly”, while the other “indubitably”. Then, 
ceteris paribus, the frequency of the letters d, e, o, u would be higher for the first one, 
while a, b, i for the second one, and that’s how we could distinguish between the two. In 
principle, under certain circumstances one could think of inferring from such information 
the number of sentences, clauses, or words. 
In reality, since the letters from the example contain also the information on all the 
other hundreds of thousands words churned out by the twin authors, the difference between 
the their letter frequencies would be very tiny. In fact, if there were some randomness 
involved in their writing – that is to say, in this or that novel they make slightly different 
word choices, but on average, in all the novels they have written, both of them use the 
same words – then by comparing only one novel of each, the indubitable difference could 
be rendered doubtful or insignificant (which on this occasion is also an accurate statistical 
term, mind you). In other words, the fluctuation, i.e., the slight random difference in the 
word usage between single novels could be enough to submerge the subtle 
‘indubitable/undoubted’ difference. Some discussion of the care one has to pay to the 
(natural) variance in the data can be seen in Hoover (2008). 
There are thus two profound problems of different nature: the first concerns 
interpretability of the results, their explanatory power, and their connection to information 
content, language structure, and linguistic theories in general (what does it mean that 
authors have different character counts? where did it come from? did they write on 
different topics or in different styles?); the second concerns the mathematical laws 
governing information retrieval (probability, statistics, information theory, etc.), which 
provide tools to tell us how certain we can be that a given conclusion is true (e.g., these 
books have been written by different authors) given some information (e.g., these two 
authors usually have such and such character frequencies). 
For a second let us focus on the second problem: the statistics. This involves several 
issues as the size of the corpus needed (5000 word text samples for EN and PL in, see Eder 
 
 
13 
 
(2013) or for a different machine learning method Luyckx and Daelemans (2011), proper 
normalisation or standardization, bootstrapping, and all the techniques warding of the 
menace of insignificance. The problems of too little statistics and randomness are however 
heavily dependent on the mere choice of what is measured. Counting individual letters will 
result in much smaller errors because there are just a few of them, while they occur very 
frequently (about 3250 on this page, which makes it 125 counts per letter on average). 
Counting words is less reliable, since the total number of words in English is possibly well 
above a quarter of a million (and there are about 600 word tokens on this page, but as 
much as 320 different word types, which makes it less than 2 on average). As can be easily 
imagined, a fluctuation of 2 character counts per 100 is fairly small, but 1 word in 2 is 
probably too much to lead to any significant conclusions. 
Coming back to the first problem, of which I intuitively think as flattening of 
information (i.e., reducing all content to just several incomprehensible variables – the 
numbers describing letter occurrences), it is a chasm which disconnects the numerical 
result from a humanly interpretable linguistic content. (As a side note, this is also a chasm 
that may seem to separate literature and language scholars from literature and language 
researchers who utilise computation.) This issue does pose some threats, but is not vital for 
authorship attribution, where one simply wants to know who wrote what. If the question is 
not whether two books or authors are related, but how and why they are or are not, such 
simple, flattened, numerical characteristics do not suffice. As Heuser and Le-Khac (2012) 
remark, “the greatest challenge of developing digital humanities methods may not be how 
to cull data from humanistic objects, but how to analyse that data in meaningfully 
interpretable ways.” Providing a brick for the bridge over this chasm is one of the main 
aims of this master’s dissertation. 
Just as inferring from letter counts, hypothetically, the number of sentences or words, 
from the frequencies of words one could attempt at inferring the number of sentences or 
the most probable statistics of clause types. Similarly, word n-grams ought to have 
inscribed some information on phrases, collocations, relationships of prepositions and 
verbs, some word-punctuation interplay, etc. 
Again, to show how this may work with the proviso that 
Although letter n-grams lack any transparent relationship to the meaning or style of a text, and are 
unlikely to be attractive to researchers who are interested in broader literary questions, word n-
grams are likely to become increasingly popular because they may both improve accuracy and allow 
the critic to focus on meaningful word groups. (Hoover 2008) 
let us resort to an example of character n-grams. They already do contain some 
morphological information (e.g., 3-grams could detect an increased number of gerunds ‘i-
n-g’, but such grammatical information is of course blended with other, e.g., both 
“boring”, “bring”, and “bingo” would spawn among others the ‘ing’ 3-gram), it also 
contains some information on word co-occurrences (when spaces are included as 
characters); 3-grams would also contain 1-, 2-, and 3-letter words, which includes many 
prepositions, pronouns, determiners and other function words. This shows that some 
residual, mixed information can be mined in such simple features as character n-gram 
frequencies. 
The last possible choices of measurable quantities might involve conjoint frequency 
lists of n-grams of different sizes, or both character and words n-grams, etc. It is also 
possible to include or exclude only certain positions of such frequency lists, e.g., one could 
base the comparison of two authors only on the verbs, or perhaps on all the words but the 
ones from the maritime domain. The choice depends on the particular research question 
that one asks and on the data available. Additionally, as can be deduced from the 
 
 
14 
 
paragraphs containing comments on statistics, there is a certain counterbalance between the 
meaningful information content that can be measured in a text and the statistical 
uncertainty of that measurement. For this reason, taking too long n-grams may introduce 
too much noise (another term for a random fluctuation). 
Eder (2011) compare which features (for English, German, Latin, and Polish texts) 
are most effective in authorship attribution: word uni-, bi-, tri-, and tetra-grams, letter bi- 
up to hexa-grams, a combination of words and word bi-grams, and a combination of words 
and letter penta-grams. The results that are relevant to us are for English: the far end of 
word frequency list (5000-10000), although the attributive success rate is high for the rest 
of words as well; for Polish: 100-500 most frequent words or 1000-2000 letter 5- or 6-
grams. 
In a little more recent work Rybicki and Eder (2011) Eder focused on words (i.e., 
unigrams) only; their “heat maps” of attributive success show that the wordlists’ initial 
position and length is optimal at: 0-600 and 400-maximum, respectively, for EN novels, 
although it works almost as good pretty much everywhere; 350-450 and 350-750, 
respectively, for PL novel classics. Although as yet there are no more detailed studies, the 
optimal choices of feature types and lists seem to depend strongly on the language 
(supposedly, on the degree of its inflection or perhaps the literary tradition and strength of 
non-authorial signals). 
 
1.2.  Burrows’s Delta 
 
Since this thesis is not aimed at a comprehensive review of different methods, I stick to 
just one, which is based on what is called Delta distance between frequency lists (Burrows 
2002a), which has proven to be reliable, and scores one of the best results in authorship 
attribution comparisons (as also shown in Figure 14 in Chapter 3 for the EN100 
benchmark). 
 The scheme is as follows: 
I. calculate (word) frequency lists for all books in the corpus; hence, we obtain 
N × M matrix 
F = (
f11 ⋯ f1N
⋮ ⋱ ⋮
fM1 ⋯ fMN
) 
where N is the number of books and M the number of words, whose elements fwb 
are the frequencies of w-th word in b-th book (i.e., percentage of occurrences of w 
among all the tokens in the book), so that each column contains the information on 
one book, and each row contains information on a particular word. Mark, that we 
may restrict the set of words we want to take into account, e.g., by taking only the 
words that appear in all texts (see culling in Appendix B.3) or only the first 100 
most frequent words in the corpus, or perhaps only the verbs, and so on. Other less 
straightforward ways of selecting words of moderate and low-frequencies are, e.g., 
Burrows’s Zeta and Iota (Burrows 2007). Picking up just a few words is also 
possible, but (at the very least) with the proviso that “while useful to distinguish 
between one particular pair of authors, may be irrelevant when comparing another 
pair of authors” (Luyckx and Daelemans 2011). 
II. for each word w calculate the mean μw and standard deviation σw of frequencies 
for the whole corpus 
 
 
15 
 
μw =
1
N
∑ fwb
N
b=1
 
σw = √
1
N − 1
∑(fwb − μw)2
N
b=1
 
 
III. standardize frequencies fwb, i.e., replace them with their z-scores (note that the  
z-scores are strongly corpus dependent, since the mean and standard deviation 
depend on the corpus that we have chosen): 
zwb =
fwb−μw
σw
. 
In short, such numbers tell how many standard deviations from the corpus average 
does a frequency of a given word in a given book lie; or, phrased differently, how 
abnormally does the word behave in a given book as compared to the whole corpus. 
If, say, zwb > 1, the word w is suspiciously more frequent in a book b than in the 
rest of the corpus, while if  
zwb < −1, w is suspiciously less frequent than normally (in the corpus). 
IV. finally, calculate distances between the texts in the corpus (one can also calculate 
distance to a model text outside corpus, e.g., a benchmark text of a given author): 
δba =
1
M
∑ |zwb − zwa|
M
w=1 ,  
which is a distance between books a and b. All such distances can once again be 
stored in the form of a symmetric matrix: 
∆= (
δ11 ⋯ δ1N
⋮ ⋱ ⋮
δN1 ⋯ δNN
). 
Such matrix can be treated as input data for some clustering algorithms as 
described in Chapter 3.1. 
 
Some extensions of the Burrows Delta can be found in Hoover (2004a), Hoover 
(2004b), Eder et al. (2013), Argamon (2008), but are not discussed here. Limitations of the 
Delta, some optimal parameters for the most frequent words (MFW), and improvements 
with a cosine distance can be found in Smith and Aldridge (2011), while some criticism in 
Vickers (2011). 
 
  
 
 
16 
 
1.3.  Stylometry of translation 
 
An overview of some most notable results in quantitative literary studies (as of 2008) is 
presented in Hoover (2008), and one cannot comprehensively summarize all of them 
without writing a whole long review paper – the wealth of methods and the range of texts 
studied by authorship attribution and stylometry scholars is becoming overwhelming. 
However, there still is a subset of problems of a subtler nature: 
Little or no attention has been paid so far to the possibility of describing the ‘style’ of a translator or 
group of translators in terms of what might be distinctive about the language they produce … not in 
the traditional sense of whether the style of a given author is adequately conveyed in the relevant 
translation but in terms of whether individual literary translators can be shown to use distinctive 
styles of their own. (Baker 2000) 
Indeed, translation gives rise to difficult stylometric obstacles, because one cannot in 
principle know 
a) if or how a style of a text produced in one language is systematically transferred 
into another language in the process, 
b) how the translator influences or contaminates the style of the target text with his or 
her own linguistic habits, predilections, or conscious choices, 
c) what happens when collaborative translation takes place (more than one translator 
or a translator collaborating with an editor). 
For instance, the second issue might result in works by different authors appear more alike 
– i.e., more than in the source language – when translated by the same translator or perhaps 
by translators having the same background (e.g., born or working in the same place or 
time). Still, the works by Rybicki (2012, 2013) show that in a corpus of translated texts it is 
the authorial rather than the translatorial signal that is visible by the virtue of Delta 
method; it is, as well, rather a volume of a book, rather than a translator that is stronger. As 
has been shown for PL↔EN and EN↔FR translations, only in a corpus written by the 
same author can dendrograms (i.e., graphs alike Figure 3) reach the translation level. 
I will summarize here two selected examples [for more, consult Hoover (2008)] of 
what results can be obtained thanks to stylometry: 
1) In one of his seminal papers, Burrows (2002b) examined 15 English 
translations of Juvenal’s Tenth Satire (from Henry Vaughan, 1646, to Peter 
Green, 1967; 4 of them in prose, the rest in verse). Four of the translators were 
also poets (John Dryden, Samuel Johnson, Thomas Shadwell, and Henry 
Vaughan), thus allowing to attribute authorship to their translations by 
comparison with their own works and the works of other poets of the English 
Restoration period (25 poets in total). Using his Delta procedure, Burrows was 
able to show that the stylistic signature of some authors (e.g., Dryden) 
disappears, when they translate. Such an observation makes it impracticable to 
attribute authorship of a translation by way of comparison with a translator’s 
own pieces, or at least there might be a bit of a lottery involved. 
Nevertheless, the method deals well with an inverse question: knowing the 
author, which of the translations was most probably made by him or her? Delta 
can also show which of the translators best concealed their own style and which 
adhered to it – thus, possibly disregarding the style of the original. In fact, by 
producing average statistics of all the translations Johnson lies furthest from the 
mean, which might indicate that his work was least faithful to the original as 
well. Such large numerical deviations from the mean word frequency 
 
 
17 
 
distribution also show a way to comment on some particular usage of words by 
the translator (e.g., by close reading one might then understand why there are so 
few articles or personal pronouns in the Johnson’s text). 
2) The paper by Rybicki and Heydel (2013) is an example of a successful 
translatorial (in analogy to authorial) attribution, especially with respect to the 
point c) above. The case study concerned Virginia Woolf’s Night and Day 
(1919) translated into Polish by Anna Kołyszko, who died in 2009 leaving the 
work only partly finished (some chapters finished plus a draft of some further 
part), which resulted in another translator, Magda Heydel, taking over: editing 
the drafts, translating what was left, and editing the whole. Both translators that 
could boast notable translatorial achievements (e.g., Heydel’s translations of: 
Woolf’s Jacob’s Room, A Moment’s Liberty and Between the Acts, Graham 
Swift’s The Light of Day and Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, and Kołyszko’s 
translations of: McCarthy’s Child of God, Miller’s Tropic of Capricorn, Roth’s 
Portnoy’s Complaint, Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children). Additionally, Heydel, 
being a Woolf scholar, with a number of strategic stylistic characteristics of 
Woolf’s text she wanted to retain, did a thorough editing, modifying especially 
the point of view and perspective of the narration. 
The stylometric methods (once again, Burrows’s Delta followed by a cluster 
analysis, which was bootstrapped to obtain a consensus tree diagram), however, 
were able to clearly distinguish which chapters were translated by Kołyszko, 
including the one that was only a draft, and which by Heydel. This was also one 
of the rare occasions that the author – well, in this case the translator – could be 
consulted if the attribution had been correct. How delicate such a stylometric 
analysis can be was further illustrated by what happens when the two parts of 
the book are immersed in a larger corpus of texts translated from EN to PL: the 
translatorial signal then became submerged by the stronger authorial one. 
Of course, as stressed in Rybicki (2010), any computational stylistics apprentice 
should be reminded – myself being in the ranks – that the traditional methods like 
“biography, history, graphology, traditional stylistics” ought to be used first, and only when 
they fail the stylometry reserves are to be thrown into the battle. Some initial information 
and a hypothesis on authorship is always needed. The traditional methods notwithstanding, 
I am of the opinion that stylometry can also be used for a large-scale pre-processing stage, 
e.g., to separate the uninteresting from the suspicious texts, and only then trying the more 
effort intensive traditional tasks. A case study that can be referred to in support of this view 
is the paper by Rybicki (2010), in which he scrutinizes the corpus containing translations 
(by 4 different authors and 2 different languages – unless some relay translation took 
place) and the translator’s own works (both ethnographic studies and memoires). The latter 
texts were known to be dictated to and edited by a wife of the translator in general, and the 
memoires of the husband in particular were discovered to be written by the wife, as the 
original manuscripts, letters, etc., had been found and examined. Nonetheless, the 
stylometric analysis was able to provide some new hypotheses: that some of the 
translations seem attributed (more heavily edited or co-authored) to the wife unlike the 
others. It seems that in traditional and computational methods can take turns. 
 
 
  
 
 
18 
 
I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as 
myself; […] It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from 
all the world; but on that account we shall be more 
attached to one another. 
 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
 
 
2. Disentangling grammar, topic, translation 
 
It has already been a recurring topic in this thesis that 
Apart from individual style, various other factors determine variation in text, such as topic, genre, 
register, and domain. Ultimately, authorship attribution techniques should be sufficiently robust to 
discriminate between these interacting sources of variation. That said, keeping a maximum of these 
interfering factors constant, is a good strategy for finding reliable indicators of style. (Luyckx and 
Daelemans 2011) 
Whereas the extraction of a text’s topic or automatic methods of determining 
characteristics of genre, register, etc. are complex theoretical and computational problems 
in themselves, there already do exist well-developed natural language processing tools for 
part-of-speech (PoS) tagging, lemmatizing, or parsing texts. Therefore, in what follows I 
present an approach to discriminating more general factors, namely vocabulary and 
grammar, however vague it may sound, and further variation stemming from translation. 
The methodology, just as quoted above, is conceptually simple but hard to do in practice: 
keep things constant. 
 
2.1.  Methods: hybrid randomised texts 
 
While already writing up the thesis I came across the article by Winder (2008), who 
develops an approach very much the same as I have taken; the aim, however, is different, 
or perhaps it is just the reverse of the same coin: Winder’s efforts are directed towards 
computer-aided text production, “accelerated writing” as he calls it, while the direction I 
took was computational methods of unraveling the elements of style of existing texts. 
Although our goals face each other, the ways of achieving them became 
surprisingly convergent. Winder’s primary interest is text transmutation, e.g.,  
chimeric poetry which combines the style of two poets. One example is the Rimbaude-laire, a set of 
poems built from templates extracted from Rimbeau's poems and lexical items from Baudelaire's (or 
vice versa). (ibidem) 
Hence, whenever I fail to state my point clearly, the reader’s understanding of these issues 
will surely benefit from reading the Winder’s text. 
While I have not reached as far as Winder, the map he outlines is akin to my view 
of how to proceed: “automatic techniques depend on the formally described topographies 
of the source and target texts. Beyond characters, more important linguistic topographies 
are syntax, lexical meaning, and narrative” (ibidem). 
 
 
 
19 
 
The precise way of random computer generation of the hybrid (chimeric) texts with 
respect to grammar, as analysed in Chapter 2.2., is as follows: 
1) take a text (or a collection of texts) of author A and tag its parts of speech, 
2) record the sequence of PoS for the text (or compute PoS distribution for A), 
3) take a text (or a collection of texts) of author B and tag it too, 
4) for each PoS class collect all the words that belong to it in text of B into a “bag” (the 
bag should either contain all the tokens or the distribution of types), 
5) generate the new text: for each PoS tag in the sequence from 2) draw randomly a token 
from the bag corresponding to that PoS. 
In such a way we obtain a text – non-sensical, of course – whose coarse-grained grammar 
has the statistical properties of author A, while it uses only the words used by author B and 
the word frequency lists within each PoS class are the same as for author B. (It should be 
noted that in producing the hybrid texts I do not intend to generate a readable or intelligible 
text. Such efforts have been made, particularly with the aim of fooling journal editors or 
just producing nonsense pseudo-scientific gobbledygook. As yet, I do not make use of 
these advances.) 
The procedure is a rough version of what Winder (2008) would call “syntactic 
templates”, which “are useful starting points for generation because they largely resolve 
the major systemic linguistic constraints and so set the stage for a free stylistic and 
referential combinatory.” One must complement this statement with a comment that these 
systemic constraints also do vary between the authors and are indicative of authors style, as 
will be seen in the next chapters. Winder was not concerned with this issue when 
generating a hybrid text. 
 What is more challenging is selecting semantically relevant combinations from all the possibilities. 
A semantic templating system requires a different set of linguistic resources. (Winder 2008) 
In the semantic domain, Winder goes on substituting stereotypically gender marked words 
of one sex with the other or finally substituting words with their hypernyms or synonyms 
or words belonging to the same semantic domain or synset – something that is yet beyond 
the ambit of this thesis. Winder discusses even higher level developments: those of 
automatic narrative generation. 
 
Now, in what kind of problems can such a text generation procedure avail us? In the 
present situation, we have a tool for extracting some information from texts, e.g., 
authorship, but we do not have a model for a text of a given author. Or rather we have – it 
is the word frequency list or the like – but it is a meagre model, too simplified to account 
for the phenomena that we want to study. The goal now is to make the model richer, less 
simplified, but tractable and manipulable, still. 
In other words, a model-of is made in a consciously simplifying act of interpretation. Although this 
kind of model is not necessarily a physical object, the goal of simplification is to make tractable or 
manipulable what the modeler regards as interesting about it. (McCarty 2008; original emphasis) 
What we want to trace is the specific layers of authorial style; what we want to manipulate 
are our null hypotheses of what contributes to the style. Thus, the model used in the 
procedure 1)-5) includes not just the word frequencies, but a conglomerate of words and 
their PoS tags, allowing to manipulate the word frequencies indirectly by manipulating the 
distributions of speech categories. And following further the line of McCarty (2008) 
 
 
20 
 
thought, “the exact correspondence between model and object … may be violated 
deliberately in order to study the consequences.” That is precisely what the hybrid text 
generation does. It computes a model of a text by author A by following its certain 
statistical properties and then it violates some of these properties (the distributions of 
tokens in PoS bags) in order to check how much a new hypothetical text differs from the 
real one. 
 
2.2.  Results: Hybrid computer-generated texts 
 
Since the jump from distance table to the clustering (extracting the authorial groups) is far 
from trivial, there is no way of telling how much the distance has to change in order for a 
fake text to be misattributed to another author. That is why at first I study merely the 
change in distance between two texts (which is just one entry in the table of Delta 
distances, which is fed into the clustering algorithm), and only then do I show how it 
affects grouping texts. 
 
 
Figure 1 Burrows’s Delta distance from Agnes Grey depending on the number of most 
frequent words (MFW) taken in to account. The dashed curves correspond to real novels, and 
the continuous lines to the hybrid computer-generated texts, respectively. 
As shown in Figure 1, the distance between Agnes Grey and itself is 0, but already 
a distance to another novel of the same author can takes values between 0.6-0.8. The 
reference point for the hybrid randomization is a text that uses the exact distribution of tags 
from Agnes Grey and the concrete words are drawn from the catalogue of words for each 
given tag, where the vocabulary distribution reflects the distribution extracted from the 
book: the distance is far from zero, but it is very hard to find a pair of novels in an 
authorial collection that would be as close. Another continues green line represents another 
hybrid randomised text, where the distributions were taken from both Anne Brontë’s books 
present in the corpus. 
 
 
21 
 
Next, we see that the distance between Thackeray’s Vanity Fair and Brontë’s Agnes 
Grey is much higher; especially in the regime where synsemantic words constitute majority 
(MFW = 100-200). Subjecting Thackeray to the same distribution of tags, however, is 
enough to produce a significant drop. It can already be seen that the lower number of 
MFW one takes into account, the more significant the distribution of tags is. This appears 
to be connected to the fact that the percentage of function words is much greater for the 
very first MFW, while for higher number of MFW the content words take over. 
 
  
Figure 2 Burrows’s Delta distance depending on the number of most frequent words 
(MFW), a magnification of Figure 1. Each of the orange and brownish continuous curves 
correspond to a randomized Thackeray’s text, in which the distribution of words from a 
given PoS category was pasted from Agnes Grey. The most important PoS tags are: 
determiners (DT), subordinating conjunctions and prepositions (IN), nouns (NN), adjectives 
(JJ), and adverbs (RB). 
 
This presupposition is confirmed in Figure 2, in which the determiners, 
subordinating conjunctions, and prepositions are the parts of speech that strongly account 
for the similarity between texts in the regime of 100-300 MFW, while substitution of 
nouns, adjectives, adverbs makes the texts more similar for greater number of MFW taken 
into account. (That verbs do not seem to play such an important role is probably due to the 
fact they are divided into several subclasses.) It can be conjectured that since the PoS 
categories containing synsemantic words are much smaller, it is only their distribution that 
distinguishes the authors (because the authors usually use quite the same range of these 
words), while for the open class of lexical words the substitution which made the curves to 
lower so much in Figure 2 involved to much greater extent the topic or generally the 
content of the book. The cumulative effect of substituting all the function words or all the 
content words requires recalculating all the distance tables and has not been done here. 
 
The effect of the distance change of individual PoS on authorship attribution, 
however, is checked within the small collection of British fiction, and can best be 
visualised by dendrograms below, see Figure 3-Figure 5. Although faking the PoS tag 
 
 
22 
 
distribution of A. Brontë in the hybrid text that used Thackeray’s vocabulary is not enough 
to fool the clustering algorithms, one can already see that such a change was able to move 
the text to the fringes of Thackeray’s authorial group, when only the first 100 most 
frequent words were used in the analysis. This shows that such a coarse-grained 
information already contains traces of authorial style that we would like to pinpoint. 
The additional decrease of distance between the texts brought by the substitution of 
word frequency distributions of a particular part of speech already does fool the algorithm, 
see Figure 4. The IN and NN are in truth the most numerous word classes in English 
(around 11-12% of tokens each), as shown later, e.g., in Figure 7, which I assume is partly 
responsible for this little success. This misattribution does not take place when a consensus 
tree over 100-1000 MFW is drawn, but as could be expected from Figure 2, in which the 
NN line keeps low for the whole range of MFW, indeed substitution of just the nouns 
makes the hybrid text least similar to the rest of Thackeray’s works. 
 
 
Figure 3 Dendrogram of classic British novels (see Appendix A.1) together with the 
computer-generated hybrid text based on Thackeray’s vocabulary and A. Brontë’s PoS-tag 
distribution. The hybrid text (labeled fakeABrontë_Thackerey1) is apparently least 
Thackeray-ish. (Note that there are only 100 MFW taken into account.) 
 
 
 
23 
 
  
  
Figure 4 Dendrogram of classic British novels together with the computer-
generated hybrid text based on A. Brontë’s PoS-tag distribution and the frequencies 
of words in IN or NN categories, respectively, and the rest being Thackeray’s 
vocabulary. The hybrid texts were clustered together with Anne Brontë’s other novels 
(note that there are only 100 MFW taken into account). 
 
 
24 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Consensus trees of classic British novels together with the computer-generated 
hybrid text based on A. Brontë’s PoS-tag distribution and the frequencies of words in IN or 
NN categories, respectively, and the rest being Thackeray’s vocabulary. The hybrid text stays 
on the Thackeray’s branch for 100-1000 MFW, but the substitution of nouns is powerful enough to 
make it the least Thackeray-ish one. 
 
  
 
 
25 
 
2.3.  Results: Translatorial traces or the influence of the 
original language 
 
In this chapter, the material consists of a series of novels written by a single author and 
translated by a single translator only, hence no conclusions can be drawn as regards 
distinctness of literary translations from the rest of literature in the target language 
(provided that there is any in general); instead, I attempt to examine whether the 
translations under scrutiny are in any way untypical by comparison with the native, target 
language literature. One would expect that translators are very much aware of their 
language use and can consciously and meticulously screen the foreign language 
interference that could manifest itself as calques; they are trained to avoid them. 
Furthermore, translated novels are also edited, proofread, etc., to ensure correctness 
according to the target language norms. Lack of calques and language errors, however, 
does not exclude language transfer in the form of a systematic bias towards this or other 
correct grammatical structure. Thus, my focus is on what is encoded in the basic 
grammatical information, namely frequencies of parts of speech, so that one could trace 
systemic differences from the norm. Whether they be caused by the influence of the 
language of the original, or the style of the original, or the style of the translator, is not easy 
to judge if at all possible. 
To proceed with the study I began with constructing a common part-of-speech tag-
set for English and Polish, as described in Appendix B.1, in order to compare tag 
distributions in the originals and translations, in case it could provide us with a clue as to 
where any language transfer could be expected. I believe more sophisticated tag-sets are 
needed for that purpose than the 12-PoS universal tag-set introduced by Petrov et al. 
(2012), which, incidentally, still lacks a mapping from the Polish language tree banks. It 
might also be the case that searching for language transfer in translated texts might involve 
a different tag-set than just the one used for the purpose of parsing if one already expects 
some specific syntactic structures to be systematically rendered by different parts of 
speech. 
Let us first proceed with look at how merely the tag distributions for PL and EN differ, 
see Figure 6. The full explanation of the tag meanings can be found in Santorini (1990), 
and some necessary modifications are described in Appendix B.1. In short, the most 
common tags are: nouns (NN) and proper nouns (NNP), various forms of verbs and 
participles (starting with V), adjectives (JJ) and adverbs (RB) in different degrees, personal 
pronouns (PRP), coordinating conjunctions (CC) and subordinating conjunctions together 
with prepositions (IN). The differences in the tag distributions are not of much interest to 
us, however; they serve us only as a reference when we go on to study translations. 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
Figure 6 The differences between PoS-(and punctuation)-tag distributions often come 
from different tagging schema for the two languages, e.g., putting together subordinating 
conjunctions and prepositions (IN) in English. Specific comments can be found in Appendix 
B.1. The error bars represent bookwise standard deviations of the number of tokens in a given PoS 
class. 
 
 
Figure 7 An example of how Chesterton’s PoS-tag distribution (red) differs from the 
EN100 corpus mean (green). 
 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Example correlations between PoS tags. Each point represents a book in 
EN100 corpus. The three red points correspond to works by Chesterton (cf. Figure 7). The 
absolute values of Pearson correlations between pairs (JJ, NN), (PRP, NN), (PRP, VB) are 
slightly more than 0.5, (VB, NN) almost 0.6, and (PRP, NN) is 0.7. Note that this is a very 
coarse-grained behaviour on the scale of whole books. 
The more interesting information is how the distributions of particular authors vary 
with respect to the mean distribution of the whole corpus. This is illustrated in Figure 7 
with collective distribution for three works of Chesterton’s, where, e.g., noun, adjective, 
pronoun, and verb frequencies are the ones most diverging from the mean. As noted in 
Argamon (2008), one has to be careful with correlations between such deviations; indeed, 
it appears that there are some correlations and anticorrelations between these parts of 
speech, as can be seen in Figure 8, which means that to some extent increased number of 
nouns already accounts for increased number of adjectives and decreased number of verbs 
 
 
28 
 
and pronouns. This in turn, could be expected to a certain extent from superficial 
knowledge of grammar (such as: “adjectives modify nouns”). A more detailed connection 
of these collective deviations to style, however, is missing. 
The particular English-to-Polish translation example can perhaps reveal something 
more intriguing. Below I analyse the corpus of Discworld fantasy novels by Terry Pratchett 
and their translations, all by the same Polish translator, Piotr Cholewa. 
As shown in Figure 9, the number of full stops, quotation marks, and expletives is 
more than one standard deviation higher than in the original; the number of the 
subordinating and coordinating conjunctions is, as expected from the above, much lower, 
and possibly present, past, and gerund verb forms are slightly more frequent than in the 
benchmark corpus. Very generally speaking, this might indicate a larger proportion of short 
dynamic sentences. 
Now, what happens in translation is reproducing the pattern of deviations from 
benchmark: by visual inspection all directions (i.e., higher or lower than average) are 
retained but for VBG and quotation marks. In the former, it might be mistagging the 
gerunds in English and an inappropriate design of the common tag-set (where I put in VBG 
Polish gerunds as well as some of adjectival and adverbial participles, whose usage is 
distributed somewhat differently than English gerunds and present participles). In the 
latter, the culprit is different typographical conventions in Polish, where character 
utterances in dialogues begin with a dash (as confirmed by larger count in the “:” tag 
class), and unfortunately, some tagging errors. 
For now, the results show that the translator probably followed the structure of the 
original text, but probably did not break out from the distribution of tags expected in Polish 
texts in general, as comparison with the Polish corpus shows (perhaps with the exception 
of suspicious overuse of punctuation – checking sentence lengths would involve some 
additional examination). 
An additional check over the joint behaviour of pairs of tags, Figure 10, shows 
some unexpected tendencies. 
 
Although these considerations do not yet reveal the translatorial component 
measured by authorship attribution methods (assuming there is any), they already allow to 
detect some fishy behavior. 
 
 
 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Tag distributions in the original and translated (EN -> PL) Discworld novels 
compared to respective benchmark distributions. 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Unnaturally correlated tags in Polish translation of Discworld (red) as 
compared to PL100 benchmark (black). The overall punctuation (upper panel: frequent 
sentence-final punctuation and infrequent commas) seems to be at the verge of what is 
normal in Polish. Similarly, rather scarce past participles and pronouns (bottom left) and 
simultaneous fairly abundant past and present tense forms, jointly indicate a style stretching 
at the limits of the normal usage.  
 
 
31 
 
There can be no community between you and me; we are 
enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in 
which one must fall. 
 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
 
 
3. Using methods of community detection to attribute 
authorship 
 
In this chapter I present an alternative to the standard classifiers and clustering algorithms 
utilized at the very end of the procedure chain attributing authorship – the so called 
community detection methods for complex networks [see Fortunato (2010) for a broad 
review]. They are a family of unsupervised methods, which means that they do not have a 
training sample and so generally do not fall into the trap of overtraining/overfitting. Only 
some kind of overtraining may take place, if these methods are parameterised; then, 
different optimal parameters may exist for different corpora. In this case, the resolution of 
the modularity null-model is such a parameter (Fortunato and Barthelemy 2007). This 
issue can be remedied to some extent, as there are some resolution-free methods (Traag 
et al. 2011), still to be tested on the linguistic data. 
Eder and Rybicki (2012) brush aside the unsupervised machine learning techniques, 
saying that “they require human interpretation of the degree of similarity between analysed 
samples” and so “are subjected to the attributor’s arbitrary decisions.” I hope that the 
examples I provide below take a stand against that view. In fact, the problem discussed in 
the paper quoted is about the large and highly unpredictable dependence of the results on 
training sample for the supervised methods – a matter non-existent in the unsupervised 
method I present. 
 In fact, as mentioned in Craig (2004), they do not really need bootstrapping. The 
methods of community detection compare the data with an  
in-built null model of what the whole table of connections should look like instead of 
constructing a model of each author from the training sample and then comparing all the 
test texts with these authorial models. Thus, needing just one iteration, these methods 
might be computationally faster. 
The algorithms presented here exist also in more sophisticated versions, where so 
called “overlapping communities” are allowed, i.e., some items can be classified into 
several groups. This is usually not welcome in authorship attribution, where we aim at 
finding the one and only author, but is similar to giving several best scores in cross-
validation procedure. The standard hierarchical clustering algorithms can be additionally 
enhanced with a bootstrap consensus technique providing a more stable and reliable results 
(Rybicki 2011); this might be possible for the network-based (as opposed to tree-based 
clustering) community detection methods as well. 
 
  
 
 
32 
 
3.1. Methods: graphs and clustering 
 
The clustering method presented here has been devised for clustering of graphs (in the 
sense of the graph theory), i.e., abstract entities which comprise so called vertices and 
edges (also called nodes and links), as exemplified in Figure 11. One of the virtues of such 
graphs is that they can be rewritten numerically in the form of matrices that encode the 
connections between the nodes. One of such matrices is the adjacency matrix, which for 
the graph in Figure 11 yields: 
 
[
 
 
 
 
0 1 1 0 1
0 0 0.3 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 2]
 
 
 
 
, 
 
where the first row says that node A is not connected to itself or to node D (zeros at 
positions 1 and 4) but it is connected to nodes B, C, and E; the second row shows that node 
B is connected with weight 0.3 to node C; and so on. 
Now, it can easily be seen that the table of distances ∆ in point IV of Section 1.2. is 
very similar to such adjacency matrix. The difference is that the adjacency matrix rather 
shows similarity between nodes, while ∆ shows distances, which roughly is a reciprocal: if 
two objects are not similar to each other, they are distant. The point is that from ∆ one can 
construct a graph, and so, seemingly, one could utilize algorithms for clustering analysis of 
graphs. 
One of the problems, however, is that the distance matrices produced by Burrows’s 
Delta are not sparse, quite the contrary, all but the diagonal elements are non-zero. In the 
graph representation this is a weighted complete graph, i.e., briefly, everything is connected 
to everything else. In such situation, the distance tables might need some pre-processing. 
Consider the extreme case, in which Delta distance from author A to him- or herself is 0; 
the inverse, the similarity, would be infinity; but the precise functional form of the relation 
between distance and similarity matrix, can be chosen fairly arbitrarily, which then can 
affect the final results. The chosen function is described in Appendix B.5. 
  
A 
 
0
.3 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E 
 
2 
Figure 11  Exemplary graph with 5 nodes (A, B, C, D, E), 1 undirected and 
unweighted link {A,C}, 1 undirected multiedge loop ({E,E},2), 2 directed unweighted 
links {A,B} and {A,E}, and 1 directed weighted link ((B,C),0.3). 
 
 
33 
 
3.2. Results: community detection algorithms 
versus the Delta 
 
Once we know the representation that is fed into the algorithms, one cautionary note is in 
place: Burrows’s Delta produces graphs which are complete. In fact, it appears that such 
structure of the data makes one of the best methods of community detection, Infomap 
(Edler and Rosvall 2013), fail. The method I use further on is the Louvain method of 
modularity maximisation as presented by Blondel et al. (2008). I compare these methods 
only on English language corpora, because the use of other languages, just as of other 
corpora, only changes the Delta distance table, which is an independent step before any 
clustering algorithm comes into play, while in this chapter the change in the method only 
involves taking a different clustering algorithm. 
 
 
Figure 12  Very dense (almost complete) graph produced from the table of Burrows’s 
Delta distances for the benchmark corpus of 100 EN novels. The visualization contains 
virtually no information. 
 
 
34 
 
 
Figure 13  Visualisation of the benchmark corpus of 100 EN novels utilising the 
information obtained from clustering (Blondel et al. 2008): each colour marks books 
considered by the algorithm to be authored by the same person; such groups of 1-4 books 
were aligned close to each other. Only the strongest links in the graph are shown for visual 
clarity (the clustering used all the links). 
As can be seen in Figure 13, the clustering of novels in EN100 benchmark 
according to the Louvain method of community detection works well. The usual accuracy 
of state-of-the-art methods is around 96-98%, as shown in Figure 14. 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 14  Results of authorship attribution on the EN100 benchmark with the use of 
Burrows’s Delta, Nearest Shrunken Centroids, and Support Vector Machines [as 
implemented by Eder et al. (2013), after 100-fold cross-validation. 
Actually, there does not exist an easy comparison between the results obtained by 
the supervised methods and the unsupervised community detection methods. The 
supervised ones, provide a Yes/No answer to the question “Does this book is similar to the 
other books written by A?”. In the community detection methods, we do not provide any 
training information saying “These books were written by A.” The only thing they do is 
finding groups of similar books, so the results they provide is: “Books no. 1, 7, 8 are in the 
same group; no. 2,3,4 are in the same group;” and so on; there is no a priori authorial label 
of the group. This might result for instance in two books of one author and two books of 
another author forming one group – but then which books should we consider 
misclassified? The first two, the second two, or all four? 
The way to approach it is to use Normalised Mutual Information (NMI) [first used 
in the context of comparing clusterings by Danon et al. (2005), which can compare the true 
authorial groups (which are known for the benchmark) with the groups obtained from 
clustering methods on information-theoretical grounds; it takes values from 0 (the true and 
found groups are totally unrelated) to 1 (they are identical), but its relation to the 
percentage of misclassified entities is non-linear and thus the value of NMI should not be 
interpreted as any such percentage.  
 
 
 
36 
 
 
Figure 15  Example of what is the value of Normalised Mutual Information for different 
types of misclassifications on EN100 benchmark corpus. The dashed line is the value obtained 
by the state-of-the-art authorship attribution methods (1 misclassification in the 33 authorial 
groups). The pink-shaded region is the extent of NMI values for different possible ways of 
misclassifying two books. In Figure 13, the community detection method separated the three 
books by Ford (upper left), which corresponds to isolating two books, labelled 2i (the 2
nd
 
point from the left). 
Although Figure 15, showing results for the EN100 corpus indicates that the 
community detection methods might have a slight edge over Delta, Figure 16 for a larger 
EN500 benchmark dispels my illusions about unsupervised methods –based on NMI (i.e., 
even knowing the true authorial groups) it is even hard to say how many authors there are, 
as there is no clear NMI maximum. In this figure, the different numbers of clusters 
(authorial groups) were obtained by changing the resolution parameter in the null model of 
modularity. 
It has to be stressed, nevertheless, that in this comparison the supervised methods 
implemented in Stylo actually attempted classification of 100 books knowing the true 
authorship of the remaining 399 novels. So if they attempted to look at another 100 out of 
499 novels, and yet another 100, scoring the 87% accuracy each time, it would mean that 
there are in fact around 5*13 = 65 novels that pose problems. The Louvain method on the 
other hand had no prior knowledge: all the clusters are emergent. 
Further development of the research summarised in this chapter could be the 
inclusion of supervision into the existing community detection methods, which as it seems 
has not been done. 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
Figure 16 The black points are the result of clustering of EN500 corpus obtained by the 
Louvain method for increasing resolution. The plateau corresponds to roughly 110 books 
having incorrect group membership. The result for a supervised classifier (399 books for 
training; 100 for test) is plotted with the dashed line. 190 was the maximum number of most 
frequent words that all the 499 novels have in common. 
The precise results of clustering the 499 novels is: 
 correct grouping of all the books by: Anderson, Charlotte Brontë, Emily Brontë, Brown, 
Cather, Chesterton, Christie, Clancy, Coben, Collins, Disraeli, Eliot, Fitzgerald, Forster, 
Freeman, Gaskell, Glasgow, Grisham, Hall, Hardy, Kipling, Koontz, Lawrence, Lewis, 
Ludlum, Lytton, MacDonald, Mansfield, Mason, McNeile, Meredith, Morrison, Post, 
Powys, Dorothy Richardson, Rowling, Scott, Thackeray, Trollope, Waugh 
 Doyle, Galsworthy, Greene, Hawthorne, Huxley, Lessing have each been split into 2 
groups 
 Dickens and James have each been split into 3 groups 
 Compton has been split into 2 groups, and absorbed one of Conrad-Ford collaborations 
 Conrad has been split into 2 groups, and absorbed one of Conrad-Ford collaborations 
 Ford has been split into 5 groups, and absorbed one of Conrad-Ford collaborations 
 Melville has been split into 2 groups and absorbed one of Twain’s books 
 All Morris’s books but one (Signs of Change) have been grouped together 
 All Orwell’s books but one (Animal Farm) have been grouped together 
 All Edgeworth’s books but one (Castle Rackrent) have been grouped together 
 All Maugham’s books but one (Liza of Lambeth) have been grouped together 
 Fielding’s Shamela has been grouped with Richardson 
 Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind has been grouped with Montgomery 
 Golding has been split into 2 groups, and absorbed Passos 
 Anne Brontë has been grouped with Jane Austen 
 Obrien has been grouped either with Stephens: 
1. Obrien_Policeman, Stephens_Crock, Stephens_Mary 
 
 
38 
 
or with Joyce, who has been split into 2 groups: 
1. Joyce_Finnegans, Joyce_Ulysses, Obrien_Swim 
2. Joyce_Dubliners, Joyce_Portrait 
 Tolkien and Nabokov have been grouped correctly but for one novel each (Silmarillion and 
The Real Life of Sebastian Knight, respectively), which have been grouped together with 
all the books by Wyndham Lewis, Wells, Wharton, Wilde, Woolf 
 Stevenson’s group has absorbed Twain’s The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, The Prince and 
the Pauper, and A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court 
 Three of Faulkner’s novels have been grouped together; the other two are grouped with a 
bag of Green’s, Hemingway’s, Maugham’s, Salinger’s, Stein’s, Steinbeck’s, and Twain’s 
The rest of the books had formed rather incomprehensible groups. Until I started compiling 
the list of authors and titles – it appeared to me that some of the writers that it is really hard 
to find (on Wikipedia) are the woman writers related to the so called Chawton House, and 
indeed most of them group together into a few clusters. Parenthetically, since I did not 
have the text files of the 499 books (only the filenames and the table of Delta distances) it 
made the work a little bit easier, as I could directly google the Chawton House website 
instead of struggling through the thicket of irrelevant results from the whole Internet. 
All of the groups resulting from the clustering are given in Appendix A.3. Such 
results might indicate that the method might have problems with the resolution, i.e., with 
the varying group sizes, which leads to splitting authorial groups. The other inconsistencies 
might already be indicative of some similarities of authorial style (vide Shamela, or joining 
Austen with A. Brontë). 
In the above I have chosen the resolution of modularity which yielded the number 
of groups closest to the hypothetical 100 (which means that there was some auxiliary 
information needed). 
 
 
  
 
 
39 
 
I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description 
horrible, and more, much more 
(I persuaded myself) was yet behind. […] I had been the 
author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest 
the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some 
new wickedness. 
 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
Discussion 
 
 
The results presented in Chapter 2 prove that the grammatical and lexical layers of 
authorial style are separable, at least to some extent, and that the Burrows’s Delta measure 
of distance between texts mixes these two layers in different proportions depending on the 
range of words chosen as the basis of the comparison. It has been shown that preserving 
merely the distribution of parts of speech (i.e., simply the relative numbers of words 
belonging to the categories) and the vocabulary comprising one of PoS classes is enough to 
fool the authorship attribution algorithm if it uses only the 100 most frequent words. How 
the preservation of PoS distribution can be carried out in real life (i.e., preserving the sense 
of the text) shrouded in mystery. What lies beneath the shroud is all the different kinds of 
sentence, clause, and phrasal structures that can aggregate into the distribution 
characterising one or the other author. Further studies on that topic should involve parsing 
texts to obtain syntactic dependencies or at least some advanced analysis of PoS n-grams. 
The lexical layer also needs to be further split at least into topic-specific word groups, so 
that the topics of individual texts could be abstracted from the authorial style. The results 
shown in this thesis also need to be repeated for other pairs of authors, and then, even 
further for groups of authors with the age, genre, topic and other variables controlled for. 
The part of the chapter that was concerned with translation used a different method 
based solely on the distributions and co-occurrences of PoS tags, which is due to the fact 
that it was rather the grammatical rather than lexical layer that I assumed could show more 
language transfer. Since the translator had to retain all the vocabulary specific to the 
fantasy novels genre, to the Discworld series, and to the particular book, the grammatical 
structures were assumed to be the significant distinguishing factor that could be prone to 
some language transfer. Such influence was observed for the idiomatic language in the 
novels (Hantz 2013), which however seems too little to affect the average PoS 
distributions. The problem here was that the benchmark corpus used was of a general type, 
while perhaps a corpus of native Polish fantasy literature could be used to control for the 
subgenre. The crude methods, nevertheless, do indicate some suspicious correlations 
between several parts of speech, which could be traced semi-manually. The drawback of 
the correlation plots is also that they are very coarse-grained, because each point in them 
represents one book, which means that some internal averaging has already been 
performed; perhaps it could be alleviated by subsampling or chopping the novels into 
smaller parts. The authorship attributions methods were not used for this part of the study, 
so that although I may have gained some insight into what does distinguish translations 
from the literature in the target language, I did not proceed into checking how this affects 
the authorship attribution of translations. 
Next, in Chapter 3 I shortly introduced how the methods of community detection 
in complex networks can be applied instead of the classical clustering and machine 
 
 
40 
 
learning techniques. Since the performance of the methods changes together with the 
corpus under investigation, there still awaits an extensive systematic study to be done 
before a fair comparative judgement can be passed. Choosing benchmark corpora for 
testing performance of clustering methods, however, can be very misleading, as the input 
information for clustering is only the distance table (or adjacency matrix in the graph-
theoretical interpretation) and it is rather the benchmark distances (graphs) that should be 
used for comparison between those. In benchmark corpora one should not count on 100% 
correct authorship attribution due to the genre, topic, gender, pastiche, collaboration, and 
other effects which can obscure the authorial fingerprint, especially when the most 
frequent words (or n-grams) are taken indiscriminately. The choice of the features for the 
analysis is outside the jurisdiction of the clustering methods, although some other machine 
learning methods might perform feature selection by themselves. It should also be 
reiterated that the community detection algorithm I used in this thesis return a partition of 
texts without supervision, i.e., it proposes that some texts seem to form groups without 
actually comparing them to any particular authorial prototypes. 
 
Finally, let me briefly conclude, based on the above results, why stylometry and 
authorship attribution work and what they measure; the answer to the first question, 
however unsatisfactory, probably should read as follows: they work well because they 
measure many aspects of texts simultaneously without discriminating between them 
(which is, by the way, also an answer to the question why authorship attribution 
occasionally fails). This immediately leads to the second answer, which is almost as 
uninformative – the greatest failure of this thesis, – the Burrowsian way of doing 
stylometry and authorship attribution blends the grammatical, lexical, and too many other 
textual layers by indirect measurement of sentence structures and narration (the 
distributions of punctuation, conjunctions, pronouns, etc.), of phrasal structures (the 
relative statistics of most of parts of speech), the topic, content and the semantic domains 
(all the content words), the genre and age (encoded already mostly in all the mentioned 
above), and so on. Chapter 2 seems to provide methods to arrive at more precise 
statements concerning the relative contributions (depending on the range of features) of 
each of these layers, and in the long run could help to decouple them. 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
Bibliography 
 
Philip W Anderson et al. More is different. Science, 177 (4047): 393–396, 1972. 
Shlomo Argamon. Interpreting Burrows’s Delta: Geometric and Probabilistic Foundations. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing, 23 (2): 131–147, 2008. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqn003. URL 
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/23/2/131.abstract. 
Mona Baker. Towards a methodology for investigating the style of a literary translator. Target, 12 
(2): 241–266, 2000. 
Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. Fast 
unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: 
Theory and Experiment, 2008 (10): P10008, 2008. URL http://stacks.iop.org/1742-
5468/2008/i=10/a=P10008. 
John Burrows. ‘Delta’: a Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17 (3): 267–287, 2002a. doi: 
10.1093/llc/17.3.267. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/17/3/267.abstract. 
John Burrows. The Englishing of Juvenal: computational stylistics and translated texts. Style, 36 
(4): 677–699, 2002b. 
John Burrows. Textual Analysis. In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, editors, 
A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell, Oxford, 2004. URL http://-
www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/. 
John Burrows. All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing, 22 (1): 27–47, 2007. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqi067. URL http://-
llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/22/1/27.abstract. 
Chawton House Library. URL http://library.chawton.org. 
Chawton House Library. Introductory note. In Penelope Aubin, The Life of Charlotta Du Pont, an 
English Lady. URL http://www.chawtonhouse.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/The-
Life-of-Charlotta-Du-Pont-an-English-Lady.pdf. [accessed: 10 September 2014] 
Hugh Craig. Stylistic Analysis and Authorship Studies. In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and 
John Unsworth, editors, A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell, Oxford, 
2004. URL http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/. 
Leon Danon, Albert Diaz-Guilera, Jordi Duch, and Alex Arenas. Comparing community structure 
identification. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2005 (09): 
P09008, 2005. 
M. Eder, M. Kestemont, and J. Rybicki. Stylometry with R: a suite of tools. In Digital Humanities 
2013: Conference Abstracts, pages 487–489, Lincoln, 2013. University of Nebraska-
Lincoln. URL https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/preprints/Eder-
Kestemont-Rybicki_Stylometry_with_R.pdf. 
Maciej Eder. Personal communication, July 28, 2014. 
Maciej Eder. Does size matter? Authorship attribution, small samples, big problem. Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 2013. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqt066. URL http://-
llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/11/14/llc.fqt066.abstract. 
Maciej Eder and Jan Rybicki. Do birds of a feather really flock together, or how to choose training 
samples for authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 2012. doi: 
10.1093/llc/fqs036. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2012/08/10/-
llc.fqs036.abstract. 
 
 
42 
 
Maciej Eder. Style-markers in authorship attribution: a cross-language study of the authorial 
fingerprint. Studies in Polish Linguistics,  (6), 2011. 
D. Edler and M. Rosvall. The MapEquation software package, 2013. URL http://-
www.mapequation.org. 
Paul J Fields, G Bruce Schaalje, and Matthew Roper. Examining a Misapplication of Nearest 
Shrucnken Centroid Classification to Investigate Book of Mormon Authorship. The 
FARMS Review, 23 (1): 87–111, 2011. 
Santo Fortunato. Community detection in graphs. Physics Reports, 486 (3–5): 75 – 174, 2010. 
ISSN 0370-1573. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2009.11.002. URL http://-
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0370157309002841. 
Santo Fortunato and Marc Barthelemy. Resolution limit in community detection. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (1): 36–41, 2007. 
Małgorzata Hantz. The Possible World of Terry Pratchett’s Fantasy Fiction in Translation. Master’s 
thesis, Institute of English Philology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, 2013. 
R. Heuser and L. Le-Khac. A Quantitative Literary History of 2,958 Nineteenth-Century British 
Novels: The Semantic Cohort Method, 2012. URL http://litlab.stanford.edu/-
LiteraryLabPamphlet4.pdf. 
David L. Hoover. Delta Prime? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19 (4): 477–495, 2004a. doi: 
10.1093/llc/19.4.477. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/4/477.abstract. 
David L. Hoover. Testing Burrows’s Delta. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19 (4): 453–475, 
2004b. doi: 10.1093/llc/19.4.453. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/4/-
453.abstract. 
David L. Hoover. Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies. In Susan Schreibman and Ray 
Siemens, editors, A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Blackwell, Oxford, 2008. 
URL http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/. 
Nancy Ide. Preparation and Analysis of Linguistic Corpora. In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, 
and John Unsworth, editors, A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell, 
Oxford, 2004. URL http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/. 
Kim Luyckx and Walter Daelemans. The effect of author set size and data size in authorship 
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26 (1): 35–55, 2011. doi: 
10.1093/llc/fqq013. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/26/1/35.abstract. 
Willard McCarty. Knowing …: Modeling in Literary Studies. In Susan Schreibman and Ray 
Siemens, editors, A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Blackwell, Oxford, 2008. 
URL http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/. 
Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. A Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset. In Nicoletta 
Calzolari, et al., editors, Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012), pages 2089–2096, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2012. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). ISBN 978-2-
9517408-7-7. URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/-
274_Paper.pdf. ACL Anthology Identifier: L12-1115. 
Maciej Piasecki. Polish Tagger TaKIPI: Rule Based Construction and Optimisation. Task 
Quarterly, 11 (1–2): 151–167, 2007. 
Stephen Ramsay. Algorithmic Criticism. In Susan Schreibman and Ray Siemens, editors, A 
Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Blackwell, Oxford, 2008. URL http://-
www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/. 
Jan Rybicki. Translation and Delta revisited: when we read translations, is it the author or the 
translator that we really read? In Digital Humanities 2009: Conference Abstracts, 
 
 
43 
 
pages 245–247, College Park (MA), 2009. University of Maryland. URL http://-
www.mith2.umd.edu/dh09/wp-content/uploads/-
dh09_conferencepreceedings_final.pdf. 
Jan Rybicki. The Translator’s Wife’s traces. Alma Cardell Curtin and Jeremiah Curtin. 
Przekładaniec. A Journal of Literary Translation, 24: 89–109, 2010. doi: 
doi:10.4467/16891864ePC.12.005.0567. 
Jan Rybicki. Alma Cardell Curtin and Jeremiah Curtin: the translator’s wife’s stylistic fingerprint. 
In Digital Humanities 2011: Conference Abstracts, pages 308–311, Stanford, 2011. 
Stanford University. URL http://dh2011abstracts.stanford.edu/xtf/view?docId=tei/ab-
195.xml. 
Jan Rybicki. The great mystery of the (almost) invisible translator: stylometry in translation. In 
M. Oakes and M. Ji, editors, Quantitative Methods in Corpus-Based Translation 
Studies: A practical guide to descriptive translation research, pages 231–248. John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2012. doi: doi: 10.1075/scl.51.09ryb. 
Jan Rybicki. Stylometryczna niewidzialność tłumacza. Przekładaniec, 27: 61–87, 2013. doi: 
doi:10.4467/16891864PC.13.004.1286. 
Jan Rybicki and Maciej Eder. Deeper Delta across genres and languages: do we really need the 
most frequent words? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 2011. doi: 
10.1093/llc/fqr031. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2011/07/14/-
llc.fqr031.abstract. 
Jan Rybicki and Magda Heydel. The stylistics and stylometry of collaborative translation: Woolf’s 
Night and Day in Polish. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28 (4): 708–717, 2013. 
doi: 10.1093/llc/fqt027. URL http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/28/4/708.abstract. 
Beatrice Santorini. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the Penn Treebank Project (3rd revision). 
Technical Reports (CIS), 1990. URL http://repository.upenn.edu/cis_reports/570. 
Paper 570. 
Peter WH Smith and W Aldridge. Improving Authorship Attribution: Optimizing Burrows’ Delta 
Method*. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 18 (1): 63–88, 2011. 
Efstathios Stamatatos. A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the American 
Society for information Science and Technology, 60 (3): 538–556, 2009. 
Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D Manning. Enriching the knowledge sources used in a 
maximum entropy part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 2000 Joint SIGDAT 
conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing and very large 
corpora (EMNLP/VLC-2000), pages 63–70. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2000. 
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D Manning, and Yoram Singer. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 
2003, pages 252–259. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2003. 
V.A. Traag, P. Van Dooren, and Y. Nesterov. Narrow scope for resolution-free community 
detection. arXiv:,  (1104.3083), 2011. [physics.soc-ph]. 
Brian Vickers. Shakespeare and authorship studies in the twenty-first century. Shakespeare 
Quarterly, 62 (1): 106–142, 2011. 
Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. URL http://en.wikipedia.org. 
Wikimedia Foundation. Świat Dysku. Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. URL http://-
pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%9Awiat_Dysku.  [accessed: 10 September 2014] 
William Winder. Writing Machines. In Susan Schreibman and Ray Siemens, editors, A Companion 
to Digital Literary Studies. Blackwell, Oxford, 2008. URL http://-
 
 
44 
 
www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/. 
Marcin Woliński. System znaczników morfosyntaktycznych w korpusie IPI PAN. Polonica, XXII-
XXIII: 39–55, 2003. URL http://nlp.ipipan.waw.pl/CORPUS/znakowanie.pdf. 
  
 
 
45 
 
Appendix A: Corpora 
 
In this appendix I provide the list of texts used in the research, together with a short 
description. The English and Polish 100-novel corpora were compiled so as to retain 
comparable time span of creation of these works, as well as to provide a balance between 
male and female authors; the other corpora are biased. 
The corpora are, in fact, collections of raw texts, without any annotations as one 
could expect [see Ide (2004) for an overview of corpus construction]. The annotation of 
parts of speech with available PoS taggers was a part of my (or my PC’s) work, as 
described in Appendices B.1-B.3. At this point one should bear in mind that “perhaps the 
noise introduced by the NLP tools in the process of [syntactic or semantic feature] 
extraction is the crucial factor for their failure” (Stamatatos 2009). 
There are some rules of what an ideal evaluation corpus should look like, which are 
listed by Stamatatos (2009): text length of training and test texts (in this case, unlike in 
Stamatatos’s, the longer the better; Delta deals with long texts well; a text, however, should 
be fairly homogeneous in terms of style, topic, etc., which might not be viable for novels), 
controlling for genre, topic (in this case, genre is controlled for; the topic, if at all, is not 
controlled for directly), and other factors (age, education level, nationality, period, etc.), a 
well-defined set of candidate authors (not too small a group), distribution of the training 
corpus over the authors (the accuracy of authorship attribution might depend on the 
method; for Delta, the problem is rather the distribution of test corpus, since it influences 
the variances of word frequencies), several languages (because the style markers may vary 
according to the language). For developing my research further it is crucial to produce a 
range of benchmark corpora controlled for different characteristics, so that the stylistic 
markers can be singled out one by one. 
The corpora in Sections A.1-A.4 were compiled by dr Jan Rybicki, and made 
available to me. Section A.5 contains titles collected by Michał Strojek, another MA 
student of dr Rybicki’s. 
The data on names, titles, and publishing dates were collected from Wikipidia 
(web-pages corresponding to particular authors) and (Chawton House Library) 
(introductory notes to the corresponding books). 
A.1. English benchmark corpus small 
 
A small-scale corpus of 27 classic English novels published between 1740-1876 by 11 
authors, 1-3 books each, including 11 books written by female and 15 by male writers. 
 
Table 1 
File-id Author Title Date1 
ABrontë_Agnes Brontë, Anne Agnes Grey 1847 
ABrontë_Tenant Brontë, Anne The Tenant of Wildfell Hall 1848 
Austen_Emma Austen, Jane Emma 1815 
Austen_Pride Austen, Jane Pride and Prejudice 1813 
Austen_Sense Austen, Jane Sense and Sensibility 1811 
CBrontë_Jane Brontë, Charlotte Jane Eyre 1847 
                                                 
1
 Date of publishing or, if known, of writing. 
 
 
46 
 
CBrontë_Professor Brontë, Charlotte The Professor 1857 
CBrontë_Villette Brontë, Charlotte Villete 1853 
Dickens_Bleak Dickens, Charles Bleak House 1853 
Dickens_David Dickens, Charles David Copperfield 1849-
1850 
Dickens_Hard Dickens, Charles Hard Times: For These 
Times 
1854 
EBrontë_Wuthering Brontë, Emily Wuthering Heights 1845-
1846 
Eliot_Adam Eliot, George Adam Bede 1859 
Eliot_Middlemarch Eliot, George Middlemarch 1872 
Eliot_Mill Eliot, George The Mill on the Floss 1860 
Fielding_Joseph Fielding, Henry The History of the 
Adventures of Joseph 
Andrews and of his Friend 
Mr. Abraham Adams 
1742 
Fielding_Tom Fielding, Henry The History of Tom Jones, a 
Foundling 
1749 
Richardson_Clarissa Richardson, 
Samuel 
Clarissa, or, the History of a 
Young Lady 
1748 
Richardson_Pamela Richardson, 
Samuel 
Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded 1740 
Sterne_Sentimental Sterne, Laurence A Sentimental Journey 
Through France and Italy 
1768 
Sterne_Tristram Sterne, Laurence The Life and Opinions of 
Tristram Shandy, Gentleman 
1759-
1767 
Thackeray_Barry Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
Barry Lyndon 1844 
Thackeray_ 
Pendennis 
Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The History of Pendennis 1850 
Thackeray_Vanity Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
Vanity Fair 1848 
Trollope_Barchester Trollope, Anthony Barchester Towers 1857 
Trollope_Phineas Trollope, Anthony Phineas Finn 1869 
Trollope_Prime Trollope, Anthony The Prime Minister 1876 
 
  
 
 
47 
 
A.2. English benchmark corpus 100 
 
A small-scale corpus of 100 English novels published between 1838-1937 by 33 authors, 3 
books each (one authoring 4 books), including 33 books written by female and 67 by male 
writers. 
 
Table 2 
File-id Author Title Date2 
barclay_rosary Barclay, Florence 
Louisa 
The Rosary 1909 
barclay_ladies Barclay, Florence 
Louisa 
The White Ladies of 
Worcester 
1917 
barclay_postern Barclay, Florence 
Louisa 
Through The Postern Gate 1911 
bennet_helen Bennett, Arnold Helen With A High Hand 1910 
bennet_imperial Bennett, Arnold Imperial Palace 1930 
bennet_babylon Bennett, Arnold The Grand Babylon Hotel 1902 
anon_clara Blackmore, Richard 
Doddridge 
Clara Vaughan 1853 
blackmore_erema Blackmore, Richard 
Doddridge 
Erema 1876 
blackmore_lorna Blackmore, Richard 
Doddridge 
Lorna Doone 1869 
blackmore_ 
springhaven 
Blackmore, Richard 
Doddridge 
Springhaven 1887 
braddon_quest Braddon, Mary 
Elizabeth 
Fenton's Quest 1871 
braddon_audley Braddon, Mary 
Elizabeth 
Lady Audley's Secret 1862 
braddon_fortune Braddon, Mary, 
Elizabeth 
Phantom Fortune 1883 
cBrontë_jane Brontë Charlotte Jane Eyre 1847 
cBrontë_shirley Brontë Charlotte Shirley 1849 
cBrontë_villette Brontë Charlotte Villette 1853 
lytton_kenelm Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
Kenelm Chillingly 1873 
lytton_novel Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
My Novel 1853 
lytton_what Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
What Will He Do With It? 1858 
burnett_princess Burnett, Frances 
Hodgson 
A Little Princess 1888 
burnett_lord Burnett, Frances 
Hodgson 
Little Lord Fauntleroy 1885 
                                                 
2
 Date of publishing or, if known, of writing. 
 
 
48 
 
burnett_garden Burnett, Frances 
Hodgson 
The Secret Garden 1910 
chesterton_ 
innocence 
Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Innocence of Father 
Brown 
1911 
chesterton_ 
thursday 
Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Man Who Was 
Thursday 
1908 
chesterton_ 
napoleon 
Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Napoleon of Notting 
Hill 
1904 
collins_basil Collins, Wilkie Basil 1852 
collins_cain Collins, Wilkie The Legacy of Cain 1889 
collins_woman Collins, Wilkie The Woman in White 1860 
conrad_almayer Conrad, Joseph Almayer's Folly 1895 
conrad_nostromo Conrad, Joseph Nostromo 1904 
conrad_rover Conrad, Joseph The Rover 1922 
corelli_romance Corelli, Marie A Romance of Two Worlds 1886 
corelli_innocent Corelli, Marie Innocent 1914 
corelli_satan Corelli, Marie The Sorrows of Satan 1895 
dickens_bleak Dickens, Charles Bleak House 1853 
dickens_ 
expectations 
Dickens, Charles Great Expectations 1861 
dickens_oliver Dickens, Charles Oliver Twist 1838 
doyle_micah Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
Micah Clarke 1888 
doyle_hound Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Hound of the 
Baskervilles 
1902 
doyle_lost Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Lost World 1912 
eliot_adam Eliot, George Adam Bede 1859 
eliot_daniel Eliot, George Daniel Deronda 1876 
eliot_felix Eliot, George Felix Holt, the Radical 1866 
ford_girl Ford, Ford Madox An English Girl 1907 
ford_soldier Ford, Ford Madox The Good Soldier 1915 
ford_post Ford, Ford Madox The Last Post 1928 
forster_room Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
A Room with A View 1908 
forster_howards Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Howard's End 1910 
forster_angels Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Where Angels Fear to 
Tread  
1905 
galsworthy_river Galsworthy, John Over the River 1933 
galsworthy_saints Galsworthy, John Saint's Progress 1919 
galsworthy_man Galsworthy, John The Man of Property 1906 
gaskell_ruth Gaskell, Elizabeth Ruth 1853 
gaskell_lovers Gaskell, Elizabeth Sylvia's Lovers 1863 
gaskell_wives Gaskell, Elizabeth Wives and Daughters 1865 
gissing_women Gissing, George The Odd Women 1893 
gissing_unclassed Gissing, George The Unclassed 1884 
 
 
49 
 
gissing_warburton Gissing, George Will Warburton 1905 
hardy_madding Hardy, Thomas Far from the Madding 
Crowd 
1874 
hardy_jude Hardy, Thomas Jude the Obscure 1895 
hardy_tess Hardy, Thomas Tess of the d'Urbervilles 1891 
james_hudson James, Henry Roderick Hudson 1875 
james_ambassadors James, Henry The Ambassadors 1903 
james_muse James, Henry The Tragic Muse 1890 
kipling_captains Kipling, Rudyard Captains Courageous 1897 
kipling_kim Kipling, Rudyard Kim 1901 
kipling_light Kipling, Rudyard The Light That Failed 1890 
lawrence_serpent Lawrence, David 
Herbert 
The Plumed Serpent 1926 
lawrence_peacock Lawrence, David 
Herbert 
The White Peacock 1911 
lawrence_women Lawrence, David 
Herbert 
Women in Love 1920 
lee_brown Lee, Vernon Miss Brown 1884 
lee_penelope Lee, Vernon Penelope Brandling 1903 
lee_albany Lee, Vernon The Countess of Albany 1884 
meredith_richmond Meredith, George The Adventures of Harry 
Richmond  
1871 
meredith_marriage Meredith, George The Amazing Marriage 1895 
meredith_feverel Meredith, George The Ordeal of Richard 
Feverel 
1859 
morris_roots Morris, William The Roots of the Mountains 1890 
morris_water Morris, William The Water of the Wondrous 
Isles 
1897 
morris_wood Morris, William The Wood Beyond the 
World 
1894 
haggard_mines Rider, Haggard 
Henry 
King Solomon's Mines 1885 
haggard_sheallan Rider, Haggard 
Henry 
She and Allan 1921 
haggard_mist Rider, Haggard 
Henry 
The People of the Mist 1894 
schreiner_african Schreiner, Olive The Story of an African 
Farm 
1883 
schreiner_trooper Schreiner, Olive Trooper Peter Halket of 
Mashonaland 
1897 
schreiner_undine Schreiner, Olive Undine 1929 
stevenson_catriona Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
Catriona 1893 
stevenson_arrow Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
The Black Arrow 1883 
stevenson_island Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
Treasure Island 1882 
 
 
50 
 
thackeray_esmond Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The History of Henry 
Esmond 
1852 
thackeray_ 
pendennis 
Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The History of Pendennis 1850 
thackeray_virginians Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The Virginians 1859 
trollope_angel Trollope, Anthony Ayala's Angel 1878 
trollope_phineas Trollope, Anthony Phineas Finn 1869 
trollope_warden Trollope, Anthony The Warden 1855 
ward_harvest Ward, Mary 
Augusta 
Harvest 1920 
ward_milly Ward, Mary 
Augusta 
Milly and Olly 1881 
ward_ashe Ward, Mary 
Augusta 
The Marriage of William 
Ashe 
1905 
woolf_night Woolf, Virginia Night and Day 1919 
woolf_years Woolf, Virginia The Years 1937 
woolf_lighthouse Woolf, Virginia To the Lighthouse 1927 
 
  
 
 
51 
 
A.3. English corpus 500 
 
A medium-scale corpus of 499 English novels published between 1704-2013 by 140 
authors or collaborations; the mean size of authorial groups is 3.56 (see Figure 17 below 
for a histogram). The topics, subgenres, editorial policies, etc. vary, as could be expected 
from the time-scale alone. 
 
 
Figure 17 The histogram of the number of books by a given author for EN500 
benchmark. 
It should be added that I excluded anonymous texts from the corpus. In the process 
it also became apparent that two books included in the corpus as different (Aubin’s The 
Life of Charlotta Du Pont, an English Lady and The Inhuman Stepmother; or the History 
of Miss Harriot Montague) are in fact the same novel, as indicated by Delta distance < 0.1; 
see the introduction to Charlotta (Chawton House Library, Charlotta). 
 
Table 3 
File-id Author Title Date3 
Freeman_Thorncase - - - 
Anderson_Marching Anderson, 
Sherwood 
Marching Men  1917 
Anderson_White Anderson, 
Sherwood 
Poor White  1920 
Anderson_Windy Anderson, 
Sherwood 
Windy McPherson's Son  1916 
Anderson_ 
Winesburg 
Anderson, 
Sherwood 
Winesburg, Ohio  1919 
                                                 
3
 Date of publishing or, if known, of writing. 
 
 
52 
 
Aubin_Charlotta Aubin, Penelope The Life of Charlotta Du 
Pont, an English lady; taken 
from her own memoirs  
1723 
Austen_Emma Austen, Jane Emma 1815 
Austen_Mansfield Austen, Jane Mansfield Park  1814 
Austen_Northanger Austen, Jane Northanger Abbey  1818 
Austen_Persuasion Austen, Jane Persuasion  1818 
Austen_Pride Austen, Jane Pride and Prejudice 1813 
Austen_Sense Austen, Jane Sense and Sensibility 1811 
Beckett_Malone Beckett, Samuel 
Barclay 
Malone Dies 1956 
Beckett_Molloy Beckett, Samuel 
Barclay 
Molloy 1955 
Beckett_Unnamable Beckett, Samuel 
Barclay 
The Unnamable 1958 
Beckford_Azemia Beckford, William 
Thomas 
Azemia 1797 
Beckford_Vathek Beckford, William 
Thomas 
Vathek 1781 
Bennett_Agnes Bennett, Anna 
Maria 
Agnes de-Courci: a 
Domestic Tale 
1789 
bennet_babylon Bennett, Arnold The Grand Babylon Hotel 1902 
bennet_helen Bennett, Arnold Helen With A High Hand 1910 
bennet_imperial Bennett, Arnold Imperial Palace 1930 
Bentley_Trent Bentley, Edmund 
Clerihew 
?Trent's Last Case  1913 
Bowen_Friends Bowen, Elizabeth Friends and Relations  1931 
Bowen_Hotel Bowen, Elizabeth The Hotel  1927 
Bradford_Plymouth Bradford, William Of Plymouth Plantation 1930, 
1946-
-1950 
ABrontë_Agnes Brontë, Anne Agnes Grey 1847 
ABrontë_Tenant Brontë, Anne The Tenant of Wildfell Hall 1848 
CBrontë_Jane Brontë, Charlotte Jane Eyre 1847 
CBrontë_Professor Brontë, Charlotte The Professor 1857 
cBrontë_shirley Brontë, Charlotte Shirley 1849 
CBrontë_Villette Brontë, Charlotte Villete 1853 
EBrontë_Wuthering Brontë, Emily Wuthering Heights 1845-
-1846 
Brown_Angels Brown, Dan Angels & Demons  2000 
Brown_Davinci Brown, Dan The Da Vinci Code  2003 
Brown_Point Brown, Dan Deception Point  2001 
Lytton_Barons Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
The Last of the Barons  1843 
Lytton_Harold Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
Harold, the Last of the 
Saxons  
1848 
Lytton_Pompeii Bulwer-Lytton, The Last Days of Pompeii  1834 
 
 
53 
 
Edward 
Lytton_Rienzi Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
Rienzi, the last of the 
Roman tribunes  
1835 
Lytton_Zanoni Bulwer-Lytton, 
Edward 
Zanoni  1842 
Burney_Camilla Burney, Frances Camilla: Or, A Picture of 
Youth 
1796 
Burney_Cecilia Burney, Frances Cecilia: Or, Memoirs of an 
Heiress 
1782 
Burney_Darblay Burney, Frances The Diary and Letters of 
Madame D'Arblay 
1904 
Burney_Evelina Burney, Frances Evelina: Or The History of A 
Young Lady's Entrance into 
the World 
1778 
Burney_Wanderer Burney, Frances The Wanderer: Or, Female 
Difficulties 
1814 
Canning_Offspring Canning, J.A. Offspring 2013 
Capote_Voices Capote, Truman Other Voices, Other Rooms 1948 
Carver_OldWoman Carver, Mrs The Old Woman 1800 
Cary_Johnson Cary, Joyce Mister Johnson  1939 
Cather_Antonia Cather, Willa Sibert My Ántonia  1918 
Cather_Bridge Cather, Willa Sibert Alexander's Bridge  1912 
Cather_Lark Cather, Willa Sibert The Song of the Lark  1915 
Cather_Ours Cather, Willa Sibert One of Ours  1922 
Cather_Pioneers Cather, Willa Sibert O Pioneers!  1913 
Catton_Luminaries Catton, Eleanor The Luminaries 2013 
Charlton_Parisian Charlton, Mary The Parisian; or, Genunine 
Anecdotes of Distinguished 
and Noble Characters 
1794 
chesterton_innocen
ce 
Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Innocence of Father 
Brown 
1911 
Chesterton_Scandal Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Scandal of Father 
Brown  
1935 
Chesterton_Secret Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Secret of Father Brown  1927 
chesterton_thursda
y 
Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Man Who Was 
Thursday 
1908 
Chesterton_Wisdom Chesterton, Gilbert 
Keith 
The Wit and Wisdom of GK 
Chesterton. 
1911 
Christie_Abc Christie, Agatha The A.B.C. Murders 1936 
Christie_Ackroyd Christie, Agatha The Murder of Roger 
Ackroyd 
1926 
Christie_AndThen Christie, Agatha Ten Little Niggers 1939 
Christie_Appointme
nt 
Christie, Agatha Appointment with Death 1938 
Christie_Cards Christie, Agatha Cards on the Table 1936 
Christie_Chimneys Christie, Agatha The Secret of Chimneys 1925 
 
 
54 
 
Christie_Curtain Christie, Agatha Curtain 1975 
Christie_Orient_Exp
ress 
Christie, Agatha Murder on the Orient 
Express 
1934 
Clancy_Games Clancy, Tom Patriot Games  1987 
Clancy_Redoctober Clancy, Tom The Hunt for Red October  1984 
Coben_Breaker Coben, Harlan Deal Breaker  1995 
Coben_Dropshot Coben, Harlan Drop Shot  1996 
Coben_Fade Coben, Harlan Fade Away  1996 
Coben_Falsemove Coben, Harlan One False Move  1998 
Coben_Gone Coben, Harlan Gone for Good  2002 
Coben_NoSecond Coben, Harlan No Second Chance  2003 
Coben_Tell Coben, Harlan Tell No One  2001 
WCollins_Armadale Collins, Wilkie Armadale  1866 
WCollins_Hotel Collins, Wilkie The Haunted Hotel  1878 
WCollins_Moonston
e 
Collins, Wilkie The Moonstone  1868 
WCollins_Robe Collins, Wilkie The Black Robe  1881 
WCollins_Woman Collins, Wilkie The Woman in White 1860 
Compton_Dolores Compton-Burnett, 
Dame Ivy 
Dolores  1911 
Compton_Family Compton-Burnett, 
Dame Ivy 
A Family and a Fortune  1939 
Compton_Men Compton-Burnett, 
Dame Ivy 
Men and Wives  1931 
Conrad_Agent Conrad, Joseph The Secret Agent  1907 
conrad_almayer Conrad, Joseph Almayer's Folly 1895 
Conrad_ArrowGld Conrad, Joseph The Arrow of Gold  1919 
Conrad_Chance Conrad, Joseph Chance  1913 
Conrad_Duel Conrad, Joseph The Duel: A Military Story 1908 
Conrad_EndTethr Conrad, Joseph The End of the Tether 1902 
Conrad_Falk Conrad, Joseph Falk 1901 
Conrad_Freya Conrad, Joseph Freya of the Seven Isles 1910-
-1911 
Conrad_Heart Conrad, Joseph Heart of Darkness  1899 
Conrad_Lord Conrad, Joseph Lord Jim  1900 
Conrad_NiggerN Conrad, Joseph The Nigger of the 
'Narcissus'  
1897 
conrad_nostromo Conrad, Joseph Nostromo 1904 
Conrad_OutcastI Conrad, Joseph An Outcast of the Islands  1896 
Conrad_Rescue Conrad, Joseph The Rescue  1920 
conrad_rover Conrad, Joseph The Rover 1922 
Conrad_ShaddowL Conrad, Joseph The Shadow Line  1917 
Conrad_ 
SmileFortune 
Conrad, Joseph A Smile of Fortune 1910 
Conrad_Typhoon Conrad, Joseph Typhoon 1899-
-1902 
Conrad_Victory Conrad, Joseph Victory  1915 
 
 
55 
 
Conrad_Western Conrad, Joseph Under Western Eyes  1911 
ConFord_Inheritors Conrad, Joseph and 
Ford, Ford Madox 
The Inheritors  1901 
ConFord_Nature Conrad, Joseph and 
Ford, Ford Madox 
The Nature of Crime 1923 
ConFord_Romance Conrad, Joseph and 
Ford, Ford Madox 
Romance 1903 
Cooper_CarolineHer
bert 
Cooper, Maria 
Susanna 
The Wife; or, Caroline 
Herbert 
1813 
Craik_Stella Craik, Helen Stella of the North, or the  1802 
Defoe_Cruzoe Defoe, Daniel Robinson Crusoe  1719 
Defoe_Moll Defoe, Daniel Moll Flanders  1722 
Defoe_Roxana Defoe, Daniel Roxana: The Fortunate 
Mistress  
1724 
Defoe_Singleton Defoe, Daniel Captain Singleton  1720 
Dickens_Barnaby Dickens, Charles Barnaby Rudge: A Tale of 
the Riots of 'Eighty 
1841 
Dickens_Bleak Dickens, Charles Bleak House 1853 
Dickens_Boz Dickens, Charles Sketches by Boz  1836 
Dickens_Chimes Dickens, Charles The Chimes  1844 
Dickens_Christmas Dickens, Charles A Christmas Carol  1843 
Dickens_Cities Dickens, Charles A Tale of Two Cities 1859 
Dickens_Cricket Dickens, Charles The Cricket on the Hearth  1845 
Dickens_Curiosity Dickens, Charles The Old Curiosity Shop 1840-
1841 
Dickens_David Dickens, Charles David Copperfield 1849-
-1850 
Dickens_Dombey Dickens, Charles Dombey and Son 1846-
-1848 
Dickens_Dorrit Dickens, Charles Little Dorrit 1855-
-1857 
Dickens_Edwin Dickens, Charles The Mystery of Edwin 
Drood  
1870 
dickens_ 
expectations 
Dickens, Charles Great Expectations 1861 
Dickens_Hard Dickens, Charles Hard Times: For These 
Times 
1854 
Dickens_Mutual Dickens, Charles Our Mutual Friend 1864-
-1865 
Dickens_Nicholas Dickens, Charles The Life and Adventures of 
Nicholas Nickleby 
1838-
-1839 
dickens_oliver Dickens, Charles Oliver Twist 1838 
Dickens_Pickwick Dickens, Charles The Posthumous Papers of 
the Pickwick Club 
1836-
-1837 
Disraeli_Coningsby Disraeli, Benjamin Coningsby, or the New 
Generation  
1844 
Disraeli_Endymion Disraeli, Benjamin Endymion  1880 
 
 
56 
 
Disraeli_Lothair Disraeli, Benjamin Lothair  1870 
Disraeli_Sybil Disraeli, Benjamin Sybil, or The Two Nations  1845 
Disraeli_Vivian Disraeli, Benjamin Vivian Grey  1826 
Passos_Initiation Dos Passos, John 
Roderigo  
One Man's Initiation: 1917  1917
1920 
Passos_Soldiers Dos Passos, John 
Roderigo  
Three Soldiers  1921 
Doyle_Adventures Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Adventures of Sherlock 
Holmes  
1892 
Doyle_Lastbow Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
His Last Bow  1917 
Doyle_MaracotDeep Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Maracot Deep  1929 
Doyle_Study Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
A Study in Scarlet  1887 
Doyle_TheHound Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Hound of the 
Baskervilles 
1902 
Doyle_TheLostWorl
d 
Doyle, Arthur 
Conan 
The Lost World 1912 
Edgeworth_Absente
e 
Edgeworth, Maria The Absentee 1812 
Edgeworth_Assistan
t 
Edgeworth, Maria The Parent's Assistant 1796 
Edgeworth_Belinda Edgeworth, Maria Belinda 1801 
Edgeworth_Ennui Edgeworth, Maria Ennui  1809 
Edgeworth_Forester Edgeworth, Maria Forester  1872 
Edgeworth_Rackren
t 
Edgeworth, Maria Castle Rackrent  1800 
Edgeworth_Vivian Edgeworth, Maria Vivian 1809-
-1812 
eliot_adam Eliot, George Adam Bede 1859 
eliot_daniel Eliot, George Daniel Deronda 1876 
eliot_felix Eliot, George Felix Holt, the Radical 1866 
Eliot_Middlemarch Eliot, George Middlemarch 1872 
Eliot_Mill Eliot, George The Mill on the Floss 1860 
Eliot_Romola Eliot, George Romola 1863 
Eliot_Silas Eliot, George Silas Marner,  1861 
Ellison_Invisible Ellison, Ralph Invisible Man 1952 
Faulkner_Absalom Faulkner, William Absalom, Absalom! 1936 
Faulkner_Dying Faulkner, William As I Lay Dying 1930 
Faulkner_Light Faulkner, William Light in August 1932 
Faulkner_Moses Faulkner, William Go Down, Moses  1941 
Faulkner_Sound Faulkner, William The Sound and the Fury 1929 
Fielding_Amelia Faulkner, William Amelia 1751 
Fielding_Joseph Fielding, Henry The History of the 
Adventures of Joseph 
Andrews and of his Friend 
1742 
 
 
57 
 
Mr. Abraham Adams 
Fielding_Shamela Fielding, Henry An Apology for the Life of 
Mrs. Shamela Andrews 
1741 
Fielding_Tom Fielding, Henry The History of Tom Jones, a 
Foundling 
1749 
Fitzgerald_Beautiful Fitzgerald, Francis 
Scott  
The Beautiful and Damned  1922 
Fitzgerald_Gatsby Fitzgerald, Francis 
Scott  
The Great Gatsby  1925 
Fitzgerald_Paradise Fitzgerald, Francis 
Scott  
This Side of Paradise  1920 
Fitzgerald_Tender Fitzgerald, Francis 
Scott  
Tender Is the Night  1934 
forster_angels Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Where Angels Fear to Tread  1905 
forster_howards Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Howard's End 1910 
Forster_Journey Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
The Longest Journey  1907 
Forster_Maurice Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Maurice 1913-
-1914 
Forster_Passage Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
A Passage to India 1924 
Forster_View Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
A Room with a View 1908 
Foster_Corinna Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
The Corinna of England, and 
a Heroine in the Shade: A 
Modern Romance  
1809 
Foster_Substance Forster, Edward 
Morgan 
Substance and shadow, or, 
The fisherman's daughters 
of Brighton : a patchwork 
story 
1812 
Freeman_Bone Freeman, Brian The Bone House 2011 
Galsworthy_Chance
ry 
Galsworthy, John In Chancery 1920 
Galsworthy_Let Galsworthy, John To Let 1921 
galsworthy_man Galsworthy, John The Man of Property 1906 
Galsworthy_Monkey Galsworthy, John The White Monkey 1924 
Galsworthy_Pharise
es 
Galsworthy, John The Island Pharisees 1904 
Gaskell_Barton Gaskell, Elizabeth Mary Barton 1848 
Gaskell_Lovers Gaskell, Elizabeth Sylvia's Lovers 1863 
Gaskell_NorthSouth Gaskell, Elizabeth North and South 1854-
-1855 
Gaskell_Ruth Gaskell, Elizabeth Ruth 1853 
Gaskell_Wives Gaskell, Elizabeth Wives and Daughters: An 
Everyday Story 
1865 
 
 
58 
 
Glasgow_Veiniron Glasgow, Ellen Vein of Iron 1935 
Godwin_Caleb Godwin, William Things as They Are; or, The 
Adventures of Caleb 
Williams  
1794 
Godwin_Imogen Godwin, William Imogen: A Pastoral 
Romance 
- 
Golding_Inheritors Golding, William The Inheritors 1955 
Golding_Lord Golding, William Lord of the Flies 1954 
Golding_Rites Golding, William Rites of Passage 1980 
Golding_Spire Golding, William The Spire 1964 
Goldsmith_Vicar Goldsmith, Oliver The Vicar of Wakefield: A 
Tale. Supposed to be 
written by Himself 
1761-
1762 
Green_Loving Green, Henry Loving 1945 
Green_Party Green, Henry Party Going 1939 
Green_Romance Green, Henry - - 
Greene_Brighton Greene, Graham Brighton Rock 1938 
Greene_BurntOut Greene, Graham A Burnt-Out Case 1960 
Greene_Confidential Greene, Graham The Confidential Agent 1939 
Greene_Havana Greene, Graham Our Man in Havana 1958 
Greene_Ministry Greene, Graham The Ministry of Fear 1943 
Greene_Power Greene, Graham The Power and the Glory 1940 
Grisham_Broker Grisham, John The Broker 2005 
Grisham_Christmas Grisham, John Skipping Christmas† 2001 
Grisham_Partner Grisham, John The Partner  1997 
Grisham_Pelican Grisham, John The Pelican Brief 1992 
Grisham_StreetLawy
er 
Grisham, John The Street Lawyer 1998 
Hall_Lamp Hall, Radclyffe The Unlit Lamp  1924 
Hall_Well Hall, Radclyffe The Well of Loneliness  1928 
Hardy_BlueEyes Hardy, Thomas A Pair of Blue Eyes: A Novel  1873 
Hardy_Greenwood Hardy, Thomas Under the Greenwood Tree: 
A Rural Painting of the 
Dutch School  
1872 
hardy_jude Hardy, Thomas Jude the Obscure 1895 
hardy_madding Hardy, Thomas Far from the Madding 
Crowd 
1874 
Hardy_Native Hardy, Thomas The Return of the Native  1878 
hardy_tess Hardy, Thomas Tess of the d'Urbervilles 1891 
Hardy_Woodlanders Hardy, Thomas The Woodlanders  1887 
Harvey_Anything Harvey, Jane - - 
Harvey_Tynemouth Harvey, Jane The Castle of Tynemouth 1806 
Hatton_Lovers Hatton, Ann Lovers and Friends; or, 
Modern Attachments  
1821 
Hawthorne_Blithed
ale 
Hawthorne, 
Nathaniel 
The Blithedale Romance  1852 
Hawthorne_Fansha Hawthorne, Fanshawe  1828 
 
 
59 
 
we Nathaniel 
Hawthorne_Marble
Faun 
Hawthorne, 
Nathaniel 
The Marble Faun: Or, The 
Romance of Monte Beni  
1860 
Hawthorne_Scarlet Hawthorne, 
Nathaniel 
The Scarlet Letter  1850 
Hawthorne_SevenG
ables 
Hawthorne, 
Nathaniel 
The House of the Seven 
Gables  
1851 
Helme_Magdalen Helme, Elizabeth Magdalen: or, The penitant 
of Godstow. An historical 
novel 
1813 
Hemingway_Across Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
Across the River and into 
the Trees 
1950 
Hemingway_Bell Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
For Whom the Bell Tolls  1940 
Hemingway_Farewe
ll 
Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
A Farewell to Arms  1929 
Hemingway_Fiesta Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
The Sun Also Rises 1926 
Hemingway_Menwit
hout 
Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
Men Without Women 1927 
Hemingway_Oldma
n 
Hemingway, Ernest 
Miller 
The Old Man and the Sea  1951 
james_ambassadors Henry, James The Ambassadors 1903 
James_American Henry, James The American 1876-
-1877 
James_Awkward Henry, James the awkward age 1899 
James_Bostonians Henry, James The Bostonians, a novel 1885-
1885 
James_Confidence Henry, James Confidence  1879 
James_Europeans Henry, James The Europeans 1878 
James_Golden Henry, James The golden bowl 1904 
James_Maisie Henry, James What Maisie knew 1897 
James_Portrait Henry, James The portrait of a lady 1880-
-1881 
James_Poynton Henry, James The spoils of Poynton 1896 
James_Princess Henry, James he Princess Casamassima 1886 
James_Reverbera Henry, James The Reverberator  1888 
james_hudson Henry, James Roderick Hudson 1875 
James_Sacred Henry, James The Sacred Fount  1901 
james_muse Henry, James The Tragic Muse 1890 
James_Washington Henry, James Washington Square 1880 
James_Watch Henry, James Watch and Ward 1871 
James_Wings Henry, James The Wings of the Dove 1902 
Lawrence_Aarons Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
Aaron's Rod  1922 
Lawrence_ 
Chatterleys 
Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
Lady Chatterley's Lover  1928 
 
 
60 
 
lawrence_peacock Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
The White Peacock 1911 
Lawrence_Rainbow Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
The Rainbow  1915 
Lawrence_Sons Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
Sons and Lovers  1913 
lawrence_women Herbert, Lawrence 
David 
Women in Love 1920 
Hughes_Caroline Hughes, Anne Caroline; or, the Diversities 
of Fortune 
1787 
Hunter_Unexpected Hunter, Rachel The Unexpected Legacy 1804 
Huxley_Brave Huxley, Aldous 
Leonard 
Brave New World 1932 
Huxley_Crome Huxley, Aldous 
Leonard 
Crome Yellow 1921 
Huxley_Gaza Huxley, Aldous 
Leonard 
Eyeless in Gaza 1936 
Huxley_Mortal Huxley, Aldous 
Leonard 
Mortal Coils 1922 
Huxley_Point Huxley, Aldous 
Leonard 
Point Counter Point 1928 
Jacson_Isabella Jacson, Frances Isabella. A Novel 1823 
Jacson_Things Jacson, Frances Things by their Right Names 1812 
Johnson_Francis Johnson, Mrs. Francis, the Philanthropist: 
an unfashionable tale 
1786 
Sjohnson_Rasselas Johnson, Samuel The History of Rasselas, 
Prince of Abissinia 
1759 
Sjohnson_Scotland Johnson, Samuel A Journey to the Western 
Islands of Scotland 
1775 
Joyce_Dubliners Joyce, James Dubliners  1914 
Joyce_Finnegans Joyce, James Finnegans Wake  1939 
Joyce_Portrait Joyce, James A Portrait of the Artist as a 
Young Man 
1916 
Joyce_Ulysses Joyce, James Ulysses 1922 
kipling_captains Kipling, Rudyard Captains Courageous 1897 
Kipling_Jungle Kipling, Rudyard The Jungle Book  1894 
kipling_kim Kipling, Rudyard Kim 1901 
Kipling_Puck Kipling, Rudyard Puck of Pook's Hill  1906 
Kipling_Rewards Kipling, Rudyard Rewards and Fairies  1910 
Koontz_Brotherodd Koontz, Dean Brother Odd 2006 
Koontz_December Koontz, Dean The Door To December 1985  
Koontz_DoorFromH
eaven 
Koontz, Dean One Door Away from 
Heaven 
2001  
Koontz_FearNothing Koontz, Dean Fear Nothing 1998 
Koontz_Hideaway Koontz, Dean Hideaway 1992  
Sterne_Sentimental Laurence, Sterne A Sentimental Journey 
Through France and Italy 
1768 
 
 
61 
 
Sterne_Tristram Laurence, Sterne The Life and Opinions of 
Tristram Shandy, Gentleman 
1759-
1767 
Harperlee_Mocking
bird 
Lee, Harper To Kill a Mockingbird 1960 
Lessing_Ben Lessing, Doris May Ben, in the World  2000 
Lessing_Child Lessing, Doris May The Fifth Child  1988 
Lessing_City Lessing, Doris May The Four-Gated City  1969 
Lessing_Dream Lessing, Doris May The Sweetest Dream  2001 
Lessing_General Lessing, Doris May The Story of General Dann 
and Mara's Daughter, Griot 
and the Snow Dog  
2005 
Lessing_MaraDann Lessing, Doris May Mara and Dann  1999 
Lessing_Orkney Lessing, Doris May The Temptation of Jack 
Orkney: Collected Stories, 
Vol. 2  
1978 
Lessing_Planet Lessing, Doris May The Making of the 
Representative for Planet 8  
1982 
Lessing_Sirian Lessing, Doris May The Sirian Experiments  1980 
ALewis_Vicissitudes Lewis, Alethea Vicissitudes in Genteel Life 1794 
Lewis_Battle Lewis, Clive Staples The Last Battle  1956 
Lewis_Caspian Lewis, Clive Staples Prince Caspian  1951 
Lewis_Chair Lewis, Clive Staples The Silver Chair  1953 
Lewis_Horse Lewis, Clive Staples The Horse and His Boy  1954 
Lewis_Lion Lewis, Clive Staples The Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe  
1950 
Lewis_Nephew Lewis, Clive Staples The Magician's Nephew  1955 
Lewis_Voyage Lewis, Clive Staples The Voyage of the Dawn 
Treader  
1952 
Mlewis_Bravo Lewis, Matthew 
Gregory 
The Bravo of Venice  1805 
Mlewis_Monk Lewis, Matthew 
Gregory 
The Monk  1796 
Wlewis_Condemned Lewis, Wyndham Self Condemned  1954 
Wlewis_Tarr Lewis, Wyndham Tarr - 
Ludlum_Bidentity Ludlum, Robert The Bourne Identity  1980 
Ludlum_BSupremac
y 
Ludlum, Robert The Bourne Supremacy  1986 
Ludlum_Halidon Ludlum, Robert The Cry of the Halidon  1974 
Ludlum_Icarus Ludlum, Robert The Icarus Agenda  1988 
MacDonald_Curdie MacDonald, 
George 
The Princess and Curdie  1883 
MacDonald_Goblin MacDonald, 
George 
The Princess and the 
Goblin  
1872 
Mackenzie_Irish Mackenzie, Anna 
Maria 
The Irish Guardian, or, 
Errors of Eccentricity 
1809 
Mackenzie_Monmo
uth 
Mackenzie, Anna 
Maria 
Monmouth: a Tale, Founded 
on Historic Facts 
1790 
 
 
62 
 
ford_girl Madox, Ford Ford An English Girl 1907 
Ford_ARingForNanc
y 
Madox, Ford Ford Ring for Nancy : a sheer 
comedy  
1913 
Ford_Crowned Madox, Ford Ford The Fifth Queen Crowned 1908 
Ford_Ladies Madox, Ford Ford Ladies Whose Bright Eyes 1911 
Ford_MrApollo Madox, Ford Ford Mr Apollo 1908 
Ford_PrivySeal Madox, Ford Ford Privy Seal 1907 
Ford_Queen Madox, Ford Ford The Fifth Queen 1906 
ford_soldier Madox, Ford Ford The Good Soldier 1915 
Ford_TheBenefactor Madox, Ford Ford The Benefactor 1905 
Ford_TheHalfMoon Madox, Ford Ford The Half Moon 1909 
Mansfield_Garden Mansfield, 
Katherine 
The Garden Party: and 
Other Stories  
1922 
Mansfield_German Mansfield, 
Katherine 
In a German Pension  1911 
Mansfield_Bliss Mansfield, 
Katherine  
Bliss: and Other Stories  1920 
Martin_Enchantress Martin, Mrs. The Enchantress; or, Where 
Shall I Find Her? A Tale 
1801 
Mathews_Simple Mathews, Mrs. Simple Facts; or, the History 
of an Orphan 
1793 
Maugham_Bondage Maugham, William 
Somerset 
Of Human Bondage  1934 
Maugham_Hero Maugham, William 
Somerset 
The Hero  1901 
Maugham_Liza Maugham, William 
Somerset 
Liza of Lambeth  1897 
Maugham_Magician Maugham, William 
Somerset 
The Magician  1926 
Maugham_Moon Maugham, William 
Somerset 
The Moon and Sixpence  1919 
McNeile_Black McNeile, Herman 
Cyril 
The Black Gang 1922 
McNeile_Bulldog McNeile, Herman 
Cyril 
Bull-Dog Drummond 1920 
Melville_Bartleby Melville, Herman Bartleby, the Scrivener 1853 
Melville_Mobydick Melville, Herman Moby-Dick; or, The Whale  1851 
Melville_Omoo Melville, Herman Omoo: A Narrative of 
Adventures in the South 
Seas  
1847 
Melville_Redburn Melville, Herman Redburn: His First Voyage  1849 
Melville_Typee Melville, Herman Typee: A Peep at Polynesian 
Life  
1846 
Meredith_Diana Meredith, George Diana of the Crossways  1885 
meredith_feverel Meredith, George The Ordeal of Richard 
Feverel 
1859 
meredith_richmond Meredith, George The Adventures of Harry 1871 
 
 
63 
 
Richmond  
Mitchell_Gonewind Mitchell, Margaret Gone with the Wind 1936 
Montgomery_Gable
s 
Montgomery, Lucy 
Maud 
Anne of Green Gables  1908 
Montgomery_Ingles
ide 
Montgomery, Lucy 
Maud 
Anne of Ingleside  1939 
Montgomery_Island Montgomery, Lucy 
Maud 
Anne of the Island  1915 
Montgomery_Quote
d 
Montgomery, Lucy 
Maud 
The Blythes Are Quoted 1942 
Morris_Child Morris, William Child Christopher and 
Goldilind the Fair  
1895 
Morris_House Morris, William A Tale of the House of the 
Wolfings, and All the 
Kindreds of the Mark 
Written in Prose and in 
Verse  
1889 
Morris_JohnBall Morris, William A Dream of John Ball  1888 
Morris_Plain Morris, William The Story of the Glittering 
Plain  
1891 
morris_roots Morris, William The Roots of the Mountains 1890 
Morris_Signs Morris, William Signs of Change 1888 
Morris_Story Morris, William The Story of Sigurd the 
Volsung and the Fall of the 
Niblungs  
1877 
Morris_Sundering Morris, William The Sundering Flood  1897 
morris_water Morris, William The Water of the Wondrous 
Isles 
1897 
Morris_Well Morris, William The Well at the World's End  1896 
morris_wood Morris, William The Wood Beyond the 
World 
1894 
Morrison_Investigat
or 
Morrison, Arthur 
George 
Martin Hewitt, Investigator  1894 
Morrison_Triangle Morrison, Arthur 
George 
The Red Triangle  1903 
Nabokov_Ada Nabokov, Vladimir  Ada or Ardor: A Family 
Chronicle 
1969 
Nabokov_Harlequin
s 
Nabokov, Vladimir  Look at the Harlequins! 1974 
Nabokov_Knight Nabokov, Vladimir  The Real Life of Sebastian 
Knight 
1941 
Nabokov_Lolita Nabokov, Vladimir  Lolita 1955 
Nabokov_Pnin Nabokov, Vladimir  Pnin 1957 
Nabokov_Sinister Nabokov, Vladimir  Bend Sinister 1947 
Nabokov_Transpare
nt 
Nabokov, Vladimir  Transparent Things 1972 
Obrien_Policeman O'Brien, Flann The Third Policeman 1939-
 
 
64 
 
1940 
Obrien_Swim O'Brien, Flann At Swim-Two-Birds 1939 
Orwell_Aspidistra Orwell, George Keep the Aspidistra Flying  1936 
Orwell_Burmese Orwell, George Burmese Days 1934 
Orwell_Coming Orwell, George Coming Up for Air 1939 
Orwell_Daughter Orwell, George A Clergyman's Daughter 1935 
Orwell_Farm Orwell, George Animal Farm 1945 
Orwell_Nineteen Orwell, George Nineteen Eighty-Four 1949 
Peacock_Headlong Peacock, Thomas 
Love 
Headlong Hall 1915 
Peacock_Marian Peacock, Thomas 
Love 
Maid Marian  1822 
Peacock_Nightmare Peacock, Thomas 
Love 
Nightmare Abbey  1818 
Poe_Letter Poe, Edgar Allan The Purloined Letter 1844 
Porter_Chiefs Porter, Jane The Scottish Chiefs  1810 
Porter_Thaddeus Porter, Jane Thaddeus of Warsaw 1803 
Post_Sleut Post, Melville 
Davisson 
The Sleuth of St. James 
Square 
1920 
Post_Uncleabner Post, Melville 
Davisson 
Uncle Abner, Master of 
Mysteries 
1918 
Powys_Weymouth Powys, John 
Cowper 
Weymouth Sands  1934 
Powys_Wolf Powys, John 
Cowper 
Wolf Solent  1929 
Purbeck_Honoria Purbeck, Elizabeth 
and Jane 
Honoria Somerville: a novel 1789 
Radcliffe_Sicilian Radcliffe, Ann A Sicilian Romance 1790 
Radcliffe_Udolpho Radcliffe, Ann The Mysteries of Udolpho 1794 
Drichardson_Interim Richardson, 
Dorothy 
Interim 1920 
Drichardson_Pointe
droofs 
Richardson, 
Dorothy 
Pointed Roofs 1915 
Drichardson_Tunnel Richardson, 
Dorothy 
The Tunnel 1919 
Rowling_Chamber Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the 
Chamber of Secrets 
1998 
Rowling_Goblet Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the Goblet 
of Fire  
2000 
Rowling_Hallows Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows  
2007 
Rowling_Order Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the Order 
of the Phoenix  
2003 
Rowling_Prince Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the Half-
Blood Prince  
2005 
Rowling_Prisoner Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the 
Prisoner of Azkaban  
1999 
 
 
65 
 
Rowling_Stone Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the 
Philosopher's Stone  
1997 
Rowling_Casual Rowling, J. K.  The Casual Vacancy  2012 
Salinger_Catcher Salinger, Jerome 
David 
The Catcher in the Rye 1951 
Richardson_Clarissa Samuel, 
Richardson 
Clarissa, or, the History of a 
Young Lady 
1748 
Richardson_Grandis
on 
Samuel, 
Richardson 
The History of Sir Charles 
Grandison 
1753 
Richardson_Pamela Samuel, 
Richardson 
Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded 1740 
Scott_Ivanhoe Scott, Sir Walter Ivanhoe 1819 
Scott_Kenilworth Scott, Sir Walter Kenilworth 1821 
Scott_Lammermoor Scott, Sir Walter The Bride of Lammermoor 1819 
Scott_Rob Scott, Sir Walter Rob Roy 1817 
Scott_Waverley Scott, Sir Walter Waverley 1814 
Selden_Villasantelle Selden, Catherine Villa Santelle, or The 
Curious Impertinent  
1817 
Shelley_Frankenstei
n 
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein: or, The 
Modern Prometheus 
1818 
Shelley_Lastman Shelley, Mary The Last Man  1826 
Shelley_Mathilda Shelley, Mary Mathilda  1819 
Shelley_Valperga Shelley, Mary Valperga; or, The Life and 
Adventures of Castruccio, 
Prince of Lucca  
1823 
Sinclair_Jungle Sinclair, Upton The Jungle 1906 
Sinclair_Samuel Sinclair, Upton Samuel The Seeker  1910 
Smollett_Clinker Smollett, Tobias 
George 
The Expedition of Humphry 
Clinker  
1771 
Smollett_Pickle Smollett, Tobias 
George 
The Adventures of 
Peregrine Pickle 
1751 
Smollett_Random Smollett, Tobias 
George 
The Adventures of Roderick 
Random  
1748 
Spence_Curate Spence, Elizabeth 
Isabella 
The Curate and His 
Daughter: A Cornish Tale 
1813 
Stein_Lives Stein, Gertrude Three Lives 1905-
1906 
Stein_Toklas Stein, Gertrude The Autobiography of Alice 
B. Toklas 
1933 
Steinbeck_Eden Steinbeck, John 
Ernst 
East of Eden  1952 
Steinbeck_Grapes Steinbeck, John 
Ernst 
The Grapes of Wrath  1939 
Steinbeck_Mice Steinbeck, John 
Ernst 
Of Mice and Men  1937 
Stephens_Crock Stephens, James The Crock of Gold 1912 
Stephens_Mary Stephens, James Mary, Mary 1912 
 
 
66 
 
stevenson_arrow Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
The Black Arrow 1883 
stevenson_catriona Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
Catriona 1893 
Stevenson_Jekyll Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
The Strange Case of Dr 
Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
1886 
Stevenson_Kidnapp
ed 
Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
Kidnapped  1886 
stevenson_island Stevenson, Robert 
Louis 
Treasure Island 1882 
Strutt_Drelincourt Strutt, Elizabeth Drelincourt and Rodalvi  1807 
Stuart_Toledo Stuart, Augusta 
Amelia 
Cava of Toledo; or, the 
Gothic Princess 
1812 
Swift_Gulliver Swift, Jonathan Gulliver's Travels  1726 
Swift_Tub Swift, Jonathan A Tale of a Tub  1704 
Taylor_Rachel Taylor, Jane Rachel: a Tale 1817 
Thackeray_Barry Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The Luck of Barry Lyndon 1844 
Thackeray_Pendenni
s 
Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
The History of Pendennis 1850 
Thackeray_Vanity Thackeray, William 
Makepeace 
Vanity Fair 1848 
Tolkien_Hobbit Tolkien, John 
Ronald Reuel 
The Hobbit or There and 
Back Again 
1937 
Tolkien_Lord1 Tolkien, John 
Ronald Reuel 
The Fellowship of the Ring 1954 
Tolkien_Lord2 Tolkien, John 
Ronald Reuel 
The Two Towers 1954 
Tolkien_Lord3 Tolkien, John 
Ronald Reuel 
The Return of the King 1955 
Tolkien_Silmarillion Tolkien, John 
Ronald Reuel 
The Silmarillion 1977 
Tomlins_Victim Tomlins, Elizabeth 
Sophia 
The Victim of Fancy 1787 
Trollope_Barchester Trollope, Anthony Barchester Towers 1857 
Trollope_Forgive Trollope, Anthony Can You Forgive Her?  1865 
Trollope_Phineas Trollope, Anthony Phineas Finn 1869 
Trollope_Prime Trollope, Anthony The Prime Minister 1876 
Trollope_Redux Trollope, Anthony Phineas Redux  1874 
Trollope_Thorne Trollope, Anthony Doctor Thorne  1858 
Trollope_Warden Trollope, Anthony The Warden 1855 
Twain_Finn Twain, Mark Adventures of Huckleberry 
Finn 
1885 
Twain_Innocents Twain, Mark The Innocents Abroad, or 
The New Pilgrims' Progress 
1869 
Twain_Pauper Twain, Mark The Prince and the Pauper  1881 
Twain_Sawyer Twain, Mark The Adventures of Tom 1876 
 
 
67 
 
Sawyer  
Twain_Yankee Twain, Mark A Connecticut Yankee in 
King Arthur's Court 
1889 
Walpole_Otranto Walpole, Horace The Castle of Otranto 1764 
Waugh_Brideshead Waugh, Evelyn Brideshead Revisited  1945 
Waugh_Dust Waugh, Evelyn A Handful of Dust  1934 
Waugh_Flags Waugh, Evelyn Put Out More Flags  1942 
Waugh_Officers Waugh, Evelyn Officers and Gentlemen 1955 
Waugh_Vile Waugh, Evelyn Vile Bodies  1930 
Wells_Invisible Wells, Herbert 
George 
The Invisible Man  1897 
Wells_MenMoon Wells, Herbert 
George 
The First Men in the Moon  1901 
Wells_Moreau Wells, Herbert 
George 
The Island of Doctor 
Moreau  
1896 
Wells_Time Wells, Herbert 
George 
The Time Machine  1895 
Wells_War Wells, Herbert 
George 
The War of the Worlds  1898 
Wells_WarAir Wells, Herbert 
George 
The War in the Air  1908 
West_Judge West, Rebecca The Judge  1922 
West_Return West, Rebecca The Return of the Soldier  1918 
Wharton_Age Wharton, Edith The Age of Innocence 1920 
Wharton_Frome Wharton, Edith Ethan Frome 1911 
Wharton_Mirth Wharton, Edith The House of Mirth  1905 
Wilde_Dorian Wilde, Oscar The Picture of Dorian Gray  1891 
Wilkinson_Child Wilkinson, Sarah 
Scudgell 
The Child of Mystery 1808 
Mason_Road Woodley, Alfred 
Edward Mason 
The Broken Road  1907 
Mason_Villarose Woodley, Alfred 
Edward Mason 
At the Villa Rose  1910 
Woolf_Acts Woolf, Virginia Between the Acts  1941 
Woolf_Dalloway Woolf, Virginia Mrs Dalloway  1925 
Woolf_Guineas Woolf, Virginia Three Guineas 1938 
Woolf_Jacobs Woolf, Virginia Jacob's Room  1922 
Woolf_Lighthouse Woolf, Virginia To the Lighthouse  1927 
Woolf_Monday Woolf, Virginia Monday or Tuesday 1941 
Woolf_Night Woolf, Virginia Night and Day  1919 
Woolf_Orlando Woolf, Virginia Orlando  1928 
Woolf_Room Woolf, Virginia Between the Acts  1941 
Woolf_Voyage Woolf, Virginia The Voyage Out  1915 
Woolf_Waves Woolf, Virginia The Waves  1931 
Woolf_Years Woolf, Virginia The Years  1937 
 
 
 
68 
 
The incorrect groups resulting from the network clustering (as described in 
Chapter 3) are delimited by horizontal bars; the shading indicates authorial connection 
between neighbouring groups: 
 
Table 4 
Compton_Dolores 
Compton_Family, Compton_Men, ConFord_Nature 
Ford_ARingForNancy 
ConFord_Inheritors, Ford_TheBenefactor 
Ford_AnEnglishGirl, Ford_Soldier 
Ford_Ladies, Ford_MrApollo 
Ford_Crowned, Ford_PrivySeal, Ford_Queen, Ford_TheHalfMoon 
Galsworthy_Pharisees 
Galsworthy_Chancery, Galsworthy_Let, Galsworthy_Man, Galsworthy_Monkey 
Hawthorne_Fanshawe 
 
Hawthorne_Blithedale, Hawthorne_MarbleFaun, Hawthorne_Scarlet, 
Hawthorne_SevenGables 
Huxley_Mortal 
Huxley_Brave, Huxley_Crome, Huxley_Gaza, Huxley_Point 
Lessing_Planet, Lessing_Sirian 
Lessing_Ben, Lessing_Child, Lessing_City, Lessing_Dream, Lessing_General, 
Lessing_MaraDann, Lessing_Orkney 
ConFord_Romance, Conrad_Agent, Conrad_ArrowGld, Conrad_Chance, 
Conrad_Duel, Conrad_EndTethr, Conrad_Falk, Conrad_Freya, Conrad_Heart, 
Conrad_Lord, Conrad_Nostromo, Conrad_Rescue, Conrad_Rover, 
Conrad_ShaddowL, Conrad_SmileFortune, Conrad_Typhoon, Conrad_Victory, 
Conrad_Western 
Conrad_Almayer, Conrad_NiggerN, Conrad_OutcastI 
Joyce_Dubliners, Joyce_Portrait 
Joyce_Finnegans, Joyce_Ulysses, Obrien_Swim 
Obrien_Policeman, Stephens_Crock, Stephens_Mary 
Doyle_MaracotDeep, Doyle_TheLostWorld 
Doyle_Adventures, Doyle_Lastbow, Doyle_Study, Doyle_TheHound 
Fielding_Amelia, Fielding_Joseph, Fielding_Tom 
Fielding_Shamela, Richardson_Clarissa, Richardson_Grandison, 
Richardson_Pamela 
Greene_BurntOut, Greene_Havana 
Greene_Brighton, Greene_Confidential, Greene_Ministry, Greene_Power 
Golding_Rites 
Golding_Inheritors, Golding_Lord, Golding_Spire, Passos_Initiation, 
Passos_Soldiers 
Melville_Bartleby 
Melville_Mobydick, Melville_Omoo, Melville_Redburn, Melville_Typee, 
Twain_Innocents 
Mitchell_Gonewind, Montgomery_Gables, Montgomery_Ingleside, 
Montgomery_Island, Montgomery_Quoted 
Orwell_Aspidistra, Orwell_Burmese, Orwell_Coming, Orwell_Daughter, 
 
 
69 
 
Orwell_Nineteen 
Orwell_Farm, Sinclair_Jungle, Stein_Toklas 
Edgeworth_Absentee, Edgeworth_Assistant, Edgeworth_Belinda, 
Edgeworth_Ennui, Edgeworth_Forester, Edgeworth_Vivian 
Aubin_Charlotta, Bradford_Plymouth, Defoe_Cruzoe, Defoe_Moll, 
Defoe_Roxana, Defoe_Singleton, Edgeworth_Rackrent 
Dickens_Barnaby, Dickens_Boz, Dickens_Cities, Dickens_Curiosity, 
Dickens_Nicholas, Dickens_Oliver, Dickens_Pickwick 
Dickens_Chimes, Dickens_Christmas, Dickens_Cricket 
Dickens_Bleak, Dickens_David, Dickens_Dombey, Dickens_Dorrit, 
Dickens_Edwin, Dickens_Expectations, Dickens_Hard, Dickens_Mutual 
James_Bostonians, James_Portrait, James_Princess, James_Reverbera, 
James_Tragic 
James_American, James_Confidence, James_Europeans, James_Roderick, 
James_Washington, James_Watch 
James_Ambassadors, James_Awkward, James_Golden, James_Maisie, 
James_Poynton, James_Sacred, James_Wings 
ABrontë_Agnes, ABrontë_Tenant, Austen_Emma, Austen_Mansfield, 
Austen_Northanger, Austen_Persuasion, Austen_Pride, Austen_Sense 
Morris_Child, Morris_House, Morris_JohnBall, Morris_Plain, Morris_Roots, 
Morris_Story, Morris_Sundering, Morris_Water, Morris_Well, Morris_Wood 
Morris_Signs, Peacock_Headlong, Peacock_Nightmare, Poe_Letter, 
Sjohnson_Rasselas, Sjohnson_Scotland, Smollett_Clinker, Smollett_Pickle, 
Smollett_Random, Sterne_Sentimental, Sterne_Tristram, Swift_Gulliver, 
Swift_Tub, Woolf_Guineas 
Beckett_Malone, Beckett_Molloy, Beckett_Unnamable, Beckford_Vathek, 
Bennet_Babylon, Bennet_Helen, Bennet_Imperial, Bentley_Trent, 
Bowen_Friends, Bowen_Hotel, Cary_Johnson, Catton_Luminaries 
Faulkner_Absalom, Faulkner_Light, Faulkner_Moses 
Maugham_Bondage, Maugham_Hero, Maugham_Magician, Maugham_Moon 
Faulkner_Dying, Faulkner_Sound, Green_Loving, Green_Party, 
Hemingway_Across, Hemingway_Bell, Hemingway_Farewell, 
Hemingway_Fiesta, Hemingway_Menwithout, Hemingway_Oldman, 
Maugham_Liza, Salinger_Catcher, Stein_Lives, Steinbeck_Grapes, 
Steinbeck_Mice, Twain_Finn 
Stevenson_Arrow, Stevenson_Catriona, Stevenson_Jekyll, 
Stevenson_Kidnapped, Stevenson_Treasure, Twain_Pauper, Twain_Sawyer, 
Twain_Yankee 
Nabokov_Ada, Nabokov_Harlequins, Nabokov_Lolita, Nabokov_Pnin, 
Nabokov_Sinister, Nabokov_Transparent 
Tolkien_Hobbit, Tolkien_Lord1, Tolkien_Lord2, Tolkien_Lord3 
Nabokov_Knight, Tolkien_Silmarillion, Wells_Invisible, Wells_MenMoon, 
Wells_Moreau, Wells_Time, Wells_War, Wells_WarAir, West_Judge, 
West_Return, Wharton_Age, Wharton_Frome, Wharton_Mirth, Wilde_Dorian, 
Wlewis_Condemned, Wlewis_Tarr, Woolf_Acts, Woolf_Dalloway, 
Woolf_Jacobs, Woolf_Lighthouse, Woolf_Monday, Woolf_Night, 
Woolf_Orlando, Woolf_Room, Woolf_Voyage, Woolf_Waves, Woolf_Years 
Capote_Voices, Ellison_Invisible 
Harperlee_Mockingbird, Sinclair_Samuel, Steinbeck_Eden 
 
 
70 
 
Mlewis_Bravo, Peacock_Marian, Walpole_Otranto 
Godwin_Imogen, Mlewis_Monk, Porter_Chiefs, Porter_Thaddeus, 
Radcliffe_Sicilian, Radcliffe_Udolpho, Selden_Villasantelle, 
Shelley_Frankenstein, Shelley_Lastman, Shelley_Mathilda, Shelley_Valperga 
CHAWTON HOUSE: Charlton_Parisian, Craik_Stella, Harvey_Anything, 
Harvey_Tynemouth, Helme_Magdalen, Hunter_Unexpected, Johnson_Francis, 
Mackenzie_Irish, Mackenzie_Monmouth, Purbeck_Honoria, Spence_Curate, 
Strutt_Drelincourt, Stuart_Toledo, Tomlins_Victim, Wilkinson_Child 
Beckford_Azemia, Godwin_Caleb 
CHAWTON HOUSE:Hughes_Caroline 
CHAWTON HOUSE: Jacson_Isabella, Jacson_Things, Taylor_Rachel 
Green_Romance, CHAWTON HOUSE: Bennett_Agnes, 
Cooper_CarolineHerbert, Foster_Corinna, Foster_Substance, Hatton_Lovers, 
Martin_Enchantress 
Burney_Camilla, Burney_Cecilia, Burney_Darblay, Burney_Evelina, 
Burney_Wanderer, Goldsmith_Vicar 
CHAWTON HOUSE: ALewis_Vicissitudes, Canning_Offspring, 
Carver_OldWoman, Mathews_Simple 
 
  
 
 
71 
 
A.4. Polish corpus 100 
 
A small-scale corpus of 100 Polish novels published between 1850-1940 by 35 authors, 3 
books each (but for J. Godlewska, L. Godlewska, and M. Samozwaniec), including 52 
books written by female and 48 by male writers. 
 
Table 5 
File-id Author Title Date4 
balucki_murzyn Bałucki, Michał  Biały murzyn 1875 
balucki_przebudzeni Bałucki, Michał  Przebudzeni 1864 
balucki_burmistrz Bałucki, Michał  Pan burmistrz z Pipidówki 
(Powieść życia 
autonomicznego Galicji) 
1887 
berent_diogenes Berent, Wacław  Diogenes w kontuszu 1937 
berent_kamienie Berent, Wacław  Żywe kamienie 1918 
berent_prochno Berent, Wacław  Próchno 1903 
dabrowska_ 
nocednie1 
Dąbrowska, Maria  Noce i dnie. T.1 1931 
dabrowska_ 
nocednie2 
Dąbrowska, Maria  Noce i dnie. T.2 1932 
dabrowska_ 
nocednie3 
Dąbrowska, Maria  Noce i dnie. T.3 1933 
deotyma_panienka Deotyma  Panienka z okienka 1893 
deotyma_rozdrozu Deotyma  na rozdrożu 1877 
deotyma_zagadka Deotyma  Zwierciadlana zagadka 1879 
dmochowska_dwor Dmochowska, 
Emma 
Dwór w Haliniszkach 1903 
dmochowska_ 
obraczka 
Dmochowska, 
Emma 
Obrączka 1907 
dmochowska_ 
odlamana 
Dmochowska, 
Emma  
Jak odłamana 1914 
mostowicz_hanki Dołęga-Mostowicz, 
Tadeusz  
Pamiętnik Pani Hanki 1939 
mostowicz_kariera Dołęga-Mostowicz, 
Tadeusz  
Kariera Nikodema Dyzmy 1932 
domanska_historia Domańska, 
Antonina  
Historia żółtej ciżemki 1913 
domanska_krysia Domańska, 
Antonina  
Krysia bezimienna 1914 
domanska_paziowie Domańska, 
Antonina  
Paziowie króla Zygmunta 1910 
dygasinski_as Dygasiński, Adolf  As 1896 
dygasinski_ 
piszczalski 
Dygasiński, Adolf  Pan Jędrzej Piszczalski, 
Opowieść z niedawnej 
1890 
                                                 
4
 Date of publishing or, if known, of writing. 
 
 
72 
 
przeszłości 
dygasinski_wilk Dygasiński, Adolf  Wilk, psy i ludzie 1883 
godlewska_ninka Godlewska, Janina Ninka 1897 
godlewska_kato Godlewska, 
Ludwika 
KATO Powieść Współczesna 1897 
godlewska_kwiat Godlewska, 
Ludwika  
Kwiat aloesu 1897 
gojawiczynska_ 
dziewczeta 
Gojawiczyńska, Pola  Dziewczęta z Nowolipek 1935 
gojawiczynska_ 
ziemia 
Gojawiczyńska, Pola  Ziemia Elżbiety 1934 
gojawiczynska_ 
jablon 
Gojawiczyńska, Pola  Rajska jabłoń 1937 
beczkowska_droga Grot-Bęczkowska, 
Wanda 
Kędy droga? 1898 
beczkowska_ 
gniezdzie 
Grot-Bęczkowska, 
Wanda 
W mieszczańskim gnieździe 1899 
beczkowska_bedzie Grot-Bęczkowska, 
Wanda  
Co będzie z naszego 
chłopca? 
1897 
iwaszkiewicz_ 
czerwone 
Iwaszkiewicz, 
Jarosław  
Czerwone Tarcze 1934 
iwaszkiewicz_mlyn Iwaszkiewicz, 
Jarosław  
Młyn nad Utratą 1936 
iwaszkiewicz_panny Iwaszkiewicz, 
Jarosław  
Panny z Wilka 1932 
kaczkowski_grob Kaczkowski, 
Zygmunt  
Grób Nieczui 1857 
kaczkowski_ 
murdelio 
Kaczkowski, 
Zygmunt  
Murdelio 1853 
kaczkowski_ 
olbrachtowi 
Kaczkowski, 
Zygmunt  
Olbrachtowi rycerze 1889 
korzeniowski_ 
emeryt 
Korzeniowski, Józef  Emeryt 1851 
korzeniowski_ 
garbaty 
Korzeniowski, Józef  Garbaty 1853 
korzeniowski_ 
krewni 
Korzeniowski, Józef  Krewni 1856 
kossak_bog Kossak, Zofia  Krzyżowcy 1935 
kossak_oreza Kossak, Zofia  Bez oręża 1937 
kossak_zmilosci Kossak, Zofia  Z miłości 1925 
kraszewski_ 
kordecki 
Kraszewski, Józef 
Ignacy  
Kordecki 1850 
kraszewski_lalki Kraszewski, Józef 
Ignacy  
Lalki, Sceny przedślubne 1874 
kraszewski_piast Kraszewski, Józef 
Ignacy  
Król Piast (Michał Książę 
Wiśniowiecki), Powieść 
historyczna 
1888 
 
 
73 
 
krzemieniecka_ 
fatum 
Krzemieniecka, 
Hanna  
Fatum 1904 
krzemieniecka_ 
odejdzie 
Krzemieniecka, 
Hanna  
A gdy odejdzie w przepaść 
wieczną, Romans 
zagrobowy 
1910 
krzemieniecka_ 
wichry 
Krzemieniecka, 
Hanna  
Lecą wichry! : powieść 1923 
kuncewiczowa_ 
cudzoziemka 
Kuncewiczowa, 
Maria  
Cudzoziemka 1936 
kuncewiczowa_ 
ksiezyce 
Kuncewiczowa, 
Maria  
Dwa księżyce 1933 
kuncewiczowa_ 
twarz 
Kuncewiczowa, 
Maria  
Twarz mężczyzny 1928 
makuszynski_ 
basie 
Makuszyński, 
Kornel  
Awantura o Basię 1937 
makuszynski_ 
drodze 
Makuszyński, 
Kornel  
Po Mlecznej Drodze 1917 
makuszynski_ 
szalenstwa 
Makuszyński, 
Kornel  
Szaleństwa panny EWY 1940 
marrene_bozek Marrené, Waleria Bożek Miljon 1871 
marrene_mezowie Marrené, Waleria Mężowie i żony 1875 
marrene_roza Marrené, Waleria  Róża 1872 
mniszek_gehenna Mniszkówna, 
Helena  
Gehenna czyli dzieje 
nieszczęśliwej miłości 
1914 
mniszek_ordynat Mniszkówna, 
Helena  
Ordynat Michorowski 1910 
mniszek_tredowata Mniszkówna, 
Helena  
Trędowata 1909 
mostowicz_murek Mostowicz, Dołęga, 
Tadeusz  
Doktor Murek 1936 
nalkowska_granica Nałkowska, Zofia  Granica 1935 
nalkowska_kobiety Nałkowska, Zofia  Kobiety 1906 
nalkowska_romans Nałkowska, Zofia  Romans Teresy Hennert 1923 
orzeszkowa_gloria Orzeszkowa, Eliza  Gloria victis 1910 
orzeszkowa_meir Orzeszkowa, Eliza  Meir Ezofowicz 1878 
orzeszkowa_ 
niemnem 
Orzeszkowa, Eliza  Nad Niemnem 1888 
prus_emancypantki Prus, Bolesław  Emancypantki 1894 
prus_faraon Prus, Bolesław  Faraon 1897 
prus_lalka Prus, Bolesław  Lalka 1890 
reymont_chlopi Reymont, 
Władysław 
Stanisław  
Chłopi 1908 
reymont_ 
komediantka 
Reymont, 
Władysław 
Stanisław  
Komediantka 1896 
reymont_obiecana Reymont, Ziemia obiecana 1899 
 
 
74 
 
Władysław 
Stanisław  
rodziewicz_lato Rodziewiczówna, 
Maria  
Lato leśnych ludzi 1920 
rodziewicz_miedzy Rodziewiczówna, 
Maria  
Między ustami a brzegiem 
pucharu 
1890 
rodziewicz_straszny Rodziewiczówna, 
Maria  
Straszny dziadunio 1887 
samozwaniec_ 
ustach 
Samozwaniec, 
Magdalena  
Na ustach grzechu 1922 
sienkiewicz_ogniem Sienkiewicz, Henryk  Ogniem i mieczem 1884 
sienkiewicz_quo Sienkiewicz, Henryk  Quo vadis 1896 
sienkiewicz_rodzina Sienkiewicz, Henryk  Rodzina Połanieckich 1894 
sygietynski_ 
calvados 
Sygietyński, Antoni  Na skałach Calvados 1884 
sygietynski_ogien Sygietyński, Antoni  Święty ogień 1918 
sygietynski_ 
wysadzony 
Sygietyński, Antoni  Wysadzony z siodła 1891 
swietochowski_ 
drygalowie 
Świętochowski, 
Aleksander  
Drygałowie 1914 
swietochowski_ 
prawdy 
Świętochowski, 
Aleksander  
Tragikomedya prawdy 1888 
swietochowski_ 
twinko 
Świętochowski, 
Aleksander  
Twinko 1936 
zapolska_smierc Zapolska, Gabriela  Śmierć Felicyana Dulskiego 1911 
zapolska_kaska Zapolska, Gabriela  Kaśka Kariatyda 1888 
zapolska_tagiejew Zapolska, Gabriela  Pan policmajster Tagiejew 1905 
zarzycka_dzikuska Zarzycka, Irena  Dzikuska 1927 
zarzycka_irka Zarzycka, Irena  Panna Irka 1931 
zarzycka_wiatr Zarzycka, Irena  Pod wiatr 1934 
zeromski_bezdomni Żeromski, Stefan  Ludzie bezdomni 1899 
zeromski_ 
przedwiosnie 
Żeromski, Stefan  Przedwiośnie 1924 
zeromski_syzyfowe Żeromski, Stefan  Syzyfowe prace 1897 
zulawski_laus Żuławski, Jerzy  Laus feminae 1914 
zulawski_srebrnym Żuławski, Jerzy  Na srebrnym globie 1903 
zulawski_zwyciezca Żuławski, Jerzy  Zwycięzca 1910 
 
  
 
 
75 
 
A.5. EN-PL parallel corpus 
 
The sample corpus comprises 39 books of one English author only, Terry Pratchett. The 
corpus of translations into Polish is short by one (crossed out, in the table below), and is 
authored by one translator, Piotr Cholewa (other translations, by Dorota Malinowska-
Grupińska, are neglected). The bibliographic information has been copied from Wikipedia 
(2014). 
Table 6 
Original title Date 
Polish title 
 
Date 
The Colour of Magic 1983 Kolor magii 1994 
The Light Fantastic 1986 Blask fantastyczny 1995 
Equal Rites 1987 Równoumagicznienie 1996 
Mort 1987 Mort 1996 
Sourcery 1988 Czarodzicielstwo 1997 
Wyrd Sisters 1988 Trzy wiedźmy 1998 
Pyramids 1989 Piramidy 1998 
Guards! Guards! 1989 Straż! Straż! 1999 
Eric 1990 Eryk 1997 
Moving Pictures 1990 Ruchome obrazki 2000 
Reaper Man 1991 Kosiarz 2001 
Witches Abroad 1991 Wyprawa czarownic 2001 
Small Gods 1992 Pomniejsze bóstwa 2001 
Lords and Ladies 1992 Panowie i damy 2002 
Men at Arms 1993 Zbrojni 2002 
Soul Music 1994 Muzyka duszy 2002 
Interesting Times 1994 Ciekawe czasy 2003 
Maskerade 1995 Maskarada 2003 
Feet of Clay 1996 Na glinianych nogach 2004 
Hogfather 1996 Wiedźmikołaj 2004 
Jingo 1997 Bogowie, honor, Ankh-Morpork 2005 
The Last Continent 1998 Ostatni kontynent 2006 
Carpe Jugulum 1998 Carpe Jugulum 2006 
The Fifth Elephant 1999 Piąty elefant 2006 
The Truth 2000 PRAWDA 2007 
Thief of Time 2001 Złodziej czasu 2007 
The Last Hero 2001 Ostatni bohater 2003 
The Amazing Maurice and his 
Educated Rodents 
2001 
Zadziwiający Maurycy i jego 
edukowane gryzonie 
2004 
Night Watch 2002 Straż nocna 2008 
The Wee Free Men 2003 Wolni Ciut Ludzie 2005 
Monstrous Regiment 2003 Potworny regiment 2008 
A Hat Full of Sky 2004 Kapelusz pełen nieba 2005 
Going Postal 2004 Piekło pocztowe 2008 
Thud! 2005 Łups! 2009 
Wintersmith 2006 Zimistrz 2007 
Making Money 2007 Świat finansjery 2009 
Unseen Academicals 2009 Niewidoczni Akademicy 2010 
I Shall Wear Midnight 2010 W północ się odzieję 2011 
Snuff 2011 Niuch 2012 
 
 
76 
 
Appendix B: Software and parameters 
 
In this appendix I provide a few hints as to what software I used and what were the 
parameters used for the particular studies, which can be helpful for readers willing to 
conduct similar research. All the necessary and sufficient information to run the programs 
is contained in the respective read-me files and how-tos.  
Some general information on the workings of PoS taggers can be found in the 
subsection Morpho-syntactic annotation of Ide (2004). 
 
B.1. Tag-sets 
 
The common English-Polish tag-set I used is based on the Penn Treebank tag-set (Santorini 
1990), in comparison to which some of the categories are additionally merged or omitted; 
being aware of the “unfortunate fact that it is often extremely difficult and sometimes 
impossible to map one tag-set to another, which has resulted in much re-creation of lexical 
information to suit the needs of a particular tagger” (Ide 2004), one has to say that in 
creating many-language tag-sets such drawbacks are inevitable. The modifications are to a 
much extent arbitrary and should be treated only as a working version. 
The tables below present replacement rules from Penn Treebank tag-set and from 
the Polish tag-set used in TaKIPI (Woliński 2003) to the common EN-PL tag-set (“-” 
means omission of a category; asterisk, e.g., in “subst:sg:*”, means including all other 
subcategories, in this case all nouns in the singular irrespective of their case, declension 
type, etc.). While I am not so much interested in comparing the grammatical structures of 
the two languages, but rather in how the translation between them is performed, some of 
the replacement rules do not reflect “equivalence” between parts of speech, but rather are 
motivated by the intuition on what happens with some structures in translation (e.g., with 
existential there or with the determiners in EN->PL translation). Some of the most 
disputable solutions are discussed in the footnotes. The rest is, hopefully, fairly self-
explanatory. 
  
 
 
77 
 
Penn Treebank Common EN-PL 
# SYM 
$ SYM 
-LSB- -LRB- 
-RSB- -RRB- 
DT -5 
EX PRP 
LS - 
MD VBP 
NNPS NNP 
NNS NN 
PDT JJ 
POS -6 
PRP$ PRP 
RP -7 
TO IN 
VBZ VBP 
WDT CC 
WP CC 
WP$ CC 
WRB CC 
 
TaKIPI Common EN-PL 
adj*comp JJR 
adj*pos JJ 
adj*sup JJS 
adja JJ 
adv:comp RBR 
adv:pos RB 
adv:sup RBS 
aglt* PRP8 
bedzie* VBP 
conj CC9 
depr:pl:* NNP 
depr:sg:* NN 
fin* VBP 
ger* VBG 
imps* VBN 
impt* VB 
inf* VB 
interp .10 
, 
" 
: 
-LRB- 
-RRB- 
num* CD11 
pact* VBG 
pant* VBN 
pcon* VBG 
ppas* VBN 
                                                 
5
 The determiners (DT) are omitted, since they are usually non-existent in Polish their rough equivalents: 
“jakiś”, “taki”, etc., belong to the group adj:...:pos which is replaced by JJ. For consistency, 
predeterminers (PDT) are also replaced with JJ. 
6
 The possessive ending (POS) is omitted, since in Polish the possessive would be grammaticalised as 
genitive case and so it does not obtain a separate category tag. 
7
 RP is a particle, i.e., roughly the preposition in a phrasal verb in English, whose function in Polish is 
fulfilled by a prefix of a verb. The omission allows to just count verbs without delving into their 
morphological constituents. 
8
 This is a fairly unintuitive replacement: the agglutinative “to be” in Polish, e.g., in 
“wlazł[praet:sg:m1:perf]eś[aglt:sg:sec:imperf:wok]” translated as “[you have] climbed” could be omitted, 
since it is morphologically integrated with the verb, but I decided to replace it with a personal pronoun 
(PRP) category, as it carries the grammatical information on person, which in English would be rendered 
as an obligatory pronominal subject of a verb.  
9
 This is the major problem with adjusting the Penn Treebank tag-set: CC contains only the coordinating 
conjunctions, while the subordinating ones belong to IN, and additional processing for their extraction 
would be needed. This affects the comparative benchmark distributions of PoS tags between EN and PL, 
as can be seen in Fig. … 
10
 Punctuation in TaKIPI is all flattened to just one tag, but since it carries some statistical information on 
clause structures, I expanded it back to the Penn Treebank categories. 
11
 The problem with this replacement is that Penn Treebank tags ordinal numbers with JJ, and additional 
processing for their extraction would be needed. 
 
 
78 
 
ppron12:* PRP 
ppron3:* PRP 
praet* VBD 
pred* VBP 
prep* IN12 
prep+adjp RB13 
qub UH14 
siebie* PRP 
subst:pl:* NNP 
subst:sg:* NN 
tmail - 
tnum* CD 
tsym SYM 
ttime CD 
turi - 
winien* VBP 
xxs FW 
xxx FW 
 
 
B.2. English PoS taggers 
 
In order to perform part-of-speech tagging in English I used Stanford Log-linear 
Part-Of-Speech Tagger (Toutanova and Manning 2000, Toutanova et al. 2003) 
implemented in Java. I did not train the tagger myself, but used the english-left3words-
distsim.tagger model for English, which was trained on PennTreebank’s Wall Street 
Journal sections 0-18 and extra parser training data using the left3words architecture and 
includes word shape and distributional 
similarity features. It is the default model of the Stanford NLP group because of its 
speed. The trained tagger can be downloaded from: 
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml. 
The Stanford Tagger uses PennTreebank tag-set (Santorini 1990). The accuracy of 
the model on the standard Wall Street Journal 22-24 test set is around 97% (around 90% on 
unknown words). 
  
                                                 
12
 The problem is connected to the one in Footnote 9: IN incorporates both prepositions and subordinating 
conjunctions. 
13
 Although it is only a partial solution, whenever a postprepositional adjective is found (see discussion in 
(Woliński 2003), it is joined with the preceding preposition, e.g., “po polsku” or “po prostu”, and jointly 
rendered as an adverb (RB), to which it seems to be functionally equivalent. The replacement is 
disputable, however, as in translation it may be rendered as a prepositional phrase. 
14
 The lexical range of the two tags is unfortunately quite different, as can be expected from Fig. … . The 
simplest interjections (UH) supposedly could be tagged as qublics (roughly, adverbial particles, which are 
not subject to any inflections), but the qublics contain also such words as czy, nigdy, już, się, tam, nie, etc., 
some of which could be tagged in English as adverbs, determiners, pronouns or finally interjections, 
depending on the precise use. 
 
 
79 
 
B.3. Polish PoS tagger 
 
In order to perform part-of-speech tagging in Polish I used TaKIPI 1.8 Polish language 
tagger (Piasecki 2007), whose name comes from Korpus Instytutu Podstaw Informatyki 
Polskiej Akademii Nauk (Korpus IPI PAN, or even shorter KIPI), i.e., the Corpus of the 
Institute of Computer Science of the Polish Academy of Sciences. It can be downloaded 
from the following website: http://nlp.pwr.wroc.pl/takipi/. 
TaKIPI works based on the tag-set of the KIPI corpus (Woliński 2003). To be 
operational it needs the contextless morphological analyser Morfeusz [Morfeusz], which 
segments the tokens found in a text into their elementary morphological components, and 
thus allows to find a range of possible lexemes to which the token belongs. It can be 
downloaded from: http://sgjp.pl/morfeusz/. Beside the morphological analysis of known 
tokens done by Morfeusz, TaKIPI performs morphological disambiguation, and also 
contains a subroutine that guesses the morphosyntactic structure of the tokens unknown to 
it. Its authors claim 93.4% accuracy in tagging all tokens in a text. 
I used the version of Morfeusz based on the Polimorf dictionary; the choice of the 
version affects the range of tokens covered. As concerns disambiguations, for the purpose 
of this thesis I always took only the first, i.e., the most probable form. 
B.4. Stylo R package 
 
The Stylo package (Eder et al. 2013) can be downloaded from: 
https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/scripts. 
The accuracy of authorship attribution on an EN100 Benchmark corpus is around 
96%-98%, depending on the classifier/clustering method, as presented in Figure 14. 
 
The results presented in Chapter 3, were all performed with the use of classic 
Burrows’s delta, either with the option Cluster Analysis (generating standard dendrograms) 
or Consensus Tree. The precise parameters are given below each figure. Pronouns were 
deleted in order to control for the narration type. So called culling parameter specifies the 
minimum percentage of the corpus in which the features used should appear (in the trivial 
case of 0% there is no limitation, while in the case of 100% the features should appear at 
least once in all the texts in the corpus). All these options can be easily chosen using the 
built-in Graphical User Interface. This part was done still using version 0.4.9.2 of the 
package. 
The results presented in Figure 14, EN100 Benchmark, were obtained using 
version 0.5.6, without the use of GUI. The primary (training) set contained 2 texts per 
author and the secondary (test) set 1 text per author. The function classify() took option 
cv.folds=100 for cross-validation. For EN500 corpus no cross-validation was performed, 
since I had at my disposal only the distance table, not the frequency tables nor the texts 
themselves. 
  
 
 
80 
 
B.5. Community detection algorithms 
 
Some preliminary clustering of the small English benchmark corpus was performed 
with Infomap software package for multi-level network clustering (Edler and Rosvall 
2013), with the options –u (undirected network, since the Delta distances are symmetric) 
and –N 100 (i.e., the number of trials to run before picking the best solution), but resulted 
in just one big group comprising all the books. 
The method I used further was the Louvain method of modularity maximisation 
(Blondel et al. 2008). The code was developed by Traag et al. (2011), which can be 
downloaded from: 
https://launchpad.net/louvain. 
To produce the Figure 13 and Figure 15 the Delta distances were transformed into 
similarities as 
sba = δba
−𝑝,      
with the power exponent p ranging from 3 to 6 in increments of 0.25; the range of 
MFW checked was 100-4400 in increments of 100, and culling 0-100% in increments of 
20%. The maximum Normalised Mutual Information scores were obtained for the power 
5.5, 300 MFW at 100% culling, and the modularity resolution of 3.5. These parameters 
were used to produce the Figures mentioned above. The functional relation of distance and 
similarity has been chosen from among several different ones, so that it optimized the 
results of clustering was. An alternative could be a logarithmic relation (Eder 2014). 
In order to produce Figure 16 the Delta distances were transformed with the same 
power exponent p = 5.5 (so that EN100 could be treated as “training” for EN500 corpus), 
and 190 MFW were taken at 100% culling; the modularity resolution parameter scanned 
ranged from 3.0 to 9.0 in increments of 0.1, which resulted in the different numbers of 
authorial groups as seen in the Figure. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
 
Abstract 
 
The topic of this thesis is the computational methods for measurement of authorial 
style and algorithms of authorial attribution. 
The first aim of the thesis was an attempt at a quantifiable separation of various 
layers of authorial style (in the present case the lexical and grammatical layers) in order to 
estimate their influence on the results of a chosen method of authorial attribution. Within 
the scope of these studies I compared the distance, so called Burrows's Delta, between a 
pair of English novels by two chosen authors and automatically generated texts, whose 
statistical distributions of parts of speech were borrowed from one of the authors, while the 
vocabulary from the other one; additionally, in the computatrificial texts I left the sets of 
words of the first author if they belonged to a particular part of speech. Such procedure 
allowed to create a hybrid text, which was attributed to the first author, even though the 
majority of lexical items were that of the second author. 
The second aim was to identify the influences of the style and language of the 
original on the style of the translation. This part of research involved among others 
adapting Polish and English part-of-speech tag-sets to form a common translatorial tag-set. 
Beside making a couple of simple observations concerning the distributions and 
coocurrences of parts of speech in the two languages, I managed to determine some 
features of the selected translatorial corpus, which lie on the fringes of what seems a norm 
for Polish. 
The third aim was testing the accuracy of state-of-the-art (unsupervised) clustering 
methods for automatic grouping of texts according to their author. The results show that 
the methods recognise authorship worse than the known supervised machine learning 
methods. 
In the thesis I made use of corpora totalling around 550 digitised English-language 
novels and 100 Polish ones, as well as a parallel corpus of 39 novels of a single English 
author together with their translations by a single Polish translator. The research conducted 
involved utilising existing part-of-speech taggers (both for English and Polish), authorship 
attribution programmes, and programmes for graph clustering.  
 
  
 
 
82 
 
Streszczenie 
 
Przedmiotem niniejszej pracy są komputerowe metody pomiaru stylu autorskiego oraz 
algorytmy rozpoznawania autorstwa tekstu. 
Pierwszym z jej celów była próba kwantyfikowalnego rozdzielenia różnych warstw 
stylu autorskiego (w tym wypadku: warstwy leksykalnej i gramatycznej), aby oszacować 
ich wpływ na wyniki wybranej metody atrybucji autorskiej. W ramach tych badań 
porównywałem odległość, tzw. Deltę Burrowsa, pomiędzy rzeczywistymi powieściami 
dwu wybranych autorów oraz tekstami wytwarzanymi automatycznie, mającymi 
statystyczne rozkłady części mowy zapożyczone od jednego z autorów, słownictwo zaś od 
drugiego; dodatkowo w tekstach sztucznych pozostawiałem zestawy słów 
odpowiadających konkretnym częściom mowy zebrane z tekstu pierwszego autora. 
Pozwoliło to na stworzenie tekstu-hybrydy, któremu pomimo zachowania przeważającej 
części warstwy leksykalnej drugiego z autorów, przypisywane było autorstwo autora 
pierwszego. 
Drugim celem było wstępne rozpoznanie wpływu stylu i języka oryginału na styl 
tłumaczenia. Ta część pracy wymagała m.in. roboczego opracowania wspólnego, polsko-
angielskiego zestawu znaczników części mowy. Poza poczynieniem prostych obserwacji 
dot. rozkładów oraz współwystępowania części mowy w obu językach, udało się znaleźć 
pewne cechy wybranego zbioru przekładów, które lokują się na obrzeżach normy dla 
polszczyzny. 
Trzecim celem było sprawdzenie skuteczności nowoczesnych (nienadzorowanych) 
metod analizy skupień w automatycznym grupowaniu tekstów wedle ich autorstwa. 
Wyniki wskazują, że metody te rozpoznają autorstwo gorzej niż metody nadzorowane 
znane dotychczas. 
W pracy wykorzystane zostały korpusy o łącznej liczbie ok. 550 zdigitalizowanych 
powieści anglojęzycznych, oraz 100 powieści polskich, a także korpus równoległy 39 
powieści jednego autora anglojęzycznego wraz z ich tłumaczeniami na język polski 
wykonanymi przez jednego tłumacza. Przeprowadzone badania wymagały użycia już 
istniejących programów do oznaczania części mowy (zarówno w polszczyźnie, jak i 
angielszczyźnie), programów do atrybucji autorskiej oraz programów do analizy skupień 
na grafach. 
 
