A Challenge of Authorship Identification for Ten-thousand-scale Microblog Users 
Syunya Okuno 
Dept. of Computer Sci. and Eng. 
Waseda Univ. 
Tokyo, Japan 
o_syunya@yama.info.waseda.ac.jp 
Hiroki Asai 
Dept. of Computer Sci. and Eng. 
Waseda Univ. 
Tokyo, Japan 
asai@yama.info.waseda.ac.jp 
Hayato Yamana 
Faculty of Sci. and Eng., Waseda Univ. 
 / National Inst. of Informatics 
Tokyo, Japan 
yamana@yama.info.waseda.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— Internet security issues require authorship 
identification for all kinds of internet contents; however, 
authorship identification for microblog users is much harder 
than other documents because microblog texts are too short. 
Moreover, when the number of candidates becomes large, i.e., 
big data, it will take long time to identify. Our proposed 
method solves these problems. The experimental results show 
that our method successfully identifies the authorship with 
53.2% of precision out of 10,000 microblog users in the almost 
half execution time of previous method. 
Keywords- authorship identification; authorship detection;  
authorship attribution; microblog; Twitter; 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, many user-created posts such as twitter 
posts are used in criminal investigations; however, most of 
them are anonymous besides some of them disguise an 
originator, which requires authorship identification. 
Although there exist authorship identification researches 
for internet contents; however, most of them target blog texts 
that are well written in comparison with microblog texts. 
Narayanan et al. [1] achieved low precision@1 as 20% with 
100,000 blog users. On the other hand, Ragel et al. [2] 
targeted short message service (SMS); however, they 
achieved low precision@1, less than 25%, with only 70 SMS 
users. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, none of 
previous papers has focused on the execution time of 
authorship identification. 
When we target microblog users’ texts, we must consider 
the characteristics of them, i.e., short texts containing wide-
ranging topics, to keep high precision@1. Also we must 
shorten the execution time to handle large number of 
microblog users. In this paper, we propose a new method to 
identify authorship of microblog texts. Our contributions are 
1) a combined selection technique for training dataset to 
handle wide ranging topics, 2) a biased weighting technique 
for n-gram to control the weight of n-gram features to handle 
short texts, and 3) POS-tag-combined-n-gram to shorten the 
execution time of identification by decreasing the number of 
features.  
II. RELATED WORK 
Originally, authorship identification has been studied in 
determining authorship of written text from a few candidate 
authors such as validating whether a given novel was 
written by Shakespeare among a few candidate set of 
contemporary novel writers inspired by Shakespeare.  
Recently, more and more studies target internet contents. 
For example, Narayanan et al. [1] and Koppel et.al [3] 
targeted blogs to identify authorship. Ragel et al. [2] 
targeted short message service and Silva et al. [4] targeted 
microblogs. 
Narayanan et al. [1] did the authorship identification for 
large scale blogs, i.e., 100,000 blog users; however, 
achieved low precision@1 as 20%. They adopt machine 
learning techniques to conclude that the combination of 
“nearest neighbor” and “regularized least squares 
classification” works well after comparison of many 
classifiers. Koppel et al. [3] also targeted blogs. They used 
1,000 blog users to identify authorship by employing word 
frequency as features followed by calculating cosine-
similarity. Since precision@1 is low as 35% by using 500 
words for each blog, they propose how to calculate the 
confidence of each result to increase precision but decrease 
recall by applying support vector machine (SVM) to the 
results. Since blogs are well written in comparison with 
microblog texts, we must think about more sophisticate 
method to achieve high precision.   
Ragel et al. [2] targeted SMS to identify authorship by 
adopting unigrams as features followed by calculating 
cosine-similarity; however, they achieved low precision@1, 
less than 25%, with only 70 SMS users. It shows that when 
targeting SMS, it becomes hard to achieve high precision 
even with small number of SMS users. Silva et al. [4] 
targeted tweets; however, they showed precision and recall 
only by employing 3 users to identify. They used 40 sets of 
tweets each of which includes 3 users. Here, 75 to 2000 
tweets were used for each user.  F-value, i.e., harmonic 
mean of precision and recall, is 0.54 when using 75 tweets 
and 0.73 when using 2,000 tweets. It shows that the 
difficulty of targeting microblog users to identify authorship. 
As shown above, when targeting microblog users, 
authorship identification becomes much harder than 
targeting blog users, because a tweet is just a string of up to 
140 characters and a set of tweets includes wide ranging 
topics. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, none of 
previous papers has focused on the execution time of 
authorship identification; however, we must decrease the 
execution time when handling huge amount of users to 
identify.  
2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
978-1-4799-5666-1/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 52
III. METHODOLOGY 
In this work, we aim to identify authorship from given 
examples of tweets written by a set of authors. Figure 1 
shows overall view of our proposed method. 
As for the baseline method, we adopt a combination of 
character-n-gram frequency, where “n” is 1, 2 and 3, as 
features. Then we calculate the similarity between a target 
user and candidate users by using cosine-similarity followed 
by ranking candidate users based on the similarity. This 
method is commonly used as stylometric features.  
Then, we extend the baseline method to adopt three new 
techniques. 
A. Combined selection technique for training dataset  
First, for the purpose of robustness to topics, i.e., 
handling wide ranging topics, we propose combined 
selection technique for training datasets.  
Previous method [2] varies the number of tweets for 
training and testing, from 50 to 400 tweets for each, to 
confirm how the precision of authorship identification 
changes; however, it does not consider the time difference 
between training dataset and test dataset. Tweets tend to 
include various topics and the topics tend to change often 
even if the tweets are posted by a single user. Thus, if we 
prepare different datasets for training, i.e., a set of datasets 
whose posted times are different, the precision will vary 
depending on which dataset is used for training.   
In our method, we prepare three kinds of training dataset 
called Trecent, Tweek, and Tmonth as shown in Figure 2. Trecent 
consists of 30 tweets posted immediately before the test 
dataset called Ttest. Tweek consists of another 30 tweets posted 
immediately one week before Ttest. Tmonth consists of another 
30 tweets posted immediately one month before Ttest.  
Our proposed combined selection technique for training 
dataset automatically selects the best matched training 
dataset for a given test dataset. We calculate three kinds of 
similarity with a given test dataset, i.e. cosine-similarity 
between Trecent and Ttest, that between Tweek and Ttest, and that 
between Tmonth and Ttest, followed by selecting maximum 
similarity score among the three similarity scores. By 
adopting the technique, we may handle wide ranging topics.  
Here, it is an open question how we should prepare these 
different datasets to increase precision@1 more than the 
above preparing technique such as Trecent, Tweek, and Tmonth.    
B. Biased weighting technique for n-gram 
Second, a biased weighting technique for n-gram is 
proposed to handle short texts. Since short texts usually 
include small number of features, we strengthen the weight 
of n-gram features in proportion to the number of “n”. Here, 
“n” represents “n” of n-gram. Specifically, we multiply “n” 
to each features of n-gram frequency. 
C. POS-tag-combined-n-gram  
Third, we propose POS-tag-combined-n-gram to shorten 
the execution time by decreasing the number of the features. 
We convert the morpheme related to a specific topic, into a 
part-of-speech (POS) tag before calculating the n-gram 
frequency. We assume that such morphemes have small 
 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of our proposed method 
 
n-gram count feature (count*”n”/30)
[行] 6 10*1/30=0.2
[行][く] 3 5*2/30=0.2
[行][く][aux] 3 3*3/30=0.3
[学校]
[Noun] [Post position]
[へ]
[行] [く]
[行く] [う]
[Auxiliary verb]
[Verb]
×30 tweets
iii) POS-tag-combined-n-gram
ii) Biased weighting for n-gram
tweet
 
Figure 2.   Three train-datasets and a test-dataset 
 
53
priority to identify authorship, because a user usually tweets 
various kinds of topics. Based on our pre-investigation, 
morphemes except verb, adverb, adjective, sign, unknown 
word, interjection, or conjunction are converted. For example, 
“school” whose POS is noun is converted into [noun] instead 
of using “school” for n-gram. 
IV. EXPELIMENT & RESULT 
We collected 2,000 tweets per user from over 8 million 
Japanese users by using Twitter API during Jan. 2013 to Dec. 
2013. Before the experiment, we preprocessed the collected 
tweets: 1) discarding mention tags such as “@username,” 2) 
discarding hashtags such as “#hashtag,” 3) discarding 
retweets, and 4) discarding all the users who are bots as 
possible as we can extract by checking their tweet-client-
name. 
 Experiments were performed to randomly select 10,000 
Japanese tweet users, who had enough number of tweets, 
from preprocessed dataset. Based on Figure 1, the newest 30 
tweets were used for test dataset, and other 90 tweets were 
used for training datasets. Table 1 shows results of our 
experiment. Precision@1 shows the percentage of the correct 
result, i.e. 1
st
 ranked estimated candidate user is correct. We 
executed the authorship identification by changing the target 
user followed by calculating how many authorship is 
correctly identified out of 10,000 users.  
A. Combined selection technique for training dataset  
First of all, the difference among baselines using Trecent, 
Tweek, and Tmonth is obvious. Since the topics of tweets tend to 
change day by day, we could achieve higher precision@1 
when we used Trecent as training dataset. 
Moreover, our proposed combined selection technique 
for training dataset, indicated as a1) in Table 1, works well in 
comparison with baselines b1), b2), and b3). It shows the 
effectiveness of automatic selection of training dataset. 
B. Biased weighting technique for n-gram 
Comparing the proposed method with a3), proposed 
method achieves higher precision@1 than a3), where w/o 
biased weighting but w/ POS-tag-combined-n-gram. 
Moreover, comparing a2) and a1), a2) achieves higher 
precision@1 than a1), where w/o biased weighting. These 
results show that we have successfully strengthen important 
features by adopting biased weighting technique for n-gram, 
regardless of adopting POS-tag-combined-n-gram. 
C. POS-tag-combined-n-gram  
Comparing both proposed method and a3) with both a2) 
and a1), both proposed method and a3) that adopts POS-tag-
combined-n-gram executes authorship identification faster 
than other two methods that are equipped with no POS-tag-
combined-n-gram. These results show that we have 
successfully shorten the execution time, i.e., almost half, by 
adopting POS-tag-combined-n-gram with small degradation 
of precision@1.   
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed a new method to identify the 
authorship out of ten-thousand scale microblog users. For the 
purpose of automatic authorship identification for short texts, 
we employ both combined selection technique for training 
dataset and biased weighting technique for n-gram. 
Moreover, to shorten the execution time, we employ POS-
tag-combined-n-gram to decrease the number of features. 
Out results show that in 53.2% of cases, we can correctly 
identify an anonymous author in the almost half execution 
time of previous method.  
Further research will target 100,000 Japanese tweet users 
besides tuning of parameters to achieve higher precision@1. 
Also, we will experiment with English tweet users.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by Grants-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research (B) (25280113) from JSPS.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Narayanan A., Paskpv, H., et al. "On the Feasibility of 
Internet-Scale Author Identification." Proc. of IEEE Symp. on 
Security & Privacy, pp.300-314, 2012.  
[2] Ragel, R., Herath, P., and Senanayake, U. "Authorship 
Detection of SMS Messages Using Unigrams." Proc. of IEEE 
Industrial and Information Systems, pp.387-392, 2013.  
[3] Koppel, M., Schler, J., et al. “Authorship attribution with thousands 
of candidate authors.” Proc. of the 29th Ann. Int’l ACM SIGIR Conf. 
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp.659-660, 
2006.  
[4] Silva, R. S., Laboreiro, G., et al. "‘twazn me!!!;(’ Automatic 
Authorship Analysis of Micro-blogging Messages." Natural 
Language Processing and Information Systems, LNCS, vol.6716, 
pp.161-168, 2011.
Table 1 Results of the microblog-to-microblog matching experiments with 10,000 tweet users 
 
Method Precision@1 Execution time on 
Six-Core AMD 
OpteronTM8425HE*8
i) Combined selection 
for training dataset
ii) biased weighting 
for n-gram
iii) POS-tag-
combined-n-gram
proposed Inc. Inc. Inc. 0.532 6,842 sec
a3) adopting both i) and iii) Inc. - Inc. 0.504 6,792 sec
a2) adopting both i) and ii) Inc. Inc. - 0.632 12,157 sec
a1) adopting only i) Inc. - - 0.589 12,021 sec
b3) baseline using Trecent - - 0.514
12,000 secb2) baseline using Tweek - - 0.416
b1) baseline using Tmonth - - 0.330
UP
UP DEC-
REASEUP
54
