 
Cyber Profiling: Using Instant Messaging Author 
Writeprints for Cybercrime Investigations
By Angela Orebaugh, Jason Kinser, and Jeremy Allnutt
The explosive growth in the use of instant messaging (IM) communication in both personal and professional environments has resulted in an increased risk to proprietary, sensitive, and personal information and safety due to the influx of 
IM-assisted cybercrimes, such as phishing, social engineering, threatening, cyber bullying, 
hate speech and crimes, child exploitation, sexual harassment, and illegal sales and 
distribution of software. IM-assisted cybercrimes are continuing to make the news with 
child exploitation, cyber bullying, and scamming leading last month’s headlines.  Instant 
messaging’s anonymity and use of virtual identities hinders social accountability and 
presents a critical challenge for cybercrime investigation.  Cyber forensic techniques are 
needed to assist cybercrime decision support tools in collecting and analyzing digital 
evidence, discovering characteristics about the cyber criminal, and assisting in identifying 
cyber criminal suspects.
Introduction
The anonymous nature of the Internet allows online criminals 
to use virtual identities to hide their true identity to facilitate 
cybercrimes.  Although central IM servers authenticate users 
upon login, there is no means of authenticating or validating 
peers (buddies).  Current IM products are not addressing the 
anonymity and ease of impersonation over instant messaging. 
Author writeprints can provide cybercrime investigators 
a unique tool for analyzing IM-assisted cybercrimes. 
Writeprints are based on behavioral biometrics, which are 
persistent personal traits and patterns of behavior that may 
be collected and analyzed to aid a cybercrime investigation. 
(Li et al.,  2006)  Instant messaging behavioral biometrics 
include online writing habits, known as stylometric features, 
which may be used to create an author writeprint to assist in 
identifying an author, or characteristics of an author, of a set 
of instant messages.  The writeprint is a digital fingerprint 
that represents an author’s distinguishing stylometric features 
that occur in his/her computer-mediated communications. 
Writeprints may be used as input to a criminal cyberprofile 
and as an element of a multimodal system for cybercrime 
investigations.  Writeprints can be used in conjunction 
with other evidence, criminal investigation techniques, and 
biometrics techniques to reduce the potential suspect space to 
a certain subset of suspects; identify the most plausible author 
of an IM conversation from a group of suspects; link related 
crimes; develop an interview and interrogation strategy; and 
gather convincing digital evidence to justify search and seizure 
and provide probable cause.
Instant Messaging and Cybercrime
Instant messaging’s anonymity hinders social accountability 
and leads to IM-assisted cybercrime facilitated by the 
following:
 • Users can create any virtual identity,
 • Users can log in from anywhere,
 • Files can be transmitted, and
 • Communication is often transmitted unencrypted.  
Cyber Security and Information Systems Information Analysis Center (CSIAC) 13
CYBER PROFILING: USING INSTANT MESSAGING AUTHOR WRITEPRINTS 
FOR CYBERCRIME INVESTIGATIONS (CONT.)
In IM communications, criminals use virtual identities to 
hide their true identity.  They can use multiple screen names 
or impersonate other users with the intention of harassing or 
deceiving unsuspecting victims.  Criminals may also supply 
false information on their virtual identities, for example a male 
user may configure his virtual identity to appear as female. 
Since most IM systems use the public Internet, the risk is 
high that usernames and passwords may be intercepted, or 
an attacker may hijack a connection or launch a man-in-the-
middle (MITM) attack.  With hijacking and MITM attacks, 
the victim user thinks he/she is communicating with a buddy 
but is really communicating with the attacker masquerading 
as the victim’s buddy.  Instant messaging’s anonymity allows 
cyber criminals such as pedophiles, scam artists, and stalkers 
to make contact with their victims and get to know those they 
target for their crimes (Cross, 2008).  IM-assisted cybercrimes, 
such as phishing, social engineering, threatening, cyber 
bullying, hate speech and crimes, child exploitation, sexual 
harassment, and illegal sales and distribution of software 
are continuing to increase (Moores and Dhillon, 2000). 
Additionally, criminals such as terrorist groups, gangs, and 
cyber intruders use IM to communicate (Abbasi and Chen, 
2005).  Criminals also use IM to transmit worms, viruses, 
Trojan horses, and other malware over the Internet.
With increasing IM cybercrime, there is a growing need for 
techniques to assist in identifying online criminal suspects 
as part of the criminal investigation.  Cyber forensics is the 
application of investigation and analysis techniques to gather 
evidence suitable for presentation in a court of law with the 
goal of discovering the crime that took place and who was 
responsible (Bassett et al., 2006).  With IM communications, 
it is necessary to have cyber forensics techniques to assist in 
determining the IM user’s real identity and collect digital 
evidence for investigators and law enforcement.
Behavioral Biometrics Writeprints for 
Authorship Analysis
Determining an IM user’s real identity relies on the fact that 
humans are creatures of habit and have certain persistent 
personal traits and patterns of behavior, known as behavioral 
biometrics (Revett, 2008).  Online writing habits, known as 
stylometric features, include composition syntax and layout, 
vocabulary patterns, unique language usage, and other stylistic 
traits.  Thus, certain stylometric features may be used to create 
an author writeprint to help identify an author of a particular 
piece of work (De Vel et al., 2001).  A writeprint represents 
an author’s distinguishing stylometric features that occur in 
his/her instant messaging communications.  These stylometric 
features may include average word length, use of punctuation 
and special characters, use of abbreviations, and other stylistic 
traits.  Writeprints can provide cybercrime investigators a 
unique behavioral biometric tool for analyzing IM-assisted 
cybercrimes.  Writeprints can be used as input to a criminal 
cyberprofile and as an element of a multimodal system to 
perform cyber forensics and cybercrime investigations.
Instant messaging communications contain several stylometric 
features for authorship analysis research.  Certain IM specific 
features such as message structure, unusual language usage, 
and special stylistic markers are useful in forming a suitable 
writeprint feature set for authorship analysis (Zheng et al., 
2006).  The style of IM messages is very different than that 
of any other text used in traditional literature or other forms 
of computer-mediated communication.  The real time, casual 
nature of IM messages produces text that is conversational in 
style and reflects the author’s true writing style and vocabulary 
(Kucukyilmaz et al., 2008).  Significant characteristics of IM 
are the use of special linguistic elements such as abbreviations, 
and computer and Internet terms, known as netlingo.  The 
textual nature of IM also creates a need to exhibit emotions. 
Emotion icons, called emoticons, are sequences of punctuation 
marks commonly used to represent feelings within computer-
mediated text (Kucukyilmaz et al., 2008).  An author’s IM 
writeprint may be derived from network packet captures 
or application data logged during an instant messaging 
conversation.  Although some types of digital evidence, such 
as source IP addresses, file timestamps, and metadata may be 
easily manipulated, author writeprints based on behavioral 
biometrics are unique to an individual and difficult to imitate.
Creating IM Writeprints
A stylometric feature set is composed of a predefined set 
of measurable writing style attributes.  Given t predefined 
features, each set of IM messages for a given author 
can be represented as a t-dimensional vector, called a 
writeprint.  Figure 1 presents a stylometric feature set for a 
356-dimensional vector writeprint with lexical, syntactic, and 
structural features. (Orebaugh et al., 2014)  The number of 
features in each category is shown in parenthesis.
Lexical features mainly consist of count totals and are further 
broken down into emoticons, abbreviations, word-based, 
and character-based features.  Syntactic features include 
punctuation and function words in order to capture an 
author’s habits of organizing sentences.  Function words 
include conjunctions, prepositions, and other words that carry 
little meaning when used alone, such as “the” or “of”.  They 
Journal of Cyber Security and Information Systems Volume II Number 2: Games People Play - Behavior and Security14


file is constructed it is analyzed to determine weaknesses and 
to identify additional information needed for prosecution. 
This analysis leads to any follow-up investigations that 
need to occur including collecting additional evidence and 
interviewing witnesses again.  Once the case is considered 
complete the prosecutor will decide whether to bring the 
case to trial and how to proceed.  There is no standard 
accuracy measure or probability threshold for authorship 
attribution evidence; the investigator only needs probable 
cause to initiate a warrant or arrest.  In addition, evidence 
admissibility varies by jurisdiction.  In cases where digital 
evidence is not admissible, expert witnesses are often called 
upon to provide their expertise and interpretation.  In 
the court of law, the jury only needs reasonable doubt to 
determine a defendant’s guilt or innocence.  Some relevant 
criminal cases were investigated and prosecuted based on 
text message abbreviations, sentence length, and punctuation 
(Leafe, 2009).
Criminal Profiling and IM
Criminal profiling is an investigative method that has 
been used in traditional criminal investigations that can 
also be applied to cybercrime investigations, known as 
cyberprofiling.  Cross defines traditional criminal profiling is 
the “art and science of developing a description of a criminal’s 
characteristics (physical, intellectual, and emotional) 
based on information collected at the scene of the crime” 
(Cross, 2008).  Criminal profiling often uses patterns and 
correlations among criminal activity and different crimes 
to construct a profile.  Criminal profiling is used to assist 
with the investigative process, reduce the potential suspect 
space to a certain subset of suspects, link related crimes, 
and develop an interview and interrogation strategy (Casey, 
1999).  It is important to note that a criminal profile will only 
provide generalities about the type of person who committed 
a crime, it will not identify a specific individual.  Criminal 
profiling is one method among many for assisting with 
criminal investigations and building a case file.  The profile 
cannot exist as evidence, rather it provides information to 
allow investigators to focus on the right suspects and begin to 
gather additional evidence (Cross, 2008).  A criminal profile 
can be used in court in conjunction with expert witness 
testimony.  “An expert witness can reference a criminal profile 
as the basis of an opinion that there is a high probability of 
a link between a particular suspect and a particular crime” 
(Cross, 2008).  An IM author writeprint may be used as 
input to a criminal profile.
The FBI is credited with formalizing the criminal profiling 
process.  The FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit (BSU) 
“focuses on developing new and innovative investigative 
approaches and techniques to solve crimes by studying 
offenders and their behaviors and motivations” (FBI, 
2014).  The BSU has been assisting local, state, and federal 
agencies in narrowing investigations by providing criminal 
profiles since the 1970s (Doublas et al., 2014).  The FBI 
BSU has created the six-step criminal profile generating 
process shown in Table 1.
Table 1.  FBI BSU Criminal Profile Process
FBI BSU Criminal Profile Process
1. Profiling Inputs The first step collects profiling inputs 
including comprehensive information 
about the crime and all evidence collected, 
both tangible, physical evidence and 
digital evidence.
2.  Decision Process 
Models
This step analyzes the information and 
evidence to determine patterns and 
possible linkages to other crimes.
3. Crime Assessment The crime scene is reconstructed and 
analyzed to determine the sequence of 
events and other information about the 
crime.
4. Criminal Profile The first three steps are combined 
to create a criminal profile, often 
incorporating the motives, physical 
qualities, and personality of the 
perpetrator.  The criminal profile is also 
used to create an interrogation strategy 
for the suspects.
5. The Investigation Investigators and others use the profile 
to learn more information and identify 
suspects.  Suspects matching the profile 
are evaluated.  The profile may be 
reassessed if no leads or suspects are 
identified.
6. The Apprehension The last stage occurs when investigators 
believe they have identified the most 
plausible suspect likely to be the 
perpetrator.  A warrant is obtained for the 
arrest of the individual, usually followed by 
a trial (Doublas et al., 2014).
The FBI criminal profile generating process may be 
easily applied in a cybercrime investigation to perform 
cyberprofiling.  Various types of digital and non-digital 
evidence may be combined as profile inputs, including, 
email, IM conversations, network packet captures, 
account activity information, and physical evidence.  A 
Cyber Security and Information Systems Information Analysis Center (CSIAC) 17
cybercriminal’s profile may include a number of traits such 
as time and location of computer access, types of computer 
attacks launched by the attacker, programs and attack tools 
used, writeprints, and targets of the cybercrime whether 
they be human or electronic (networks, satellites, phones, 
computer systems, etc.).
In the context of IM-assisted cybercrime, cyberprofiling uses IM 
data such as the conversation logs, IM client version, timestamps, 
the length of time the user has been logged on, etc. IM writeprints 
may be used in conjunction with other evidence and investigative 
techniques to build or validate a criminal profile; reduce the 
potential suspect space to a certain subset of suspects; link related 
crimes; develop an interview and interrogation strategy; and 
gather convincing digital evidence to justify search and seizure 
and provide probable cause.
Conclusion
As cybercrimes continue to increase, new cyber forensics 
techniques are needed to combat the constant challenge of 
Internet anonymity.  The IM writeprint technique may be used 
to assist cybercrime decision support tools in collecting and 
analyzing digital evidence, discovering characteristics about 
the cyber criminal, and assisting in identifying cyber criminal 
suspects.  Future areas of research include implementing the 
IM writeprint taxonomy on past and/or ongoing investigation 
data for further analysis and modification.  Additionally, this 
research would benefit from a feasibility analysis of various 
sociolinguistic writeprint categories (such as gender and age). 
Lastly, the IM writeprint taxonomy may be modified and 
applied to other communication mediums such as text, Twitter, 
and Facebook.
About the Authors
 Dr. Angela Orebaugh is Fellow and Chief 
Scientist at Booz Allen Hamilton. She 
received her Ph.D. from George Mason 
University with a concentration in 
Information Security.  Her current research 
interests include behavioral biometrics and 
the Internet of Things.
 Dr. Jason Kinser is an Associate Professor 
in the School of Physics, Astronomy, and 
Computational Sciences at George Mason 
University.  His current research interests 
include classification of regions in lung 
scans to detect idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis.  
Dr. Jeremy Allnutt is a Professor in the 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Department at George Mason University 
with a focus in communications and signal 
processing, computer networking, and 
telecommunications.
References
1.    Cross, Michael. Scene of the Cybercrime. Syngress Publishing, (2008): 679-690
2.   Moores, Trevor, and Gurpreet Dhillon. “Software piracy: a view from Hong 
Kong.” Communications of the ACM 43.12 (2000): 88-93.
3.  Abbasi, Ahmed, and Hsinchun Chen. “Applying authorship analysis to 
extremist-group web forum messages.”  Intelligent Systems, IEEE  20.5 
(2005): 67-75.
4.  Bassett, Richard, Linda Bass, and Paul O’Brien. “Computer forensics: An 
essential ingredient for cyber security.” Journal of Information Science and 
Technology 3.1 (2006): 22-32.
5.  Revett, Kenneth. Behavioral biometrics: a remote access approach. Wiley 
Publishing, (2008): 1-2.
6.  De Vel, Olivier, Alison Anderson, Malcolm Corney, and George Mohay. 
“Mining e-mail content for author identification forensics.” ACM Sigmod 
Record 30.4 (2001): 55-64.
7.  Zheng, Rong, Jiexun Li, Hsinchun Chen, and Zan Huang. “A framework 
for authorship identification of online messages: Writing‐style features and 
classification techniques.” Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology 57.3 (2006): 378-393.
8.  Kucukyilmaz, Tayfun, B. Cambazoglu, Cevdet Aykanat, and Fazli Can. 
“Chat mining: Predicting user and message attributes in computer-
mediated communication.” Information Processing & Management 44.4 
(2008): 1448-1466.
9.  Leafe, David. “Dear Garry. I’ve decided to end it all: The full stop that trapped 
a killer.” Daily Mail (2009).
10.  Casey, E. “Cyberpatterns: criminal behavior on the Internet.” Criminal 
profiling: An introduction to behavioral evidence analysis (1999): 361-378.
11.  Federal Bureau of Investigation, Behavioral Science Unit website. http://
www.fbi.gov/hq/td/academy/bsu/bsu.htm.  (accessed March 4, 2014)
12.  Doublas, John E., Robert K. Ressler, Ann W. Burgess, and Carol R. Hartman. 
“Criminal profiling from crime scene analysis.” Behavioral Sciences & the 
Law 4.4 (1986): 401-421.
13.  Li, Jiexun, Rong Sheng, and Hsinchun Chen. “From Fingerprint to 
Writeprint.” Communications of the ACM 49.4 (2006): 76-82
14.  Orebaugh, Angela, Jason Kinser, and Jeremy Allnutt. “Visualizing Instant 
Messaging Author Writeprints for Forensic Analysis,” In Proceedings of 
Conference on Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Richmond VA (2014): 
191-213
CYBER PROFILING: USING INSTANT MESSAGING AUTHOR WRITEPRINTS 
FOR CYBERCRIME INVESTIGATIONS (CONT.)
Journal of Cyber Security and Information Systems Volume II Number 2: Games People Play - Behavior and Security18
