Blogs and Twitter Feeds: A Stylometric
Environmental Impact Study
Rebekah Overdorf, Travis Dutko, and Rachel Greenstadt
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA
{rjo43,tad82,greenie}@drexel.edu
http://www.cs.drexel.edu/
Abstract. Stylometry is the study of determining the author of a doc-
ument based on the linguistic features contained in the document. Pre-
vious work in this area has yielded impressive results, but assumes that
the training and testing documents are similar key attributes, namely
the domain and setting in which they are written. This paper focuses on
the scenario where this assumption cannot be made. We determine that
standard methods in stylometry do not perform well when the training
and suspect documents differ in this way. For example, when working
exclusively with blogs we obtain an average accuracy of 93.30% and
with Twitter feeds we obtain an average accuracy of over 98.99%. How-
ever, when we apply the same method to try to identify a twitter feed
via a blog’s writing, accuracy falls drastically. We provide a method to
improve this cross-domain accuracy to 88.89%. Being able to identify
authors across domains facilitates linking identities across the Internet,
making this a key privacy concern.
1 Introduction
The need for a robust stylometric method is integral in keeping online com-
munication anonymous as we aim to understand how supposedly anonymous
communications can be attributed to an author. The accuracy and robustness
with which stylometry can identify anonymous and pseudonymous authors has
a direct bearing on the ability to produce anonymous speech online.
Take, for example, an employee who wishes to expose incriminating informa-
tion about the company he works for while avoiding being discovered. He may
take other measures to make sure that the information cannot be traced back to
him, but with the right tools, his employer may still be able to trace the writing
style of the leak back to this employee based on emails the employee has written.
It is important, then, that the employee is aware of this possibility so he can
take steps to keep himself anonymous.
While current methods achieve high accuracies within a number of domains,
these methods do not take into account the possibility that the training and
testing documents may be in different domains. As a result, many of them fail
2 Rebekah Overdorf, Travis Dutko, and Rachel Greenstadt
in this situation. We show that a document can be attributed to its author, even
if no training data in the same domain is available with an accuracy of 88.89%.
For this paper, we wish to examine the scenario in which you want to identify
a document of a particular domain (in our case, a Twitter feed) but do not have
additional training data for that author in that specific domain. Instead, we have
blogs that each of the suspect authors has written. We want to use the features
from the blogs that describe the writing style of each author to determine which
of them wrote the Twitter feed in question. More formally, we aim to discover
the author of a document d in some target domain Dt from a set of authors A.
Every author in A has sample documents in domain Ds, which is distinct from
Dt. Our goal is to utilize the information we have from the documents in Ds
about the authors’ writing styles to discover the author of d. We supply evidence
in this paper that an author’s writing style changes depending on which domain
she is writing in, making this problem difficult to solve via conventional means.
An alternative approach is required.
Our contributions include:
– We demonstrate high accuracy at identifying authors of blogs from blogs
(93%) or authors of Twitter feeds from other Twitter feeds (98%) on 15
author sets.
– However, we also show that training on blogs and testing on Twitter feeds
using standard methods results in accuracy that drops to 25% on 15 author
sets.
– Lastly, we apply an augmented version of Doppelgänger Finder [2], a stylo-
metric approach for multiple account detection that can handle small stylis-
tic changes, to the domain adaptation problem in stylometry. This provides
significant improvements in the blog-to-Twitter case resulting in 88.89% ac-
curacy on average, however requires more training data of the to-be-tested
document than traditional approaches.
2 Related Work
Machine learning techniques have been used, to great success, in authorship
attribution of documents. Feature selection is an important part of any machine
learning task, and this is especially true in stylometry. A popular feature that
is often utilized in this field is the frequency of top character n-grams [12, 17,
20], where we extract the most common n-grams. An n-gram is the number of
occurrences of n characters in a row.
It is also common in stylometry to combine a number of features, as a person’s
style is made up of many different attributes that makes them unique. One very
diverse feature set utilized in this paper is the writeprints feature set [1]. This
feature set contains a robust collection of features to be extracted from text
that perform well within a variety of domains. These features are collected from
previous works and include lexical [4, 10, 22], syntactic [3, 5, 6, 13], structural [10,
22], context-specific [11], and idiosyncratic [9, 14] attributes. The combination of
Blogs and Twitter Feeds: A Stylometric Environmental Impact Study 3
these features yields a feature set that performs well in determining the author
of a document in many domains.
For classification in natural language processing, sequential minimal opti-
mization support vector machines [18] (SMO SVM) are often utilized. SVM’s
have had much success in authorship attribution [7, 8, 10, 12] and allow for a
large feature set [19].
There has been little work in domain adaptation in stylometry. [16] makes a
claim that careful feature selection may negate the need for domain adaptation
in stylometry. The authors use only stop words (or function words) to identify
the authors of books across different genres. They achieved an accuracy of over
97% using this method on books with from a verity of genres. In total, they
collected at least 25 works from 14 distinct authors that spanned a large number
of genres. Again, the authors use SVM SMO for classification.
Another recent advancement in stylometry is a method known as Doppelgänger
Finder [2]. This method was introduced as a way to link users with multiple ac-
counts within the same forum. The Doppelgänger Finder works by removing
each author Ai one time and training a classifier on the remaining authors. It
then tests the classifier on the documents by Ai and collects the probability
scores that those documents are written by the other authors. If the probability
that Ai wrote the documents by Aj is high and the probability that Aj wrote
the documents by Ai is high, then Ai and Aj are likely the same person.
There are a number of tools developed recently to facilitate authorship at-
tribution in both real-world and research settings. In this paper, we utilize the
JStylo1 [15] and JGAAP2 authorship attribution frameworks for our experi-
ments.
3 Corpora
For this research, we collected a dataset of authors who had accounts on Twitter
and published blogs on the blogging site Wordpress. In total, we collected blogs
and tweets from 57 users. To pre-process the tweets, we stripped out all hashtags,
tags, and links, as they are not necessarily tied to writing style and may make
the solution too specific to this situation. Not including such factors hopefully
makes this solution usable outside of the blogs and tweets domains. The average
number of words for each blogger is 21,153 words and the average number of
tweets per user is 3,336. In each experiment, we use a random selection of 15
authors from this pool of 57, and then average the results.
4 Näıve Approaches
In this section, we aim to set a baseline for the domain adaptation problem by
exploring two näıve approaches. In the first we implement no domain adaptation
1 https://github.com/psal
2 http://evllabs.com/jgaap/
4 Rebekah Overdorf, Travis Dutko, and Rachel Greenstadt
and use a method that performs well in each domain. In the second we use only
non-lexical features. We will use the results outlined in this section as a baseline
for comparison.
4.1 Baseline 1
In order to create the first baseline, we must find a method that performs well in
each domain independently. To this end, we use the writeprints feature set [1],
as described in section 2. The writeprints method has been shown to work on a
verity of data sets from many domains including emails, forum posts, chat logs,
and feedback comments from peer to peer commerce websites. In addition, we
use a sequential minimal optimization support vector machine for classification.
Within each domain, we group the texts into similarly sized documents and
divide the authors into groups of 15 for analysis. This method is able to identify
the author of a 500 word document an average of 93.30% of the time for each
experiment. Similarly, this method identifies the author of a group of 30 tweets
an average of 98% of the time for each experiment. When we use this same
method to try to cross domains, that is where we train on blogs and test on
Twitter feeds (a collection of grouped tweets), our accuracy drops to an average
of 31.94% for each experiment.
4.2 Baseline 2
For the second approach, we aim to remove the concept of context and subject
from the feature extraction by using only non-lexical features. This idea comes
from [16], which we describe in section 2. Note that the authors achieved an
accuracy of 97%. We replicated these experiments on our own data set; training
on 3,500 words of blogs for each author and testing on 500 word documents of
both blogs and tweets. We use the same feature set as well, frequency of stop
words. In addition, we use 10 authors for each experiment, less than the 14
authors used in the work that we are replicating. We randomly arranged the
authors into three problem sets ten times and averaged the results. Accuracy
is reported as the total number of correctly attributed documents out of the
total number of documents within each domain. The average accuracy across
experiments for the blog test documents was 60.50% and the average accuracy
for the Twitter test documents was only 32.91%. The relatively low accuracy for
the blog test documents can be attributed to the lack of training data, however
the stark difference between the blog and Twitter accuracies gives us evidence
that this method does not work in the general case of domain difference and
only when changes in content or genre in the same medium (i.e. books) does this
method appears to succeed. Note, also, that even when all of the blogs for an
author are used as training data (an average of 21,153 words per author), the
accuracy is similar at 31.20%.
Blogs and Twitter Feeds: A Stylometric Environmental Impact Study 5
5 Methodology
To circumvent the loss in accuracy that occurs when using the näıve approaches,
we propose modifying a method previously used to connect accounts across fo-
rums. This method, named Doppelgänger Finder [2], is well suited for this prob-
lem, as we are, essentially, trying to link the accounts.
The Doppelgänger Finder method works by removing each author Ai from
the set of all authors one time and training a classifier on the remaining authors.
It then tests the classifier on the documents by Ai and collects the probability
scores that those documents are written by the other authors. If the probability
that Ai wrote the documents by Aj is high and the probability that Aj wrote
the documents by Ai is high, then Ai and Aj are likely the same person.
Algorithm 1 Augmented Doppelgänger Finder
Require: Set of authors Aα = A1, ..An and associated documents, D where each D is
in the domain α; Set of authors Aβ = A1, ..An and associated documents, D where
each D is in the domain β
Ensure: A map of authors from domains α to β where each Ai ∈ Aα is mapped to
an Aj ∈ Aβ , M
F ⇐ Add weight k with every feature frequency (default k=10)
F ′ ⇐ Features selected using PCA on F
. Calculate pairwise probabilities
for Ai ∈ Aα ∪ Aβ do
n = Number of documents written by Ai
C ⇐ Train on all authors ∈ Aα ∪ Aβ using F ′
R⇐ Test C on Ai (R contains the probability scores per author.)
for Aj ∈ R do
Pr(Ai → Aj) =
∑n
x=1 Pr(Ajx)
n
end for
end for
. Find highest probabilities
for (Ai, Aj) ∈ Aα ∪ Aβ do
P = Combine(Pr(Ai → Aj), P r(Aj → Ai))
end for
for Ai ∈ Aα do
Find the author Aj such that P (Ai, Aj) is maximum for all Aj ∈ Aβ
M.add(Ai, Aj)
end for
return M
We modify the Doppelgänger Finder algorithm for use in domain adaptation
in stylometry. Because we are not trying to link all accounts to each other, we are
under more constraints. These constraints give us a distinct advantage over the
situation that the Doppelgänger Finder was intended to solve. The Doppelgänger
Finder is attempting to discover the author of each document from all other
authors. However, we aim to find the author of a single Twitter feed from a
selection of blogs. We do not have to compute all of the pairwise probabilities
6 Rebekah Overdorf, Travis Dutko, and Rachel Greenstadt
between authors, just the pairwise probabilities between each blogger and the
Twitter feed in question. Our modification to this algorithm is described in
Algorithm 1.
6 Results
To test our Augmented Dopplegänger Finder algorithm, we used blog documents
of 500 words and groups of 30 tweets. We found that our method outperformed
the baseline accuracies outlined in section 4, achieving an accuracy of 88.89%
across three tests with random sets of authors. Table 1 summarized the results
found in this paper.
Train Test Method Authors TP Rate
Twitter Feed Twitter Feed Writeprints/SMO 15 98.99
Blogs Blogs Writeprints/SMO 15 93.30
Blogs Twitter Feed Writeprints/SMO 15 31.941
Blogs Twitter Feed Function Words/SMO 10 32.912
Blogs Twitter Feed Augmented Doppelgänger 15 88.89
1Baseline 1
2Baseline 2
Table 1. This table shows a summary of the domain adaptation the results outlined
in this paper. The best results are achieved when the testing and training documents
are in the same domain. When that is not available, however, we can still attain a
relatively high accuracy using the augmented Dopplegänger Finder
7 Conclusions and Future Work
Stylometric analysis has continued to advance over recent years; each improve-
ment acquires a new domain in which it is usable or improves a domain’s accu-
racy. This paper contributes to this advance via taking a step towards bridging
the documents of different domains. The methods which work well in a single do-
main need not apply when attempting to cross the boundary. This problem can
be solved using an alternative approach-in the situation of identifying a Twitter
feed from a blog with the augmented Dopplegänger Finder. However, there is
still room for this idea to be expanded upon.
One scenario we would like to explore in the future is the situation where
training documents in both the same domain as the test document and a different
domain than the test document are available. That is, the situation where you
would like to determine the author of a document in domain DA, but posses
training documents of some proportion in both DA and a distinct domain DB .
Depending on which proportion of the training data is in each domain, it may
Blogs and Twitter Feeds: A Stylometric Environmental Impact Study 7
be beneficial for you to omit one of the domains and train on only one of them.
Alternatively, there may be a method that extracts certain features from each
set individually and combines them into a model to be tested on. Finally, it may
be possible to find a training system robust enough to use any type of training
data and still attain a high accuracy. We would also like to see which other
domains the Augmented Doppelgänger Finder works well in. For example, can
you find the author of an email based on a collection of blogs or can you find
the author of a something as structured as a poem based on a Twitter feed.
Advances in authorship attribution make retaining privacy online more diffi-
cult, however, it is important to understand the assumptions that underly these
good results. Blind application of these methods across domains may yield poor
results. However, the Augmented Doppelgänger Finder approach makes these
difference in style less significant. As documents are linked more easily to identi-
ties in a particular domain, the privacy of users in that domain (such as Twitter)
decreases. With increased research into cross-domain classification, and further
refinement of the algorithms applied in this paper, the advances in one domain
may affect the privacy in others. Users who create a private account on one
service but one linked to their real identity on another may find their privacy
threatened by cross-domain stylometry.
References
1. Ahmed Abbasi and Hsinchun Chen. Writeprints: A stylometric approach to
identity-level identification and similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM Trans.
Inf. Syst., 26(2):1–29, 2008.
2. Sadia Afroz, Aylin Caliskan-Islam, Ariel Stolerman, Rachel Greenstadt, and Da-
mon McCoy. Doppelgänger finder: Taking stylometry to the underground. 2014.
3. Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, and Galit Avneri. Routing documents according
to style. In First International workshop on innovative information systems, pages
85–92. Citeseer, 1998.
4. Shlomo Argamon, Marin Šarić, and Sterling S Stein. Style mining of electronic
messages for multiple authorship discrimination: first results. In Proceedings of the
ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 475–480. ACM, 2003.
5. Harald Baayen, Hans van Halteren, Anneke Neijt, and Fiona Tweedie. An exper-
iment in authorship attribution. In 6th JADT, pages 29–37. Citeseer, 2002.
6. Harald Baayen, Hans Van Halteren, and Fiona Tweedie. Outside the cave of
shadows: Using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 11(3):121–132, 1996.
7. Mudit Bhargava, Pulkit Mehndiratta, and Krishna Asawa. Stylometric analysis for
authorship attribution on twitter. In Big Data Analytics, pages 37–47. Springer,
2013.
8. Michael Brennan, Sadia Afroz, and Rachel Greenstadt. Adversarial stylometry:
Circumventing authorship recognition to preserve privacy and anonymity. ACM
Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., 15(3):12:1–12:22, November 2012.
9. Carole E Chaski. Empirical evaluations of language-based author identification
techniques. Forensic Linguistics, 8:1–65, 2001.
8 Rebekah Overdorf, Travis Dutko, and Rachel Greenstadt
10. Olivier De Vel, Alison Anderson, Malcolm Corney, and George Mohay. Mining e-
mail content for author identification forensics. ACM Sigmod Record, 30(4):55–64,
2001.
11. Joachim Diederich, Jörg Kindermann, Edda Leopold, and Gerhard Paass. Author-
ship attribution with support vector machines. Applied intelligence, 19(1-2):109–
123, 2003.
12. Patrick Juola. Authorship attribution. Foundations and Trends in information
Retrieval, 1(3):233–334, 2008.
13. Moshe Koppel, Navot Akiva, and Ido Dagan. Feature instability as a criterion for
selecting potential style markers. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 57(11):1519–1525, 2006.
14. Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler. Exploiting stylistic idiosyncrasies for author-
ship attribution. In Proceedings of IJCAI’03 Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis, volume 69, pages 72–80. Citeseer, 2003.
15. Andrew McDonald, Sadia Afroz, Aylin Caliskan, Ariel Stolerman, and Rachel
Greenstadt. Use fewer instances of the letter ”i”: Toward writing style anonymiza-
tion. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS), 2012.
16. Rohith Menon and Yejin Choi. Domain independent authorship attribution with-
out domain adaptation. In RANLP, pages 309–315. Citeseer, 2011.
17. Fuchun Peng, Dale Schuurmans, Shaojun Wang, and Vlado Keselj. Language
independent authorship attribution using character level language models. In Pro-
ceedings of the tenth conference on European chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 267–274. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2003.
18. J. Platt. Fast training of support vector machines using sequential minimal opti-
mization. In B. Schoelkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel
Methods - Support Vector Learning. MIT Press, 1998.
19. Efstathios Stamatatos. A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Jour-
nal of the American Society for information Science and Technology, 60(3):538–
556, 2009.
20. Efstathios Stamatatos et al. Ensemble-based author identification using character
n-grams. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Text-based Infor-
mation Retrieval, pages 41–46. Citeseer, 2006.
21. Ariel Stolerman, Rebekah Overdorf, Sadia Afroz, and Rachel Greenstadt. Clas-
sify, but verify: Breaking the closed-world assumption in stylometric authorship
attribution. International Conference on Digital Forensics, 2013.
22. Rong Zheng, Jiexun Li, Hsinchun Chen, and Zan Huang. A framework for au-
thorship identification of online messages: Writing-style features and classification
techniques. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 57(3):378–393, 2006.
