International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
 
www.ijetmas.com  October 2015, Volume 3, Issue 10, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
41 Aneri R. Oza, Mrunalini V. Bhosale, Kajal K. Ladkat, Pranjali M. Marne 
 
Study of different methods for Authorship verification  
 
Aneri R. Oza, Mrunalini V. Bhosale, Kajal K. Ladkat, Pranjali M. Marne 
Dept of Computer Engineering 
NBN Sinhgad School of Engineering, 
 Pune, India 
  
ABSTRACT  
The documents written by an author exhibits a unique way of identification of any author of an anonymous document. It 
is indeed one of the important parts of the Computer System. In distance education evaluation of an individual’s work is 
an important characteristic. For institutions it is difficult to verify whether the individual anticipated is the person 
enrolled. To prevent plagiarism and verifying an individual’s identity Author identification has played a crucial role. In 
this paper focus is on Authorship verification check by using stylometric techniques through the analysis of the author’s 
writing characteristics and linguistic styles. Stylometry is a behavioral feature which is used to check and verify the 
identity of the author of documents on internet that is exhibited by an author during writing and which can be extracted 
respectively. In text classification as well as in various other applications these methods are used. 
Keywords 
Authorship verification, Authentication and access control, stylometry, n-gram features, text mining  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
In the age of information revolution, electronic documents are become principle media of business and 
academic Information. Very large amount of document are produced and made available every day on 
internet. To determine the actual author of the document or article is also one of the important things. System 
is required which is self learning and who can find out the actual owner of the document from those 
Thousands of documents which are getting uploaded on internet every day. Along with that system should 
find out richness of the document and compare the relevance of the document with other author based on 
some threshold parameter.   Test analysis is one way to find out the author of the document based on text 
analysis. 
Text mining is an emerging field that attempts to extract relevant information from natural language text. The 
process of analyzing text to extract information may be generalized as which is useful for some particular 
purposes. Unlike the data stored in databases, textual data is unstructured and ambiguous. Therefore, it is 
algorithmically complex to deal with. Text has always been the most common way of exchanging the 
information. Three different perspectives including authorship attribution or identification, authorship 
verification, and authorship profiling or characterization can be carried out of Authorship analysis. Among a 
list of known individuals Authorship attribution consists of determining the most likely author of a target 
document. 
Authorship Verification also plays an important role in E-mails, short text messages and in many other 
domains for avoiding duplication of author identity [1]. Whether a target document was written or not by a 
specific individual was checked by Authorship verification. Authorship profiling or characterization comprise 
of determining the characteristics of the author (e.g. gender, age, and race) of an anonymous document [2]. 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
The attempts for identifying authors were made since mid18th century. The first significant attempt was made 
by Mendenhall in the year of 1887. It was based on the plays of world famous English writer Shakespeare. 
Mendenhall applied his technique to the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy in the year of 1901. This work was 
followed by Zipf in 1932 and by Yule in 1938. This effort made by Zipf and Yule highlights the statistical 
analysis of text. In the latter half of 20th century, the research in author identification was continued by 
Mosteller and Wallace. Their work was based on the authorship of ‗The Federalist Papers „[3][4].  
In authorship attribution there are three kinds of evidence which can be used to detect the authorship. 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
 
www.ijetmas.com  October 2015, Volume 3, Issue 10, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
42 Aneri R. Oza, Mrunalini V. Bhosale, Kajal K. Ladkat, Pranjali M. Marne 
 
- External evidence: This includes the handwriting or signed manuscript of the author. 
- Linguistic evidence: This concentrates on the patterns of the words and the actual words used in the 
documents. 
-Interpretative evidence:- it is mainly concerned about the information which can be derived from the 
document i.e. when was it written, what the author meant by it etc. 
By using statistical methods, accurate calculations can be performed and this has helped to successfully 
deduce author identity in the past [5]. 
This paper consisted of 146 essays based on politics written by number of authors like Alexander Hamilton, 
James Madison, John Jay. This was undisputedly the best contribution in Author Identification. Their 
approach for Author Identification was based on Bayesian statistical analysis of the occurrences of 
prepositions and conjunctions like ‗or„, ‗to„, ‗but„, ‗and„, etc. Thus, it was helpful in classifying the authors 
accordingly. The research in Author Identification then saw a tremendous attention and sped up rapidly.  
 These research papers consisted of a small set of authors due to the scarcity of textual data. For last few years, 
the research in Author Identification has changed the direction towards advanced machine learning techniques 
of Author Identification. Internet today has enormous amount of documents available with it and thus it is 
very challenging to carry out proper Author Identification process over entire Internet. In the period of 2006 to 
2011, only Koppel et al have tried successful Author identification on Internet scale. These researchers have 
successfully implemented their work respectively. 
Plagiarism detection used as a method which attempts to detect the similarity between two different pieces of 
work but is unable to determine if the documents were produced by the same author[6]. 
 A document is represented by a feature vector that contains one Boolean attribute for each word that occurs in 
the training collection of documents. When generalized this method by using word sequences it forms a 
sequence, termed n-gram as a feature. For generation of n-gram features, consideration was made for small 
value of n, number n-gram features that can be discovered in the document, which increases in a way such that 
for every n-gram, there is at least one n+1gram that has n-gram as a starting sequence. Thus features are 
growing linearly and the number of features with minimum frequency grows more slowly. So, an efficient 
algorithm for generating these feature sets, should therefore avoid generating all n-grams[7]. 
 
3. METHODS 
There are number of methods for carrying out Author Identification. Some of the commonly used methods are 
listed below:- 
3.1 Token Ratio Based Approach: 
This method is commonly used for small sized documents. This method is based on finding the repetition of 
the _n keywords from the all the words used in the document. Analysis calculated that average repetition of 
the words should not be more than 40% of the original document.. The term ‗types„ represents the number of 
unique words in a text and the term ‗token„ represents the total word count of the text. This method is based 
on the ratio of ‗types„ and ‗tokens„. The average ratio for every author is stored in the database. When a new 
document is to be identified, the ratio for that document is calculated and matched with the ratio values in the 
database. This is one of the ways of using text analysis for author verification based on tokens (keywords) 
present in the document. It‟s very difficult to verify the author just based on token from the document. This is 
not one of the accurate methods of Author Identification [8][4]. 
3.2 Text Processing Based Approach: 
Every author has his/her own and unique writing style. The author tends to use some of the words frequently. 
These words are helpful in determining the author. This technique starts by measuring the length of the 
sentences in terms of number of words. The proper nouns used in the sentences are treated as single symbols. 
The average sentence length for a particular document is calculated and then each sentence is compared with 
the average length and is marked with a ‗+„ or a ‗-„according to its length. This allows good identification 
even if the feature set is large. In CUSUM technique the text is analyzed by the use of function words by an 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
 
www.ijetmas.com  October 2015, Volume 3, Issue 10, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
43 Aneri R. Oza, Mrunalini V. Bhosale, Kajal K. Ladkat, Pranjali M. Marne 
 
author and shorter words like vowel words (words which begins with a vowel) and the combinations of both 
i.e. the short + vowel word. There are nine test samples included in this technique for identifying the authors. 
Thus, this method plays a very important role in author identification [9]. 
3.3 N grams –Authorship Verification: 
This model consists of a collection of profiles generated separately for individual users. The model involves 
two modes of operations, namely, training and verification, where the users profiles are built and then 
checked, respectively. The training phase involves two steps. During the first step, the user profile is derived 
by extracting n-grams from sample documents. 
During the second step, a user specific threshold is computed and used later in the verification phase.  Need to 
calculate the threshold value for each user based on n grams algorithm. 
Following steps will be used in N grams approach: 
1. Find out the threshold value for each user; 
2. Divide the given user U data into block of character of size p.  
3. Find out the n grams for each block defined of size p. For another users also find out they also need to 
find out the n grams from the set of document.  
4. A block p is said to be a genuine sample of user U if and only if the percentage of unique n-grams 
shared by block of user U is greater than threshold value specified for the user [10]. 
 
4. CONCLUSION 
In the process of Author Identification the important aspects of a document remains unknown and it is 
difficult to analyze the document completely. This has been one of the major issues faced in identifying the 
authors. Investigation shows that the possibility of using stylometry for authorship verification for online 
messages is high with accuracy. The technique is based on a combination of supervised learning and n-gram 
analysis. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Vishal Chandani, Ninad Deshmane, Kshitij Buva, Suvrat Apte, Dr. R.S. Prasad, “Study of Different Methods for 
Author Identification”, International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT), ISSN: 2278-0181, 
Vol. 4, Issue 01,January-2015. 
[2] Efstathios Stamatatos, “A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods”, Dept. of Information and 
Communication Systems Eng.University of the Aegean Karlovassi, Samos – 83200, Greece. 
[3] Abdur Rahman, Haroon A. Babri, Mehreen Saeed, “Feature Extraction Algorithms for Classification of Text 
Documents”, ICCIT 2012, pp. 231-236.  
[4] C. E. Chaski, “Who‟s at the keyboard: Authorship attribution in digital evidence investigations”, International 
Journal of Digital Evidence, 4(1), Spring 2005. 
[5] Akhil Gokhale, Kunal Brkar, Dr. Rajesh S. Prasad, “A Proposed System for Author Identification Using Statistical 
Method”, International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology(IJERT), ISSN: 2278-0181, Vol.2, Issue 9, 
September-2013. 
[6] Prof. Nihar Ranjan, Dr. R.S. Prasad, “Author Identification in Text Mining For used in Forensics”, International 
Journal of Research in Advent Technology, E-ISSN: 2321-9637, Vol. 1, Issue 5, December 2013. 
[7] Mubin Shaukat Tamboli, Dr.Rajesh S. Prasad, “Authorship Analysis and Identification Techniques: A Review”, 
International Journal of Computer Applications(0975-8887), Vol.77-No.16,  September 2013. 
[8] Joachim Diederich, “Computational methods to detect plagiarism in assessment”, Paper No. 145, 2006 ITHET. 
[9] A. Abbasi and H. Chen. Writeprints, “A stylometric approach to identity level identification and similarity detection 
in cyberspace”, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 26:7:1–7:29, April 2008. 
[10] Marcelo Luiz Brocardo, Issa Traore, Sherif Saad, Isaac Woungang, “Authorship Verification for Short Messages 
using Stylometry”. 
 
 
