Alias Detection in Malicious Environments 
Patrick Pantel 
 
Information Sciences Institute 
University of Southern California 
4676 Admiralty Way 
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 
pantel@isi.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Alias detection is a challenging task critical in several areas 
such as the intelligence community, social network analysis, 
databases, biology, and marketing. Problem domains can be 
as simple as datasets containing accidentally replicated data, 
or as complex as populations containing criminals or 
terrorists wielding multiple identities. Teasing out aliases or 
near aliases in the later case is a serious and challenging 
problem. We propose an unsupervised information theoretic 
approach for automatically detecting aliases in malicious 
environments by observing the behaviors of the entities. Our 
model discovers the most informative observations (e.g. 
emails, phone calls, relational data) between entities and 
then compares them to identify entities exhibiting similar 
behaviors. We test our model by applying it to the task of 
discovering aliases in a standard synthetic world of 
interrelated individuals. Given our system’s top-20 guesses, 
we extracted with 80% accuracy the true aliases of a given 
entity. 
Introduction  
Entity consolidation is the problem of uncovering duplicate 
or near-duplicate entities in a dataset. Problem domains 
can be as simple as datasets containing accidentally 
replicated data, or as complex as populations containing 
criminals or terrorists wielding multiple identities. Teasing 
out duplicate or near duplicate entities in the later case is a 
serious and challenging problem. 
Alias problems are commonly encountered in the 
intelligence community when performing background 
checks or, in general, when tracking individuals from a 
broad population. Often, simple orthographic cues indicate 
an alias, as in Osama bin Laden and Usama bin Laden. 
Other times, semantic variations can be detected, as in for 
example Richard Fendlebaum and Dick Fendlebaum. 
Malicious individuals, however, can easily fool such 
verifications by assigning completely different labels to 
their identities. But, their behaviors are likely to be similar 
since these are much harder to fake or separate across 
identities. Behaviors can be observed from various sources 
                                                 
Copyright © 2006, American Association for Artificial Intelligence 
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 
 
of information such as communications (emails, phone 
calls, chats), transaction material (financial transactions, 
travel logs, shipments), social links, and other relation data. 
For large populations, the total number of such 
observations can become enormous, with only a small 
portion of important observations overlapping for aliases. 
Consider the following scenario of a population of 
Southern California residents and two particular residents 
John Doe and Alex Forrest. If you were told that last year 
both John and Alex called the Hollywood area about 21 
times a month, then would this increase your confidence 
that John and Alex are the same person? Yes, certainly. 
Now, suppose we also told you that John and Alex both 
called Kabul about 21 times a month. Intuitively, this 
observation yields much more evidence that John and Alex 
are similar or aliases since not many Southern California 
residents call Kabul with such frequency. Measuring the 
relative importance of such observations and leveraging 
them to detect aliases is the topic of this paper. We will 
outline an information theoretic framework that models the 
importance of observations by capturing the intuition of the 
above example. We will evaluate our system on the task of 
discovering aliases in a standard artificial dataset created 
by Information Extraction & Transport, Inc. within the 
EAGLE Project. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
the next section, we review previous approaches to entity 
consolidation. We then present five important problems 
that can be cast as an alias detection problem. 
Subsequently, we outline our information theoretic model 
and present experimental results. Finally, we conclude with 
a discussion and future work. 
Related Work 
Most previous solutions to entity consolidation search for 
morphologic, phonetic, or semantic variations of the labels 
associated with the entities. One of the earliest approaches, 
patented in 1918 by Margaret O’Dell and Robert Russell, 
was a rule-based system that matched labels which are 
roughly phonetically alike. This algorithm, later refined as 
the Soundex matching algorithm [9], removes vowels and 
represents labels with six phonetic classifications of human 
speech sounds (bilabial, labiodental, dental, alveolar, velar, 
and glottal). 
Recently, researchers have looked at combining 
orthographic (and phonetic) features with semantic 
features. In addition to string edit distance features, [2] and 
[7] began looking at the behavioral observations that we 
introduced in the previous section. They asserted 
connections between entities for each interrelation present 
in a link dataset, ignoring the actual relation types. Adding 
these semantic cues outperformed previous methods like 
Soundex. Unlike these approaches, our technique makes 
use of the link labels (e.g. relation types such as email, 
financial transaction, travel to, etc.) Also, our method 
automatically determines the importance of each link and 
leverages this measurement to dramatically reduce the 
search space. 
Davis et al. [5] have proposed a supervised learning 
algorithm for discovering aliases in multi-relational 
domains. Their method uses two stages. High recall is 
obtained by first learning a set of rules, using Inductive 
Logic Programming (ILP), and then these rules are used as 
the features of a Bayesian Network classifier. In many 
domains, however, training data is unavailable. Our 
method is completely unsupervised and requires no 
positive or negative samples of aliases. Also, ILP does not 
scale well to large datasets, whereas our approach does. 
A related problem in the natural language processing 
community is automatic spelling correction. The most 
widely used systems are based on Shannon’s noisy channel 
model [3][8]. The systems assume that the word that was 
meant to be written was altered by some corruption model 
(the noisy channel). A decoder is then trained on tagged 
examples to reconstruct the original (intended) word given 
the surface error. 
Another related but different problem is when multiple 
entities are referred to by the same label [11]. For example, 
the name Michael Jackson refers not only to the singer, but 
also to the bank president, the talk show host, and the 
author of several books about beer. This problem is 
important in natural language applications, such as 
question answering, which must answer questions such as 
“Where is the Taj Mahal?” and must select between 
candidate answers such as Agra, India or Atlantic City, NJ. 
Most approaches to name resolution have used clustering 
techniques over coreference chains [1], multiple syntactic 
and semantic features [10], and over referents by first 
applying a maximum entropy model that estimates the 
probability that two labels refer to the same entity [6]. 
Five Important Aliasing Problems 
Solving the aliasing problem is important for many 
different purposes in various areas such as the intelligence 
community, social network analysis, databases, biology, 
and marketing. In some cases, it can be used to flag 
malicious intents while in others it can be used to clean 
data and to link knowledge. In this section, we describe 
five problems that exhibit an aliasing problem at the core: 
identity thefts, identifying and monitoring terrorist cells, 
data integration, social network analysis, and author 
identification. For each of these problems, we describe the 
entities of the population as well as some of the behavioral 
observations that may be available for modeling in our 
system. 
Identity Theft 
Identity theft is the fastest growing financial crime in the 
U.S. According to a Federal Trade Commission survey, it 
is estimated that 27 million Americans have been victims 
of identity theft in the past five years. In one of its 
incarnations, thieves acquire social security numbers and 
other personal information in order to fraudulently acquire 
credit cards, bank accounts and cell phone accounts. It can 
be years before unsuspecting victims discover that their 
credit is ruined, they owe large sums of money to creditors, 
or worse that they are prosecuted for financial frauds. 
Supposing authorities are tracking a known identity thief, 
we expect that our system will be capable of discovering 
the identities that were stolen by modeling their usage 
behaviors. The population consists of identities (e.g. all 
social security numbers) and examples of observed 
behaviors may include communications, financial 
transactions, travel information, etc. 
Another type of identity theft is when a criminal 
fraudulently acquires identities, but then sells them instead 
of using them himself or herself. Here, we expect that our 
method would not work since the identities are used in 
different ways by different people. 
Terrorist Cells 
In 2004, the FBI estimated that al-Qaida sleeper cells were 
believed to be operating in 40 states, awaiting orders and 
funding for new attacks on American soil. It is also 
approximated that between 2,000 and 5,000 terrorist 
operatives currently operate in the U.S. In response, 
several researchers developed techniques for threat group 
detection. 
Generally, it is believed that the social links as well as 
the similar religious and cultural background of terrorists 
yield cells of very similar people. Treating each terrorist 
cell as an identity, one can perform group detection to 
identify its members using aliasing models. Here, the 
population consists of, say, people living in America and 
known terrorist cells. The observed behaviors may include 
communications, financial transactions, travel information, 
etc. We expect that certain observations will be rare and 
some will be erroneous, but our model is quite tolerant to 
sparsity and noise. 
Data Integration 
In many large organizations and especially government, 
data is split in many different ways and is collected at 
different times by different people. The resulting massive 
data heterogeneity means that staff cannot effectively 
locate, share, or compare data across sources, let alone 
achieve computational data interoperability. 
What is needed is a method to integrate the data in two 
comparable but heterogeneous data sources. We can 
partially address this problem by finding matching records 
across sources. The population consists of all possible 
records in two data sources, and the observable behaviors 
are the data fields that are contained in each record. For 
example, given records of contact names along with 
contact information such as phone number, address, zip 
code, etc., we can use this contact information as the 
observations for our model. 
Social Network Analysis 
User modeling and recommendation systems are easily 
hampered by duplicate users in social networks. Duplicate 
identities, whether accidentally created or not, are 
prominent. The population here consists of all identities in 
the network and the observed behaviors include personal 
attributes such as contact information, colleges attended, 
board memberships, etc., as well as communication links. 
Author Identification 
Author identification is the task of attributing authorship to 
anonymous text [16]. The problem exists in many forms 
like identifying plagiarism, accrediting famous historical 
writings to their true authors, and even ownership or 
copyright legal battles. In the context of alias detection, 
techniques for author identification can be used to model a 
source’s communication style by looking at the very words 
and expressions she uses. In an electronic world where 
one’s population consists solely of citizens of the Internet, 
or Netizens, then one can simply observe the language use 
and style to find aliases. 
Information-Theoretic Model 
Most entity consolidation problems consist of large 
numbers of entities and observations. However, as 
illustrated in the introduction, certain observations are 
much more important than others when matching entities 
(e.g. calling Kabul vs. Hollywood). In this section, we 
outline an information theoretic model, inspired from the 
one developed in [12] for aligning databases, that measures 
this importance. 
Before we formally describe the model, we appeal to the 
reader’s intuition. Recall our phone call scenario from the 
introduction where we were asked if Southern California 
residents John Doe and Alex Forrest are the same person 
given their monthly phone call records. Figure 1 a) lists 
John’s most frequent phone calls along with the call 
frequencies. It is not surprising that a Californian would 
call L.A., Culver City, Anaheim, and even D.C. If Alex had 
similar calling patterns to these four cities, it would 
certainly increase our confidence that him and John are the 
same person, but obviously our confidence would increase 
much more if Alex called the more surprising cities Kabul 
and Mosul. 
Looking only at the frequencies of the calls in Figure 1 
a), however, one would put more importance on matching 
calls to L.A. than to Kabul. The goal of our framework is 
to have a better measurement than frequency for the 
importance of each call and to re-rank them in order of 
information content. Figure 1 b) illustrates the frequencies 
of John calling D.C., John calling any city, and anyone 
calling D.C, whereas c) illustrates the same for Kabul. 
Notice that although D.C. is much more frequent than 
Kabul, many more people in the population call D.C. than 
Figure 1. Identifying important observations in our fictitious scenario of phone calls placed by 
Southern California residents. a) Frequency of phone calls placed monthly by John Doe. b) 
Frequency of calls placed by John and others (*) to D.C. and other cities (*). c) Frequency of calls 
placed by John and others (*) to Kabul and other cities (*). 
John D.C.
calls
John *
calls
* D.C.
calls
= 336
= 1606
= 1300281
John Kabul
calls
John *
calls
* Kabul
calls
= 21
= 1606
= 227
L.A. 571
D.C. 336
Hamburg 234
Culver City 199
Anaheim 103
Leipzig 59
Mosul 51
Toronto 38
Boston 34
Ventura 33
St. Louis 31
Kabul 21
Hollywood 21
Covina 20
Long Beach 16
Carson 16
Compton 16
b)
a)
c)
Kabul. Our model leverages this observation by adding 
importance for a city to which John calls frequently and by 
deducting importance if many people in the general 
population call the same city. After applying our model, 
the cities in Figure 1 a) are re-ranked as follows: 
Kabul 7.88 Toronto 4.36 
Mosul 7.05 Boston 4.31 
Leipzig 5.78 Covina 2.91 
Hamburg 5.58 Compton 2.86 
Culver City 5.48 St. Louis 2.40 
D.C. 5.33 Long Beach 2.03 
L.A. 4.77 Carson 1.62 
Anaheim 4.46 Hollywood 1.43 
Ventura 4.38  
The four cities that were bold in Figure 1 b) are now at the 
top of this list, and consequently more importance is now 
put on matched calls to Kabul than matched calls to 
Hollywood. We now formally introduce our model. 
Pointwise Mutual Information 
Pointwise mutual information is commonly used to 
measure the association strength between two events [4]. It 
essentially measures the amount of information one event 
gives about another. For example, knowing that a Southern 
Californian calls L.A. is not informative since most 
residents call L.A. Conversely, if he or she calls Kabul, 
then this is an informative observation. The pointwise 
mutual information between two events x and y is given 
by: 
( ) ( )( ) ( )yPxP
yxPyxmi ,log, =  
Pointwise mutual information is high when x and y occur 
together more often than by chance. It compares two 
models (using KL-divergence) for predicting the co-
occurrence of x and y: one is the MLE (maximum-
likelihood estimation) of the joint probability of x and y 
and the other is some baseline model. In the above 
formula, the baseline model assumes that x and y are 
independent. Note that in information theory, mutual 
information refers to the mutual information between two 
random variables rather than between two events as used in 
this paper. The mutual information between two random 
variables X and Y is given by: 
( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( )∑∑∈ ∈
=
X Yx y yPxP
yxPyxPYXMI ,log,,  
The mutual information between two random variables is 
the weighted average (expectation) of the pointwise mutual 
information between all possible combinations of events of 
the two variables. 
For each entity in our population e, we first construct a 
frequency count vector C(e) = (ce1, ce2, …, cem), where m is 
the total number of features (observations) and cef is the 
frequency count of feature f occurring for entity e. Here, cef 
is the number of times we observed feature f for entity e. 
For example, in Figure 1 b), one feature for e = John Doe 
is f = Kabul with frequency 21. 
We then construct a mutual information vector MI(e) = 
(mie1, mie2, …, miem) for each entity e, where mief is the 
pointwise mutual information between e and feature f, 
which is defined as: 
N
c
N
c
N
c
ef m
j
ej
n
i
if
ef
mi
∑∑
== ×
=
11
log  
where n is the number of entities and N = ∑ ∑
= =
n
i
m
j
ijc
1 1
is the 
total frequency count of all features of all entities. 
In our example from Figure 1 b), assuming that N = 1.32 
x 1012, the mutual information for e = John Doe and 
feature f = D.C. is: 
5.33log
1212
12
10  1.32
1606
10  1.32
1,300,281
10  1.32
336
=
×
=
××
×
efmi  
and for f = Kabul: 
7.88log
1212
12
10  1.32
1606
10  1.32
227
10  1.32
21
=
×
=
××
×
efmi  
A well-known problem is that mutual information is biased 
towards infrequent entities/features. We therefore multiply 
mief with the following discounting factor [13]: 
1,min
,min
1
11
11
+⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
×
+
∑∑
∑∑
==
==
m
j
jf
n
i
ei
m
j
jf
n
i
ei
ef
ef
cc
cc
c
c
 
Similarity Model 
Now that we have a method of ranking observations 
according to their relative importance, we still need a 
comparison metric for determining the likelihood that two 
entities are aliases. The requirement is that the metric 
handles large feature dimensions and that it not be too 
sensitive to 0-valued features. That is, the absence of a 
matching observation is not as strong an indicator of 
dissimilarity as the presence of one is an indicator of 
similarity. Some measures, like the Euclidean distance, do 
not make this distinction. Many models could apply here; 
we chose the cosine coefficient model [14]. The similarity 
between each pair of entities ei and ej, using the cosine 
coefficient of their mutual information vectors, is given by: 
( )
∑∑
∑
×
×
=
f
fe
f
fe
f
fefe
ji
ji
ji
mimi
mimi
eesim
22
,  
This measures the cosine of the angle between two mutual 
information vectors. A similarity of 0 indicates orthogonal 
vectors whereas a similarity of 1 indicates identical 
vectors. For two very similar elements, their vectors will 
be very close and the cosine of their angle will approach 1. 
Detecting Aliases 
We now have all the pieces of the puzzle to detect aliases 
from a given population and a set of observations. Figure 2 
illustrates our system architecture for alias detection. The 
various observations (e.g. travel logs, communications, 
social links, etc.) are first processed through our mutual 
information model to generate a ranked composite view of 
the important observations. Then, our similarity model is 
used to detect and rank candidate aliases for each entity in 
our population. 
Experimental Results 
We evaluate our model on one of the five problems 
described earlier in this paper: discovering malicious 
aliases in a social network. Below, we describe our 
experimental setup and present our results. 
Experimental Setup 
Following Davis et al. [5], we evaluated our system on 
standard synthetic datasets modeling threat groups in a 
social network of a general population, generated by 
Information Extraction & Transport, Inc (IET) within the 
EAGLE Project [15]. Using an artificial world simulator 
producing interrelated entities (through communication 
links and group membership links), IET generated two 
datasets containing aliases1. Each dataset was generated by 
setting modeling parameters, the most important of which 
are described below: 
 Population size: Determines the number of entities 
in the social network. 
                                                 
1 IET actually generated five alias datasets for various 
purposes, but we only focus on the two uncorrupted 
datasets. 
 Connectivity (Sparsity): Determines the mean 
number of interconnections between individuals. 
 Noise: Determines the signal to noise ratio (omitted 
connections); the lowest ratio is bounded by: Easy 
(0.08), Fair (0.008), and Hard (0.0008). 
Table 1 summarizes the two IET datasets used in our 
evaluation. IET provided us with answer keys containing 
the aliases for each of the two datasets. 
Precision and Recall 
We applied our model from Section “Information-
Theoretic Model”, using the communication links as the 
observations (features) of the entities, and output candidate 
aliases for each dataset. The precision of the system is the 
percentage of correct detections: 
 
AT
CPrecision =   
where C is the number of correctly detected aliases and TA 
is the total number of proposed aliases by our system. The 
recall is the percentage of aliases in the answer key, TM, 
which were retrieved by the system: 
 
MT
CRecall =   
Precision and recall measure the tradeoff between 
identifying aliases correctly and retrieving all of them. 
Figures 3 and 4 shows the Precision vs. Recall curves of 
our system on each dataset. The 95% confidence intervals 
were all in the range of 0.5% – 3%. 
Our system shows vastly different performance results 
on the datasets. Upon inspection of the output, the 
connectivity and the ratio of total aliases to population size 
appeared to be the primary cause. Our framework is 
designed to handle very large feature spaces, which is 
common in many real world scenarios, by teasing out the 
most informative features. However, in small feature 
Figure 2. System architecture. First, the mutual information model is applied to the observations of a population. Then, the
similarity model yields candidate aliases for each entity in the population. 
Communications Social Links Enron Emails (250K) IET Dataset
Mutual 
Information 
Model
 $ $ 
$$$
 $ $  $ $ 
$$
 $ $ 
$$$$$$
 $ $  $$  $  $  $  
$
 $ $ 
$$$
 $ $  $ $ 
 $ $ 
$$$
 $ $  $ $ 
 $ $ 
$$$$$$
 $ $  $$  $   $  $ $ 
$
 $ $ 
$$$$$$
 $ $  $$  $   $  $ $ 
$
Similarity
Model
Your Data!!!
Population Population Model 
(Composite View)
Candidate
Aliases
Travel Logs
spaces, mutual information cannot as easily uncover the 
informative features. To support this, we inspected the 
mutual information vectors for incorrectly identified 
aliases in dataset 20 and noticed that the mutual 
information scores are ranked almost identically to the 
frequency scores. 
Increased connectivity is only slightly responsible for 
the apparent superior performance on dataset 18. It is the 
ratio of total aliases to population size that had the most 
drastic impact on the system performance.  This is mostly 
due to the nature of the IET datasets, which were built to 
model threat and non-threat group behaviors and 
consequently contained many similar entities (from group 
memberships). Even though there are few aliases, our 
system discovers the closeness between entities of same 
groups. Therefore, the smaller the ratio of aliases to 
population size is, the lower the system precision will be. 
In the next section, we show using a different measure that 
the system performs equally well on both datasets when 
finding the alias of a suspected entity (i.e. given a 
particular suspect entity, our system does well at 
identifying its alias or aliases). 
Davis et al. [5] also presented their evaluation on three 
IET datasets, but they did not specify which IET datasets 
they used. A direct comparison is therefore impossible. 
However, like us, they showed vastly different precision 
and recall curves for the different datasets. Comparing 
their best precision/recall graph with our precision/recall 
graph for IET-18 shows that we achieve very similar 
performance, even though unlike their approach, ours is 
completely unsupervised and requires no training data. 
Top-K Accuracy 
In the previous section, we showed that our system 
sometimes confuses aliases and similar group members 
(because the IET datasets initially served for the task of 
group detection). Below, we evaluate our system on the 
task of identifying the correct alias for a particular 
suspected entity. 
We randomly sampled2 entities known to have aliases 
from the IET answer keys, and we measured the 
percentage of its aliases that were discovered by our 
system. Figure 5 illustrates the results for varying numbers 
of Top-K guesses (i.e., the system is allowed to make up to 
                                                 
2 The random samples where taken in order to obtain 95% 
confidence bounds for our reported accuracies. 
K guesses for each entity, and we evaluate the accuracy of 
the correct alias being in this list of guesses). Given five 
guesses, the system finds the correct alias nearly 60% of 
the time, whereas given 20 guesses the system finds the 
correct alias 80% of the time. An analyst could potentially 
use this system for greatly reducing the number of 
candidate aliases that must be considered in an 
investigation. 
Conclusion and Future Work 
Entity consolidation is a common problem encountered in 
various areas from the intelligence community to social 
network analysis, databases, biology, and marketing. 
Instead of detecting aliases by looking for morphological, 
phonetic, or semantic cues in entity labels, we focused our 
attention on behavioral cues exhibited by the entities (e.g. 
communications, financial transactions, social links, etc.), 
which are much harder to fake in malicious environments. 
For large populations, the total number of such 
observations can become enormous, with only a small 
portion of the important observations overlapping for 
aliases. In this paper, we proposed an information theoretic 
model for measuring this importance and leveraging it to 
detect aliases. 
Figure 3. Precision vs. Recall curve for IET-18. 
Precision vs. Recall (IET-18)
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
100.0%
0.0% 10.0% 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 50.0% 60.0% 70.0% 80.0% 90.0% 100.0%
Recall
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Figure 4. Precision vs. Recall curve for IET-20. 
Precision vs. Recall (IET-20)
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
100.0%
0.0% 10.0% 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 50.0% 60.0% 70.0% 80.0% 90.0% 100.0%
Recall
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Table 1. Summary of IET datasets for alias detection. 
D
at
as
et
  I
D
Po
pu
la
tio
n 
Si
ze
T
ot
al
 A
lia
se
s
C
on
ne
ct
iv
ity
N
oi
se
18 2504 821 43.6 Fair
20 12,391 681 19.2 Fair
We applied our model to the task of discovering aliases 
from a standard synthetic model of a large, sparse, and 
noisy social network. Below is a summary of the 
evaluation results: 
 on our best dataset, with 50% accuracy, our system 
was able to extract 27% of the aliases; 
 for a given entity and the top-5 candidate aliases, our 
system correctly identified the true alias with 60% 
accuracy; 
 for a given entity and the top-20 candidate aliases, 
our system correctly identified the true alias with 
80% accuracy. 
At a minimum, our model can dramatically reduce the 
time a human needs to find the aliases of an entity in a 
social network (looking at only 20 possible aliases for each 
entity would uncover the aliases with 80% accuracy). 
However, the power of the model is critically dependent on 
gathering the right observations that aliases might share, 
which in itself is a very interesting avenue of future work. 
Given the right observations, our model has the potential to 
solve several serious and urgent problems such as terrorist 
detection, identity thefts, and data integration. 
References 
[1] Bagga, A. and Baldwin, B. 1998. Entity-Based Cross-
Document Coreferencing Using the Vector Space 
Model. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL-98. Montreal, 
Canada. 
[2] Baroni, M.; Matiasek, J.; and Trost, H. 2002. 
Unsupervised discovery of morphologically related 
words based on orthographic and semantic similarity. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Morphological 
and Phonological Learning of ACL/SIGPHON-2002. 
pp. 48-57. Philadelphia, PA. 
[3] Brill, E. and Moore, R. C. 2000. An Improved Error 
Model for Noisy Channel Spelling Correction. In 
Proceedings of ACL-00. pp. 286-293. Hong Kong. 
[4] Church, K. and Hanks, P. 1989. Word association 
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. In 
Proceedings of ACL-89. pp. 76–83. Vancouver, 
Canada. 
[5] Davis, J.; Dutra, I.; Page, D.; and Costa, V. S. 2005. 
Establishing Identity Equivalence in Multi-Relational 
Domains. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Intelligence Analysis. 
[6] Fleischman, M. B. and Hovy, E. H. 2004. Multi-
Document Person Name Resolution. In Proceedings of 
the ACL Workshop on Reference Resolution. 
Barcelona, Spain. 
[7] Hsiung, P. 2004. Alias Detection in Link Data Sets. 
Technical report CMU-RI-TR-04-22, Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
[8] Kernighan, M.D.; Church, K.; and Gale, W. 1990. A 
pelling correction program based on a noisy channel 
model. In Proceedings of COLING-90. pp. 205-211. 
Helsinki, Finland. 
[9] Knuth, D. 1973. The Art of Computer Programming – 
Volume 3: Sorting and Searching. Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company. 
[10] Mann, G. and Yarowsky, D. 2003. Unsupervised 
Personal Name Disambiguation. In Proceedings of 
CoNLL-2003. Edmonton, Canada. 
[11] Martinich, A.P. 2000. The Philosophy of Language. 
Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK. 
[12] Pantel, P.; Philpot, A.; and Hovy, E.H. 2005. An 
Information Theoretic Model for Database Alignment. 
In Proceedings of the Conference on Scientific and 
Statistical Database Management (SSDBM-05). pp. 
14-23. Santa Barbara, CA. 
[13] Pantel, P. and Lin, D. 2002. Discovering word senses 
from text. In Proceedings of SIGKDD-02. pp. 613–
619. Edmonton, Canada. 
[14] Salton, G. and McGill, M.J. 1983. Introduction to 
Modern Information Retrieval. McGraw Hill. 
[15] Schrag, R. 2004. EAGLE Y2.5 Performance 
Evaluation Laboratory Documentation Version 1.5. 
Internal report, Information Extraction and Transport, 
Inc. 
[16] Stamatatos, E.; Fakotakis, N.; and Kokkinakis, G. 
2001. Computer-based Authorship Attribution without 
Lexical Measures. Computers and the Humanities, 
Volume 35, Issue 2, May 2001. pp. 193-214. 
 
Figure 5. System accuracy on retrieving correct alias in
Top-K returned candidates. 
Top-K Accuracy (with 95% confidence intervals)
0.0%
20.0%
40.0%
60.0%
80.0%
100.0%
1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
K
A
cc
ur
ac
y
18 20
