Poster: Assessing the Effectiveness of
Countermeasures Against Authorship Recognition
Michael Backes
CISPA, Saarland University
backes@cs.uni-saarland.de
Pascal Berrang
CISPA, Saarland University
berrang@cs.uni-saarland.de
Praveen Manoharan
CISPA, Saarland University
manoharan@cs.uni-saarland.de
Abstract—Methods for authorship recognition were originally
developed to aid in criminal investigations and attribution of
historical texts. Nowadays, however, in an age in which the
Internet has become the central platform for day-to-day social
interactions and communication, authorship recognition tech-
nology can be abused to break the anonymity of users by
identifying the authors of user-generated text content. While
there have been recent advances in adversarial stylometry, which
investigates the impact of obfuscation and imitation on current
authorship recognition techniques, no comprehensive model for
the assessment of countermeasure effectiveness currently exists.
In this work, we introduce a novel measure for assessing
the context-dependent importance of writing style features in
authorship recognition. From this measure, we furthermore
derive an additional measure for assessing the effectiveness of
authorship-recognition countermeasures by analysing how well
these countermeasures reduce the importance of the affected
features.
We then utilise these measures to conduct a large-scale
evaluation of four semantics-retaining countermeasures and their
combinations on a dataset of 923,997 comments collected from
the online social network Reddit. We examine the practical impact
of these countermeasures on the importance of standard writing
style features and explore the outcome of combining several
countermeasures at the same time. Moreover, we validate our
approach by applying it to the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt
Adversarial Corpus and comparing our results with previous
research.
I. MOTIVATION
During the last two decades, the Internet evolved from
a simple communication network to a global multimedia
platform which is part of our everyday life. On this platform,
billions of users actively share data, even revealing personal
information, without considering the consequences of the easy
accessability and the permanent nature of their disseminated
data. The detrimental consequences range from personalized
advertisements and the sale of personal information up to
threats concerning personal safety.
An intuitive, commonly pursued approach to separate sen-
sitive information from one’s personal identity, and thus protect
one’s privacy, would be to disseminate sensitive information
only through anonymous or pseudonymous profiles, with the
intention of decoupling a user’s real-life identity from sen-
sitive information posted under pseudonymous accounts. As
literature has shown, however, this approach is not really
effective since different profiles are typically linkable using
common characteristics [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. In particular,
for user-generated text content, the writing style of a user
is often unique across different profiles, and can thereby be
used to attribute text content to its corresponding (seemingly
anonymous) author [6]. Current research has shown that this
profile linkage can even be conducted at Internet scale [7].
Recent work on adversarial stylometry [8], [9] has tried to
reduce the likelihood of correctly linking corresponding pro-
files by investigating the impact of obfuscation and imitation
of text passages on current authorship recognition techniques.
These works have mostly focused on the development of
manual and semi-automated countermeasures in order to cir-
cumvent stylometry. However, none of these works is capable
of assessing the actual effectiveness of these countermeasures.
Hence, these works do not provide any insights on which coun-
termeasures are particularly well-suited for a given context in
which a certain text should be published. The absence of such
results is, in particular, due to the lack of a rigorous model for
assessing the effectiveness of various types of countermeasures
on the identifiability of authors, which currently does not
exist. In addition, developing a model of this kind might
help in identifying the major challenges that research needs
to overcome in order to provide fully-automated assistance for
authorship obfuscation.
II. NOVEL MEASURE FOR FEATURE IMPORTANCE
In this work, we present a novel, classifier-independent
measure for assessing the importance of stylometric features
for the identifiability of authors. We base this assessment on
the privacy model introduced by Backes et al. [10], which
provides a generic data model to cope with heterogeneous
information using statistical models. We adapt and extend these
statistical models to fit our use case to authorship recognition,
effectively defining a model for writing style that allows us
to capture a comprehensive list of stylometric features, as
introduced by Abbasi and Chen [3]. Overall, we develop a
model of the authorship recognition problem that allows us
to formally reason about authorship recognition in the open
setting of the Internet.
We then derive how we can identify important stylometric
features that significantly contribute to the identification of the
correct author from the context in which text is published
by using these writing-style models. We employ standard
regression techniques to determine the weights of each type of
stylometric feature, which then correspond to their importance.
Figure 1: This flowchart represents our actual set-up.
III. ASSESSING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
COUNTERMEASURES
From the features’ importance assessment we then further
derive the gain measure for the effectiveness of countermea-
sures against authorship identification by measuring how well
they reduce the importance of stylometric features towards a
target value. This target value depends on the actual importance
values and identifies the desired state that minimizes the
success of authorship recognition techniques.
Definition 1 (Gain): Let λ1, . . . , λn be the features’ im-
portance values, ϕ1, . . . , ϕn the corresponding target values
and λ′1, . . . , λ
′
n the corresponding values after the application
of a countermeasure. Then the gain provided by the counter-
measure is defined as gain =
∑
i |λi − ϕi| − |λ′i − ϕi|.
IV. EVALUATION AND VALIDATION
We apply this measure to assess the effectiveness of
four, fully automated countermeasures, namely synonym sub-
stitution, spell checking, special character modification and
adding/removing misspellings. Moreover, we group them into
two categories: informed countermeasures, which choose their
action based on a local optimization, and uninformed coun-
termeasures, which always choose a fixed or random action
without involving any further knowledge.
As shown in Figure 1, we follow a general and comprehen-
sive methodology that structures the evaluation process and is
easily extensible for future evaluation.
First, we perform our experiments on a dataset of 923,997
comments by 3439 users collected from the online social
network Reddit. In particular, we apply the countermeasures
individually, and also in combination, to the comments of test
users and evaluate the gain provided on average. The results of
this evaluation are already available and suggest a surprising
improvement on the importance values in case of the spell
checker. We also show that our gain measure correlates with
authorship recognition precision.
Then, we also apply our methodology on the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt Adversarial Corpus [8], [9] and validate
our approach by giving a comprehensive comparison to exist-
ing authorship recognition techniques.
As part of our work in progress, we are currently facing
the following challenges: the actual interpretation of possibly
negative features’ importance values – due to non-negative
regression techniques – and tracing back the gains provided
by a countermeasure to its actual implementation in order to
allow for a more detailled interpretation of their gains.
REFERENCES
[1] T. C. Mendenhall, “The characteristic curves of composition,” Science,
pp. 237–249, 1887.
[2] O. Uzuner and B. Katz, “A Comparative Study of Language Models
for Book and Author Recognition,” in Proc. of the 2nd International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP), 2005, pp.
969–980.
[3] A. Abbasi and H. Chen, “Writeprints: A Stylometric Approach to
Identity-level Identification and Similarity Detection in Cyberspace,”
ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), vol. 26, no. 2, pp.
1–29, 2008.
[4] M. Koppel, J. Schler, and S. Argamon, “Computational Methods in Au-
thorship Attribution,” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 9–26, 2009.
[5] M. B. Malyutov, “Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review,” in
General Theory of Information Transfer and Combinatorics, 2006, pp.
362–380.
[6] S. Afroz, A. C. Islam, A. Stolerman, R. Greenstadt, and D. McCoy,
“Doppelgänger finder: Taking stylometry to the underground,” in Proc.
of the 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2014, pp. 212–
226.
[7] A. Narayanan, H. Paskov, N. Z. Gong, J. Bethencourt, E. Stefanov,
E. C. R. Shin, and D. Song, “On the feasibility of internet-scale author
identification,” in Proc. of the 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S& P), 2012, pp. 300–314.
[8] M. R. Brennan and R. Greenstadt, “Practical Attacks Against Author-
ship Recognition Techniques,” in Proc. of the 21st Annual Conference
on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI), 2009.
[9] M. R. Brennan, S. Afroz, and R. Greenstadt, “Adversarial Stylome-
try: Circumventing Authorship Recognition to Preserve Privacy and
Anonymity,” ACM Transactions on Information and System Security
(TISSEC), vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 12:1–12:22, 2012.
[10] M. Backes, P. Berrang, and P. Manoharan, “How well do you blend
into the crowd? - d–convergence: a novel paradigm for reasoning about
privacy in the age of Big-Data,” http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03346, 2015.
