 
ANALYZING WRITING STYLES OF BLOGGERS WITH 
 DIFFERENT OPINIONS 
Thomas H. Park, Jiexun Li, Haozhen Zhao 
College of Information Science and Technology 
Drexel University 
{thomas.park, jiexun.li, haozhen.zhao}@ischool.drexel.edu
Michael Chau 
School of Business 
The University of Hong Kong 
mchau@business.hku.hk
Abstract 
Understanding customers is crucial to companies’ decision-making. With the advent of Web  2.0, 
more and mo re p eople ch oose to  exp ress th eir feelin gs a nd a rticulate th eir a ttitudes th rough 
online social communities such as blogs and web forums. These new sources of information offer 
the potential to obtain large quantities of customer feedback using automated analysis techniques. 
In th is pap er, we stu dy ho w p eople with  d ifferent o pinions to ward a commerci al p roduct write 
differently in their blogs. We define and extract four types of stylometric features – namely lexical, 
syntactic, structural, and sentimental features – t o represent a  blogger's writing style. Based on 
multivariate analyses on a data set of iPod-relat ed blogs, we found vari ous writing style patterns 
of bloggers. Our analysis shows that a b logger’s writing style is ma rginally related to his or her 
opinion toward a product.  
Keywords:  Blog Analysis, Stylometry, Principal Components Analysis, MANOVA 
1. Introduction 
Understanding customers is crucial to companies’ decision-making. Traditionally, companies have relied 
on expensive, time-consuming methods to collect customer feedback, including focus groups, surveys, 
and professional evaluations. With the advent of Web 2.0, a growing number of people are sharing their 
opinions about commercial products and services through online social communities such as blogs and 
web forums. These new forms of communication offer customer feedback that is timely, abundant, and 
amenable to automated text-mining techniques. 
Our position is that the opinions expressed by bloggers toward a commercial product relate to the writing 
styles in which they express themselves. A stylometric analysis of these bloggers may yield insights into 
how automated techniques can be used to interpret customer feedback found online. In this study, we pose 
the following research questions: 
 How do bloggers with different opinions toward a product differ in their writing styles? 
 What are the business implications of the writing style patterns found among different groups of 
bloggers? 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Stylometry Analysis 
This study is closely related to a linguistic research area called stylometry, which refers to the statistical 
analysis of literary style (Holmes 1998). The central task of stylometry is to extract a set of features that 
can represent the writing styles of a particular author. These features are also referred to as “writeprints.” 
Stylometry has been successfully applied to determine authorship of historical literature. For example, 
Mosteller and Wallace (1963) used the frequency of content-free “function words” to attribute the 
disputed Federalist papers to James Madison. Elliott and Valenza (1991) incorporated stylometric 
features to discredit the Earl of Oxford as the true identity of William Shakespeare. In addition to 
authorship identification, content analysis has been used for authorship characterization. Burrows (1989) 
used function words to cluster sixteen novelists by gender and chronology. 
151 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
  
In recent years, stylometry has been directed toward the Web. Stamatatos et al. (1999) attributed essays 
from a newspaper's website to one of ten authors using stylometric features. de Vel (2000) identified the 
authors of emails based on stylometric and email-specific attributes including the use of attachments and 
signatures. Zheng et al. (2006) used stylometric features to identify the authors of piracy-related 
newsgroup and bulletin board system (BBS) messages. Abbasi and Chen (2008) developed a framework 
for text analysis of computer-mediated communication (CMC) in which various stylometric features are 
included. 
2.2 Blog Analysis 
Blogs serve as online diaries for people to document their life, express their views on various topics, and 
form and maintain social relationships. Both content analysis and link analysis techniques have been used 
to discover useful information from blog content and the blogosphere structure. In recent years, 
stylometric analysis has been applied to blog content in order to characterize its authors. Burger and 
Henderson (2006) explored features for predicting the age of bloggers, including stylometric features and 
blog-specific features like links, images, profiles, and “friend links”. Yan and Yan (2006) combined 
stylometric features with “non-traditional” ones, including background colors, fonts, and emoticons, to 
classify the gender of bloggers. Nowson et al. (2005) examined the correlation between the frequencies of 
different parts-of-speech and the personality traits of bloggers. Datta and Sarkar (2008) utilized 
stylometric features to discriminate legitimate blogs from spam blogs. 
From a business intelligence perspective, Chau and Xu (2007) explored the attitudes expressed in blogs 
toward a commercial product using social network analysis. Their analysis showed that different opinions 
toward a product do not keep bloggers from interacting with one another. In this study, we aim to build on 
this work by looking at how bloggers with different attitudes toward a product write differently. 
3. Data Description 
Our corpus was comprised of blog entries authored by people who expressed sentiment toward Apple’s 
iPod portable media players through their group affiliations. Blog entries were collected from Xanga, a 
popular blog hosting website that supports “blogrings” - groups formed around a common interest or 
circle of friends. An initial set of blogrings was identified by the use of the word “iPod” in their titles or 
descriptions, and refined by discarding spam and other irrelevant groups. The resulting 201 groups were 
then manually classified as having a positive, negative, or neutral sentiment toward iPods based on their 
descriptions. 
Members of these blogrings were assigned one of the three sentiment labels as expressed by their 
membership to iPod-related groups. Bloggers in both a neutral and a positive (or negative) group were 
assigned a positive (or negative) label. None of the bloggers were in a positive and negative blogring 
simultaneously. From this set of bloggers, 1,990 bloggers that had posted 1,000 or more words of text 
were selected. Notably, these authors seldom mentioned iPods in their blog entries despite their 
membership in iPod-related groups (Chau & Xu 2007). Table 1 provides an overview of the corpus. 
Table 1. Summary of Corpus 
  Blogrings  Bloggers 
Sentiment 
 Count 
(Percentage) 
Mean Number
of Members 
 Count 
(Percentage) 
Mean Number
of Entries 
Positive  104 (51.7%) 23.11 1,346 (67.6%) 68.96
Negative  33 (16.4%) 7.85 159 (8.0%) 85.04
Neutral  64 (31.8%) 14.48 485 (24.4%) 76.14
Total  201 (100%) 17.86 1,990 (100%) 71.99
152 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
  
  
 
4. Sylometric Feature Extraction 
Individuals possess writing styles that remain consistent in their works, even across multiple topics. By 
measuring characteristics of an author's writings, a "writeprint" can be created that captures his or her 
unique writing style (Li et al. 2006). In our analysis, we measured 39 stylometric features that fall into 
four categories: lexical, syntactic, structural, and sentimental. 
The lexical features characterize a person’s writing style using six character-based features, such as the 
frequency of special characters (e.g., ‘!’, ‘$’), and eleven word-based features, including the frequency of 
hapax legomena (i.e., words that occur exactly once in an entry) and hapax dislegomena (i.e., words that 
occur exactly twice). The syntactic features measure the use of five parts of speech as well as 
comparatives (e.g., ‘better’, ‘faster’), superlatives (e.g., ‘best’, ‘fastest’), wh- words (e.g., ‘who’, ‘why’), 
and function words. Function words are common words that have been identified as being content-free 
and context-independent (e.g., ‘the’, ‘and’). The structural features describe the author’s organization of 
content through the use of sentences and paragraphs. Lastly, the sentimental features indicate the direction 
and degree of sentiment expressed by the words in the texts. These stylometric features are outlined in 
Table 2 and explained in detail by Li et al. (2008). 
Table 2. Stylometric Features 
Lexical Features  Syntactic Features 
Total number of words 
Total number of distinct words 
Average word length 
Standard deviation of word length 
7 Vocabulary richness measures 
Total number of characters 
Frequency of English characters 
Frequency of uppercase characters 
Frequency of lowercase characters 
Frequency of numerical characters 
Frequency of special characters 
 Frequency of nouns 
Frequency of proper nouns 
Frequency of verbs 
Frequency of adjectives 
Frequency of adverbs 
Frequency of comparatives 
Frequency of superlatives 
Frequency of wh- words 
Frequency of function words 
Structural Features  Sentimental Features 
Total number of lines 
Total number of paragraphs 
Total number of sentences 
Average number of words per sentence 
Average number of words per paragraph 
Average number of sentences per paragraph 
 Frequency of subjectivity clues 
Frequency of strong positive words 
Frequency of weak positive words 
Frequency of strong negative words 
Frequency of weak negative words 
Frequency of strong neutral words 
Frequency of weak neutral words 
5. Data Analysis and Discussion 
After extracting the stylometric features from each blog entry, we calculated their mean values for each 
author. This resulted in a matrix whose rows represented the bloggers and whose columns represented the 
stylometric features. This matrix was analyzed using principal components analysis (PCA) and 
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA). 
5.1 Principal Components Analysis 
We performed a PCA with varimax rotation in order to visualize and interpret the stylometric data in a 
lower dimensional space. The 39 stylometric features were distilled into two principal components 
accounting for 39.8% of the variance in the data. The PCA results demonstrate significant correlation 
among the stylometric features, including between features of different categories. Figure 1 shows how 
the features loaded on these principal components. 
153 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
  
 
Figure 1. Plot of Variable Loadings on Principal Components 
The first principal component PCX represents a subjectivity dimension, with subjectivity words, 
adjectives, and adverbs as positive contributors, and the more objective nouns, proper nouns, and 
numerals as negative contributors. The second principal component PCY corresponds to the size of the 
blog entries, with counts of words, characters, and sentences loading most positively. The vocabulary 
richness measures lie on a diagonal, suggesting a third major component. 
Bloggers from the three sentiment groups were plotted in the space defined by PCX and PCY. Figure 2 
shows that the majority of bloggers are concentrated toward the bottom right. In other words, most 
bloggers express personal viewpoints through relatively brief entries. However, a substantial number of 
bloggers radiate above and to the left of this core, representing longer entries and more objective tones, 
respectively. 
Any further interpretations based on these principal components must be made with caution. Conclusions 
drawn from stylometric analysis of books, articles, and other forms of edited text do not necessarily hold 
for blogs due to their unrestricted nature. For example, typical uses of capitalization include names and 
the start of sentences. These counts are often eclipsed, however, when bloggers use capitalization for 
emphasis (e.g., “MY COMPUTER DIED”) or aesthetics (e.g., “DiNnEr WaS sO nIcE tOo”). These usages 
underscore the difficulty in drawing meaningful conclusions of bloggers based on current stylometric 
analysis techniques, and the need to develop features that better discern attitudes and intentions from text 
found online. 
154 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
  
  
 
 
Figure 2. Plot of Bloggers by Sentiment 
5.2 MANOVA 
A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was used to determine whether stylistic differences 
existed between bloggers with differing sentiment toward iPods. The Wilks' Lambda value of 0.942 (p < 
0.05) indicates that sentiment has a significant effect on stylometric features. 
Helmert contrasts showed that the entries of neutral bloggers had, on average, 5.3 more lines, 3.4 more 
paragraphs, and 1.2 more words per sentence than those of non-neutral (positive and negative) bloggers, 
all significant at the 0.05 alpha level. Neutral bloggers predictably also had lower usages of strong 
negative words than non-neutral bloggers. Between the two non-neutral groups, negative bloggers used 
more subjectivity words with strong negative, weak negative, and surprisingly, strong positive polarities 
when compared with positive bloggers. Finally, bloggers with positive sentiment used 11.4 more distinct 
words per entry than negative bloggers, hinting at further patterns in vocabulary richness. 
In short, MANOVA revealed that bloggers who expressed neutral opinions toward iPods tended to have 
long entries with few subjective words, negative bloggers had short entries with many subjective words, 
and positive bloggers were in between. Figure 2 offers some visual support for these results. Nevertheless, 
there is a high degree of overlap between the different sentiment groups, echoing earlier findings that 
"even if a blogger is negative (or positive) about iPod[s], he/she still interacts with other bloggers who 
may be positive (or negative)" (Chau & Xu 2007). 
It should be noted that the stylistic differences found among the sentiment groups do not manifest 
exclusively in writings about iPods; rather, they correspond to the underlying personalities of the 
bloggers. Some use blogs as a platform for expressing their opinions about a wide range of topics, 
whereas others use blogs for posting more objective or reflective information. This raises questions of 
how bloggers with different writing styles influence the opinions of others differently, and how shared 
opinions can grow into trends online. Are bloggers who evaluate products passionately or dispassionately 
more influential within their communities? Does one opinionated blogger with a negative sentiment 
drown out the many positive bloggers? Further study is needed to understand these phenomena. 
155 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
  
6. Conclusion 
In our study, we discovered that the writing styles of bloggers could be characterized in terms of 
subjectivity and entry size, and captured using specific stylometric features. We extracted stylometric 
features from the blog entries of people who expressed opinions toward a commercial product through 
their membership in blogrings. We then used multivariate statistical techniques to analyze and visualize 
these bloggers based on their writing styles, finding a marginal relationship between the writing styles of 
bloggers and their attitudes toward a product. 
These results are an early step in realizing the potential of data found in blogs and web forums for 
business intelligence. Nevertheless, our results suffered from the gulf between blogring affiliation and 
blog content. We hope to discover stronger patterns by incorporating more sophisticated stylometric 
features and by applying our methodology to content more closely tied to the product of interest. Lastly, 
we believe that by integrating our stylometric approach with topical and network analyses, a more 
complete understanding of bloggers’ online expressions toward a product can be achieved.  
References 
Abbasi, A. & Chen, H. 2008. “CyberGate: A design framework and system for text analysis of computer-
mediated communication,” Management Information Systems Quarterly (32:4), pp. 811-837. 
Burger, J.D. & Henderson, J.C. 2006. “An exploration of observable features related to blogger age,” 
AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs, pp. 15-20. 
Burrows, J.D. 1989. “‘An ocean where each kind…': Statistical analysis and some major determinants of 
literary style,” Computers and the Humanities (23), pp. 309-312. 
Chau, M. & Xu, J. 2007. “Studying customer groups from blogs,” 6th Workshop on e-Business. 
Datta, S. & Sarkar, S. 2008. “A comparative study of statistical features of language in blogs-vs-splogs,” 
2nd Workshop on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (303), pp. 63-66. 
de Vel, O. 2000. “Mining e-mail authorship,” Workshop on Text Mining, ACM International  Conference 
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 
Elliott, W. & Valenza, R. 1991. “Was the Earl of Oxford the true Shakespeare?” Notes and Queries (38), 
pp. 501-506. 
Holmes, D.I. 1998. “The evolution of stylometry in humanities scholarship,” Literary and Lingu istic 
Computing (13:3), pp. 111-117. 
Li, J., Zheng, R., & Chen, H. 2006. “From fingerprint to writeprint: Identifying the key features to help 
identify and trace online authorship,” Communications of the ACM (49:4), pp. 76-82. 
Li, J., MacDonald, C.M., & Zheng, R. 2008. “Stylometric feature selection for assessing review 
helpfulness,” 18th Annual Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems. 
Mosteller, F. & Wallace, D. 1963. “Inference in an authorship problem,” Journal of t he American  
Statistical Association (58:302), pp. 275-309. 
Nowson, S., Oberlander, J., & Gill, A. 2005. “Weblogs, genres, and individual differences,” 27th Annual 
Conferences of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1666-1671. 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., & Kokkinakis, G. 1999. “Automatic authorship attribution,” 9th Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 158-164. 
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., & Hoffmann, P. 2005. “Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentimental 
analysis,” Human Language Technology Conference and the Conference on Empirical Met hods in 
Natural Language Processing. 
Yan, X. & Yan, L. 2006. “Gender classification of weblog authors,” AAAI 2006 Spring Sy mposium on 
Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs, pp. 228-230. 
Zheng, R., Li, J., Chen, H., & Huang, Z. 2006. “A framework for authorship identification of online 
messages: Writing-style features and classification techniques,” Journal of the  American Society for 
Information Science and Technology (57:3), pp. 378-393. 
156 19th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
