Segmentation of Handwritten Text from Underlined Variable
Regions in Documents
Suman V Patgara, Y H Sharath Kumar b, Vasudev Tb
aPET Research Foundation, P E S College of Engineering, Mandya, India, 571401,
Contact: sumanpatgar@gmail.com
bMaharaja Research Foundation, Maharaja Institute of Technology Mysore, Belawadi, S.R Patna,
Mandya, India, 571438
In this paper, we propose a system to identify underlined handwritten region from a given document. The
approach initially eliminates the outer boundary surrounding the text of interest and later, the handwritten
words are extracted from the remaining contents through proposed line detection algorithm using central
moments. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated using five different region based measures.
In order to substantiate the efficacy of the proposed model experimentation is conducted based on a dataset
over 300 various samples such as conference certificates, birth/death certificates, bank challans, degree cer-
tificates, attendance certificates, etc.. Experimental results show that the proposed segmentation algorithm
achieved best average Dice similarity measure and Measure of overlapping accuracy.
Keywords : Document, Handwritten Text, Segmentation, Underlines, Variable Regions.
1. INTRODUCTION
Many authorities in India trust and consider
the photocopied documents submitted by citi-
zens as proof and accept the same as genuine.
Few such applications like to open bank ac-
count, applying for gas connection, request-
ing for mobile sim card, the concerned au-
thorities insist photocopy documents like voter
id, driving license, ration card, pan card and
passport as proof of address, age, photo id
etc to be submitted along with the applica-
tion form. Certain class of people could ex-
ploit the trust of such authorities, and indulge
in forging/ tampering/ fabricating photocopy
document for short / long term benefits un-
lawfully. Fabricated photocopy is generated
normally by making required changes intelli-
gently in the photocopy obtained from an orig-
inal document and then taking the recursive
photocopy from the modified photocopy [1]. It
is learned that in majority cases, fabrications
are made by replacing a different photograph
in place of photograph of an authenticated per-
son; replacing contents in variable regions [2]
through cut-and-paste technique from one or
more documents; overlaying new content above
actual content; adding new content into exist-
ing content; removing some content from exist-
ing; changing content by overwriting; intellec-
tually changing character in contents.
It is quite evident from the applications listed
above, the fabrication could be mainly made in
the variable regions [1] of documents. Most of
the variable regions contain handwritten text
in the documents of the above applications.
Figure 1 (a) and (b) show samples of docu-
ments having variable regions being encircled.
There is a strong need to detect fabrication in
the photocopied documents submitted for the
applications mentioned above. Since fabrica-
tion could be suspected in variable regions, it is
quite necessary to identify the variable regions
in such documents. Once the variable regions
in a document are identified, further investi-
gations could be performed to check for the
possibility of fabrication. Thus identification
of variable regions in a document is a prereq-
uisite step to detect fabrication in photocopied
23
International Journal of Information Processing, 8(3), 23-30, 2014
ISSN : 0973-8215
IK International Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, India
Segmentation of Handwritten Text from Underlined Variable Regions in Documents 29
5. CONCLUSIONS
The implemented method serves as an intelli-
gent system for segmentation of handwritten
text in variable region in a document. The
method is essentially based on central mo-
ments of intensity values of document. It shows
an acceptable better segmentation efficiency,
which is close to ground truth segmentation.
It can be used without a complex hardware
setup for detection of variable regions in doc-
uments in applications where only photocopy
documents are sufficient. Certain cases ex-
hibit mis-segmentation due to appearance of
characters having line structure in the compo-
nents. The method is limited to work on docu-
ment in which variable regions are underlined.
There is much scope to segment variable re-
gions which are not underlined and also the
contents are printed instead of handwritten.
Further the performance efficiency can be en-
hanced through exploring other moments and
also preparing the document to be free from
noise, dirt and background art.
REFERENCES
1. Suman Patgar and Vasudev T. Estimation of
Recursive Order Number of a Photocopied
Document Through Entropy From Gray Level
Co-occurrence Matrix, ICSEC2013, pages 313–
317, 2013.
2. Vasudev T. Automatic Data Extraction from
Pre-Printed Input Data Forms: Some New
Approaches, PhD thesis supervised by Dr. G
Hemanthakumar, University of Mysore, India,
2007.
3. Gorman L O. The Document Spectrum for
Page Layout Analysis. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
15:1162–1173, 1993.
4. Nagy G, Seth S and Stoddard S. Document
Analysis with an Expert System, Pattern
Recognition Practices II, 2:149–155, 1984.
5. Ergina Kavallieratou, Stathis Stamatatos and
Hera Antonopoulou. Machine-Printed from
Handwritten Text Discrimination, in Proceed-
ings of 9th International Workshop on Fron-
tiers in Handwriting Recognition (IWFHR-9
2004), 2004.
6. M S Shirdhonkar and Manesh B Kokare. Dis-
crimination between Printed and Handwritten
Text in Documents, IJCA Special Issue on Re-
cent Trends in Image Processing and Pattern
Recognition RTIPPR, 2010.
7. Ranju Mandal, Partha Pratim Roy and Uma-
pada Pal. Signature Segmentation from Ma-
chine Printed Documents using Conditional
Random Field, in Proceedings of International
Conference on Document Analysis and Recog-
nition, pages 1170–1174, 2011.
8. Xujun Peng, Srirangaraj Setlur, Venu Govin-
daraju and Ramachandrula Sitaram. Hand-
written Text Separation from Annotated Ma-
chine Printed Documents using Markov Ran-
dom Fields, IJDAR 16:1–16, 2013,
9. Suman Patgar and Vasudev T. An Unsuper-
vised Intelligent System to Detect Fabrication
in Photocopy Document Using Geometric Mo-
ments and Gray Level Co-Occurrence Matrix,
IJCA(0975-8887), 74(12), July 2013.
10. Kuo Chin Fan. Marginal Noise Removal of
Document Image, ICDAR 01, pages 317–321,
2001.
11. Rafael C Gonzales and Richard E Woods. Dig-
ital Image Processing, 2nd Edition, Pearson
30 Suman V P, et al.,
Education Publication, 2002.
12. Arash Asef Nejad and Karim FaezA. Novel
Method for Extracting and Recognizing Logos,
International Journal of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering (IJECE), ISSN: 2088-8708,
2(5):577–588, October 2012.
13. Tinku Acharya and Ajoy K Ray. Image Pro-
cessing Principles and Applications, A Wiley-
Interscience Publication.
14. Jain A K. Fundamentals of Digital Image Pro-
cessing, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1998
15. M R Teague. Image Analysis via the General
Theory of Moments, Journal of the Optical So-
ciety of America, 70(8):920–930, 1979.
16. P B Mallikarjun and D S Guru. Performance
Evaluation of Segmentation and Classifica-
tion Of Tobacco Seedling Diseases, Interna-
tional Journal of Machine Intelligence ISSN:
09752927 and E-ISSN: 09759166, 3(4):204–211,
2011.
17. Elter M, Held C and Wittenberg T. Physics
in Medicine and Biology, 55:5299–5315, 2010.
Vasudev T is Professor, in the
Department of Computer Appli-
cations, Maharaja Institute of
Technology, Mysore. He ob-
tained his Bachelor of Science
and post graduate diploma in
computer programming with tw-
o Masters Degrees one in Computer Applications
and other one is Computer science and Technol-
ogy. He was awarded Ph.D in Computer Science
from University of Mysore. He is having 30 years
of experience in academics and his area of research
is Digital Image Processing specifically Document
Image Processing.
Suman V Patgar is Research
Scholar, P.E.T Research Cen-
ter Mandya. She obtained her
Bachelor of Engineering from
Kuvempu University in 1998.
She received her Masters degree
in Computer Science and Engin-
eering from VTU Belgaum in 2004. She is pursuing
doctoral degree with the supervision of Vasudev T
under University of Mysore.
Y H Sharath Kumar is
Assistant Professor in the De-
partment of Computer Science
and Engineering, Maharaja
Institute of Technology, Mysore.
He obtained his Bachelor of En-
gineering from VTU Belgaum.
He received his Masters degree
in Computer Science and Techn-
ology from University of Mysore. He is pursuing
doctoral degree with the supervision of D S Guru
under University of Mysore.
