ISTITUTO DI TEORIA E TECNICHE DELL'INFORMAZIONE GIURIDICA DEL CNR
LITERATURE REVIEW ON MULTILINGUAL INFORMATION ACCESS. 
APPROACHES, DEVELOPMENTS AND TRENDS
Ginevra Peruginelli
Rapporto tecnico n. 21/2004
Keywords: legal information retrieval, language and law
Firenze, 2004
INDEX
LITERATURE REVIEW  
1. DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE p. 3
2. KEY ASPECTS OF MULTILINGUAL ACCESS p. 4
2.1 The technical aspects p. 5
2.2 The linguistic aspects p. 6
2.2.1 Controlled vocabularies p. 7
2.2.2 Free-text searching p. 8
2.2.2.1 Dictionary-based methods p. 8
2.2.2.2 Corpus-based methods p. 8
2.2.3 Translation issues p. 9
3. RESEARCH, PROJECTS AND EXPERIMENTS: A BRIEF OVERVIEW p. 10
4. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS p. 13
REFERENCES p. 15
CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF THE STRATEGIES USED IN THE LITERATURE REVIEW  
SEARCH STRATEGIES p. 23
REVIEW OF THE SOURCES p. 25
WRITING THE REVIEW p. 26
2
LITERATURE REVIEW  
MULTILINGUAL INFORMATION ACCESS: APPROACHES, DEVELOPMENTS AND 
TRENDS
1. DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE
Multilingual information access can be defined as the functionality allowing 
anyone to  find information that  is  expressed in  any language.  Oard ([3], 
1997) identifies it as a  selection of useful documents from collections that 
may contain several languages. Another formulation refers to the capability 
for users to retrieve documents written in a language different from a query 
language (Lee, Kageura and Choi,  2004).
These requirements can be clarified by stating that in a multilingual access 
environment information is searched, retrieved and  presented effectively, 
without  constraints  due  to  the  different  languages  and  scripts  used  in 
documents  and  their  metadata.  This  implies  that  in  creating  multilingual 
access  services,  both  users’  native  language  and  the  multiplicity  and 
richness of world-wide languages are to be accommodated, so that users can 
put  queries  expressed  in  any  one  language  and  retrieve  information 
resources independently of the language of documents and  indexing.
Multilingual access is the general expression used throughout this review to 
refer to the development, research and applications concerning the above 
mentioned functionality. Another  expression widely used in literature, also 
adopted in this study, is cross-language information retrieval (CLIR), often 
referred to as opposed to within-language (or monolingual) retrieval (Oard 
[2], 1997).
The requirement  for  multilingual  access  is  based on the  recognition  that 
cultural diversity is vital to the maintenance of society and that languages 
are  a  strong  element  of  the  different  cultural  traditions.  The  role  of  the 
information professionals in this context is crucial, as clearly stated by Clews 
(1994),  who  points  out  that  the  naturally  multilingual  and  multicultural 
position  of  libraries  in  society  means  that  they  should  lead  the  way  in 
developing systems and services to foster cross-language retrieval. As the 
diversity  of  the  world’s  languages  and  cultures  generates  a  wealth  of 
knowledge and ideas, it is essential to develop research studies and tools to 
preserve and successfully use the variety of resources produced.
With  the  increasing  moves  towards  an  integrated  Europe  and  the 
increasingly  multicultural  nature  of  modern  society  and  its  globalisation, 
facilitated by the development of digital information and telecommunications 
networks, the need for multilingual information access has become more and 
more pressing and the issues connected with cross-language retrieval have 
increased in importance. Language barriers are critical to the effectiveness 
of resource sharing and world-wide common access, and their emergence as 
3
a  problem is  to  be  connected  with  the   growing  number  of  information 
databases now available on networks (Hudon, 1997; Oard [1], 1997; Michos, 
Stamatos and Fakotakis, 1999). Landry (2003) goes beyond, his main focus is 
on multilingual subject access, observing how  users’ needs have expanded 
as the result of the Web, that has made OPACs available beyond local use, 
but  he  points  out  also  that  new  technologies  have  opened  up  various 
possibilities and solutions to multilingualism.
This  review  concerns  multilingual  text  retrieval,  while  image  and  speech 
retrieval, now coming into the scene (Gey, Kando and Peters, 2002) are very 
marginally  addressed.  The  focus  is  on   multilingual  access  through 
information systems,  not  on  multilinguality  in  general,  thus  leaving aside 
functionality  which  is  nevertheless  the  commitment  of  libraries,  such  as 
collection development in multilinguages and reference assistance services 
to multilingual populations.
Multilingual access is a complex and multifaceted topic, embracing technical, 
functional  and  strategic  issues  which  have  been  (and  still  are)  under 
discussion  in the information specialists community for many years. What is 
needed is functionality like thorough and proper handling of characters (their 
presentation, arrangement, transfer), putting queries in a preferred language 
and  script,  retrieving  resources  irrespective  of  the  language  used  in 
searching and indexing, having world-wide communication no matter what 
the language.
The  extensive  literature  produced  contains  contributions  encompassing 
these main themes: functional requirements of multilingual access, technical 
issues concerning character set standards, multiscripts manipulation, various 
approaches to cross-language retrieval. These themes are often presented 
with a description of related projects, experiments and research studies.
Earlier literature, starting about in the late 1960s, mainly concentrated on 
characters  encoding,  font  facilities,  filing  and  display  of   multiscripts. 
Challenge of  access to multilingual  resources in  single  libraries and on a 
world-wide scale was perceived as being mostly a technological one. It  is 
mainly  in  the  late  1970s  that  careful  attention  has  been  paid  to  cross-
language  retrieval  functionality  and  tools,  software  solutions,  research 
projects  and  studies  where  CLIR  is  often  associated  with  disciplines  like 
artificial intelligence and computational linguistics (Michos, Stamatatos and 
Fakotakis,  1999),  machine  translation  (Kay,  1996),  language  engineering, 
natural language processing (Fluhr, 1996).
Another  important  aspect  of  multilingual  access  concerns  strategic  and 
management issues.  These refer to the  need for general  consensus and 
recommendations to achieve multilingual functionality. Emphasis is put on 
the  need for  a  paradigm shift  in  information  professionals  community  to 
overcome language barriers in information retrieval. These themes are not 
as  popular  in  the  literature  as  those  concerning  technical  and functional 
aspects, but are specifically addressed  by some authors such as Borgman 
(1997) and Nardi-Ford (1998).  They point out that the problem of English 
language  dominance,  initially  encountered  in  the  development  of  the 
character  encoding  systems,  affects  developments  in  CLIR  and  attention 
4
must  expand  beyond  technical  aspects.  As  the  richness  of  human 
communication is extremely hard to tackle, the library world should become 
more aware of linguistic and strategic issues and be exposed more and more 
to the rest of the world.
Similar  opinions,  yet  with  more  emphasis  on  digital  library  and  Internet 
related technologies’ issues, are expressed by Peters and Picchi (1997) who 
claim that, despite the technological developments which have occurred in 
the 1990s, in general digital library research and development until recently 
have somehow neglected the issues of multilingual presentation and access, 
and  have  concentrated  developments  and  applications  on  monolingual 
environments,  where  English  language  employment  has  taken  the  lead. 
Development  of  tools  and  applications  embracing  different  languages, 
including Asian ones, has nevertheless progressed in these last few years.
2. KEY ASPECTS OF MULTILINGUAL ACCESS
Strictly  speaking  multilingual  facilities  must  include  multiple  language 
recognition, manipulation, display, and cross language search and retrieval 
(Peters and Picchi, 1997; Bossmeyer, 1994). These are the two sides of the 
problem  of  multilingual  access,  which  are  of  a  technical  and  linguistic 
(semantic) nature. It is worth noting that in literature very few contributions 
deal with them in parallel. Presentation issues regarding standard character 
encoding and technical solutions generally appear in strictly library related 
literature, while CLIR is a topic discussed in a wider information specialists 
environment.
2.1 The technical aspects
The technical multilingual challenge is very complex; users expect to search 
and display results in multiple languages locally, but also more and more 
globally via the Internet, even if the originating library is monolingual. In the 
actual digital library environment where primary electronic resources are to 
be accessed, this implies  interoperability of character sets used to represent 
texts in different languages (Borgman, 1997).
Klavans and Schäuble (1998) extend such requirement, arguing that original 
data  and  metadata  must  be  interpreted,  parsed,  and  displayed  by  Web-
browsers and search engines.
Concern is also showed by Clews (1994) who states that multilinguality and 
multiscripts  is  a  major  issue.  He  argues  that  there  are  thousands  of 
languages and about only two dozen scripts are currently used, but users 
expect  them  to  be  properly  handled,  and  librarians  and  information 
specialists  must  meet  their  customers’  requirements  by  asking  systems’ 
suppliers to respond to such expectations.
Dowlin (1994) argues that in order to realise the “global village  library”, 
access, display and storage devices have to be developed and improved to 
accommodate multilingual and multiscript information, but also installation 
of communication systems are needed, allowing the transmission of different 
5
characters. These are the competence of the technical industry, which must 
be carefully advised by the library community.
As regards the use of characters in automated systems, initially only a few 
characters  were  used  (represented  by  a  7-bit  code  for  each  character) 
corresponding to the ASCII system  based on the character set of the English 
language,  and  solutions  for  representing  other  languages  consisted  in 
transliteration, national variations for special characters of Latin alphabet or 
even proprietary encoding schemes.
Although  ISO  character  sets  have  been  established  for  the  different 
alphabets  (Clews,  1994),  difficulties  lie  in  the  adoption  of  extension 
techniques  of  sets,  in  the  availability  and  management  of  conversion 
programs and of appropriate equipment for handling multiscripts. All this has 
hindered  data  exchange  and  adequate  solutions  for  multilingual  access 
(Clews, 1988; Sheldon, 1991; Aliprand, 1992).
With the development, in 1993, of ISO 10646/Unicode system (The Unicode 
Consortium, 2003), a Universal Character Set-UCS standard  supporting the 
most of the world's written languages (about 64000 characters based on 16 
bit  encoding  and  allowing  a  unique  code  for  each  character),  the 
international  community  of  technicians  and  information  professionals 
involved  aimed  at  having  characters  encoded  in  their  original  form  and 
information be stored consistently  in  almost  every language in  the world 
(Erickson, 1997; Zhang and Zeng, 1999; Aliprand, 1994 and 2000).
Despite  its  potential  and the increasing number of  applications  in  library 
systems  like,  for  example,  VTLS  (VTLS’s  VIRTUA  completes…,  1999)  and 
Aleph  (Jilovsky,  2004),  the  development  and  availability  of  character 
conversion  programs  within  the  CHASE  (Character  Set  Standardisation) 
project (Fisk and Brickell, 1997) and work undertaken to incorporate Unicode 
in MARC formats (MARC-Charset-0.2 version 0.01, 2002), still much work has 
to be done to make the new standard easily handled by software tools and 
widely applicable (Ksar, 1993; Aliprand, 1994). Treatment of accent marks, 
font differences, script directionality, keyboard design and sorting tools are 
still matters to be solved by implementers (Cain, 1994). Furthermore data 
transformation is frequently required in an acceptable form in information 
systems. The most common format currently being used to be appropriately 
used by hardware and software tools is UTF-8 that allows Unicode characters 
to be converted into an ASCII-compatible style. The huge amount of data 
stored with different character sets to be converted is also a major problem.
Much consideration has been given by IFLA to automated systems for access 
to  multilingual  and  multiscript  materials  (Bossmayer  and  Massil,  1987; 
McCallum, 1994) by encouraging  studies and exchange of experiences in 
design  and  implementation  of  multilingual  OPACs  and  non  Roman  and 
multiscript bibliographic databases, as well as of multilingual retrieval.
It is worth mentioning that one strong recommendation following the 2nd 
IFLA satellite meeting concerned encouragement of changes to cataloguing 
rules to include all languages and scripts (Townley, 1994).
The two satellite pre-conference seminars held in 1986 and 1993 reflect a 
shift in priorities, where much attention is paid in the second pre-conference 
on  access  in  automated  multithesaurus  and  multilingual  environment 
6
(Chachra, 1994; Dowlin, 1994) as compared to the first, mainly focused on 
character  representation  and  exchange  with  special  consideration  of 
ideographic scripts (Huck Tee, 1987; Haeger, 1987).
In  addressing  issues  of  cross-language  retrieval  in  a  digital  library 
environment,  Peters  and  Picchi  (1997)  recognize  the  importance  of 
multilingual  recognition  and  representation,  and  believe  that  a  major 
requirement of multilingual applications is the support of character sets and 
standard  encoding  to  represent  the  information  to  be  manipulated.  They 
specify how HTTP protocol for the transfer of Web documents and resources 
provide parameters for language identification and how multilinguality is also 
taken into account in HTML documents where a tag for the LANG attribute 
specifies the language of each HTML element. But the richness of characters 
can be  displayed only  if  local  applications  are equipped with  appropriate 
fonts and if base facilities in place for multilingual applications running on 
WWW  are  used,  such  as,  for  example,  mark  up  of  bi-directional  text, 
superscripts and subscripts.
2.2 The linguistic aspects
As  cross  language  information  retrieval  addresses  the  growing  need  to 
access  large  volumes  of  data  across  language  boundaries,  there  is 
consensus on identifying multilingual functionality not only as a multilingual 
interface dialogue, but as the ability for users to search in their preferred 
language  and  retrieve  documents  written  or  indexed  in  other  languages 
(Altuna, 1994; Dowlin, 1994).
The complexity of languages as such and of languages coming into contact 
with one another, that is translating issues, is widely tackled in the literature 
about multilingual access.
Gaining correspondence between languages is a major problem both when 
controlled and uncontrolled vocabularies are used. Vocabulary mapping, that 
is  establishing  equivalencies  between  terms,  is  a  complex  task  due  to 
difficulties arising from use of different linguistic expressions for the same 
concept, different degree of specificity and presence of polysemeous terms.
Koch,  Neuroth and Day (2001),  on the basis  of  their  experience with the 
RENARDUS  project,  stress  the  importance  of  these  factors  on  browsing 
structure and display, and see trade-off between consistency, accuracy and 
usability of systems in implementing multilingual access systems.
While Nardi-Ford (1998) believes that researchers and implementers dealing 
with cross-language retrieval  somehow underestimate the problem hoping 
for  a  technical  solution,  a  wealth  of  authors  focus  on  such  complexity, 
highlighting  the  functional  requirements  of  cross-language  retrieval,  the 
various approaches and related issues in achieving language and concept 
interoperability.
The fundamental approaches to cross-language retrieval are those based on 
controlled vocabulary and on free (or full-text) retrieval. However synergies 
between the two methods are now being experimented (Penas, Verdejo and 
Gonzalo, 2002).
7
2.2.1 Controlled vocabularies
Methods based on  indexation and query through a controlled vocabulary are 
the most traditional and practical approach. Here documents to be retrieved 
are  manually  (or  semi-automatically)  indexed  on  the  basis  of  a 
predetermined  vocabulary  and  users’  queries  are  expressed  using  terms 
from this  vocabulary.  The list  of  authorised words and semantic  relations 
between them make up a thesaurus.
In cross-language retrieval usually a multilingual thesaurus is used. Formal 
guidelines for designers of multilingual thesauri are those provided by the 
International Organisation for Standardisation (1985), where problems and 
procedures  in  their  building  are  addressed  and  different  degrees  of 
interlanguage equivalence among concepts and terms are described, with 
possible  solutions  and  recommendations.  Especially  single-to  multiple 
equivalencies  and  non-equivalence  are  hard  to  manage.  The  solutions 
offered by the Guidelines such as the use of many descriptors in the target 
language, the creation of a neologism or the establishment of one or more 
non descriptors in the source language with a link to the preferred terms, are 
commented by Hudon (1997).
The multilingual thesaurus function is to relate the selected terms from each 
language  to  a  common  set  of  concept  identifiers,  which  are  language-
independent. One example is given by EUROVOC multilingual thesaurus. To 
implement multilingual querying using this approach, it is necessary to give 
the corresponding translation of each thesaural term for each new language 
recognised (Fluhr, 1996; Oard [2], 1997).
Limitations of this method are the labour intensive work needed for indexing, 
developing and managing a multilingual thesaurus, especially in applications 
with a wide number of diverse documents. This difficulty is mostly due to the 
fact that translation has inherent problems as the concepts of one language 
do not necessarily correspond exactly to the concepts of another language.
In order to establish interoperability between selected knowledge systems, 
Zeng  and  Chan  (2002)  envisage  several  approaches  and  make 
recommendations for creating multilingual thesauri, consisting in translating 
(a  monolingual  existing  thesaurus  in  one  or  more  languages),  merging 
(several existing monolingual thesauri), creating from scratch.
Hudon (1997)  points  out  that  a   true  multilingual  approach in  thesaurus 
building should be adopted, hopefully created from scratch, in order not to 
favour the source language, and make the concept description be equally 
detailed  to  label  the  chosen  concepts  in  all  languages.  The  multilingual 
thesaurus  is  more  than  just  the  putting  together  of  several  monolingual 
thesauri; it  adopts the principle of language equality, offering full conceptual 
and  terminological  inventories  for  each  language  represented,  and 
presenting all semantic relationships in each one of the languages  of the 
thesaurus.
Jorna and Davies (2001) argue that many so-called multilingual thesauri for 
subject access on the Internet and in library OPACs are in fact monolingual 
thesauri  in  conjunction  with  bilingual  or  multilingual  dictionaries.  They 
8
recommend  that  thesauri  be  semantically  structured  rather  than 
alphabetically, assist user comprehension by offering definitions and scope 
notes of concepts.
The issues of multilingual subject retrieval based on controlled vocabulary in 
a library environment are examined by Clavel-Merrin (1995) who uses for 
this methodology the expression ‘just in case’.  Here it is necessary to create 
and maintain a thesaurus or list of subject headings with links between the 
different language forms for a concept. Advantages are the transparency of 
translations  of  descriptors,  control  and  navigation  of  related  terms,  but 
problems are  the  high  cost  of  preparing  such  thesauri  (hopefully   to  be 
developed in co-operation with other institutions) and the need for adequate 
support in library formats and application systems.
Chachra  (1994)  follows  another  approach  and  addresses  system  design 
issues in multilingual subject  access,  where three types of  languages are 
involved: that of documents, that of the cataloguer (that is of the subject 
terms in the bibliographic record), that used by the searcher. In a multilingual 
environment systems should automatically provide a cross-reference with all 
translated  versions  of  the  subject  heading  in  all  the  languages  in  use. 
Furthermore different options for storing the data are possible such as, for 
example,  subject  headings  in  bibliographic  records  in  all  languages  and 
multiple multilingual authority files, with the authority records being in two 
different files: the authority file in a single primary language and a second 
multilingual authority file to support access to multilingual materials.
2.2.2 Free-text searching
An alternative approach to controlled vocabulary is free-text searching. Free 
or full-text cross-language retrieval has emerged  as a possibility to avoid 
some  of  the  difficulties  due  to  controlled  vocabulary  approach  and  its 
adoption is strictly connected to electronic resources availability on the Web. 
Here two methods have emerged: dictionary-based and corpus-based (Oard 
[2], 1997; Peters and Picchi, 1997; Lee, Kageura and Choi, 2004).
2.2.2.1. Dictionary-based methods
The method based on a dictionary technique tries to apply the idea of  a 
multilingual thesaurus by using bilingual dictionaries to perform translations. 
As a matching has to be done between documents and queries, either the 
query is translated into every language in which a document might be found 
(a suitable method when storage is limited and several languages are to be 
managed), or the document itself, at indexing time. Difficulties are due to 
occurrence of no equivalence in translation and to ambiguity which can arise 
from translating terms between languages when no context is provided. The 
very frequent formulation of only short queries by users (often untrained) are 
additional  problems  associated  with  this  method,  which  hinders 
contextualisation of the terms used in queries (Ballesteros and Croft, 1996; 
Peters and Picchi, 1997; Lee, Kageura and Choi, 2004).
9
Lots of research studies and experiments have addressed these issues by 
developing interfaces where users interact to disambiguate queries (Davis 
and Ogden, 1997) and by enriching the query automatically before and after 
translation (Ballesteros and Croft, 1997).
In  addressing  multilingual  access  to  keywords  as  opposed  to  controlled 
vocabulary, Clavel-Merrin  (1995) refers to this method as a ‘just in time’ 
approach. With such approach search terms input by the user are analysed, 
and  translations  are  provided  which  extend  the  search.  The  author 
emphasises  that all fields in the bibliographic record, and even the whole 
digital text is searchable through this method, but crucial questions are the 
choice,  maintenance  and  storage  of  multiple  dictionaries,  sophisticated 
parsers  to  analyse  the  search  terms  input,  presence  of  synonyms, 
identification of semantic context.
2.2.2.2. Corpus-based methods
In order to overcome limitations of  dictionary-based techniques and have 
enough  context  for  accurate  translations  of  most  types  of  phrases, 
techniques  have  been  devised  following  a  corpus-based  approach.  This 
means  analysing  existing  collections  of  texts  from  which  to  extract 
information needed to construct application specific-translation techniques. 
These  collections  may  be  formed  by  texts  that  were  translated  (parallel 
collection),  or  by  documents  on  similar  subjects  (comparable  collection) 
written  in  different  languages (Oard [2],  1997).  Here  query  translation  is 
made according to the way a language is used in a specific application and a 
corpus-based cross-language thesaurus is generated.
As  explained by Peters  and Picchi  (1997),  source texts work  as   training 
corpora to  obtain information  about  the relationship between terms from 
observed  statistics  of  term  usage.  Limitations  of  this  approach  are  the 
difficulty, especially in non  specialised application domains, to find parallel 
corpora, and the high cost of translations creation.
A  technique,  described  by  Landauer  and  Littman  (1990),  uses  existing 
translations of  a part  of  the database to be searched. It  is  based on the 
concept  of  ‘Cross-Language  Latent  Semantic  Indexing’  (CL-LSI)  which 
consists  in  approximating  the  total  words-documents  matrix  by  three 
smaller, thus more easily manageable matrices. Although this transformation 
causes a loss of information, it allows comparisons not just on single words 
but on sets of words with their implicit relations in the texts (dependency 
relations  or  simple  co-occurrences).  This  method  tries  to  approximate 
concepts  rather  than  words  when  searches  are  processed  (Fuhlr,  1996). 
Berry and Young (1995) used this technique using passages from the Bible in 
English  and  Greek.  Oard  ([3],  1997)  expresses  doubts,  based  on  his 
experience,  arguing  that  performance  is  reduced  when  using  a  parallel 
document collection that is more weakly related to the retrieval application.
Comparable  corpora  are  now  studied  as  a  possible  solution:  here  no 
translations are used, but alignment of documents dealing with similar topics 
in different languages. Comparable documents are in fact easier to find than 
10
translations of parallel documents. Here limitations are due to the fact that 
existing automatic and semiautomatic document alignment techniques are 
application-specific, and the generalised development of these techniques is 
under question.
2.2.3 Translation issues
Research  onto  interlinguistic  equivalence  is  strictly  the  competence  of 
language  disciplines,  but  CLIR  has  close  links  with  such  disciplines,  with 
techniques drawn from natural language processing and artificial intelligence 
and of  course involves translation issues (Mayfield  and McNamee,  2002). 
Both in case of query and document translation, problems are mainly those 
of  translating words,  phrases,  predicate and argument structure,  properly 
exploiting  monolingual  resources  for  Out  of  Vocabulary  (OOV)  terms  and 
comparable collections, translating lexical resources.
As  regards document translation,  this  method is  subject  to availability  of 
existing translations and high quality machine translation systems (Oard and 
Hackett, 1997). A more practical approach, given the availability of bilingual 
and  multilingual  dictionaries,  is  using  query  translation  methods  (Davis, 
1997). These are based on bilingual dictionaries, multilingual ontology and 
thesaurus. The method of dictionary-based query translation is widely used 
by implementers who nevertheless have to solve the problem of increased 
ambiguity of query terms. Several techniques have been suggested, such as 
the selection of the translation term pair with the highest value (Ballesteros 
and Croft, 1997).
A system is described by Lee, Kageura and Choi  (2004), which incorporates 
what is called “implicit ambiguity resolution method based on query-oriented 
document clusters”. Here query terms are automatically translated through 
bilingual  dictionaries  and,  as  the  translated  query  can  contain  noises, 
retrieved  documents  in  a  collection  are  organised  in  clusters.  These  are 
incrementally  and  dynamically  created;  a  calculation  is  made  of  the 
similarity between each cluster and the query and the relevant context of 
the query established to present and rank the relevant documents.
Machine  translation  techniques  have  been  widely  experimented  in 
multilingual access, under the pressure of the growth of electronic content 
available  in  many  different  languages  (Oard,  Ruiz,  Klavans,  Peters, 
Frederking and Sheridan, 1999; Lehtola, 1999). The two main methods used 
are: interlingual (translation between all pairs of a set of languages achieved 
through translation to and from the interlingua for each member of the set) 
and transfer (reference  to a collection of existing translations, where a major 
part of the translation system for a given pair of languages is specific to that 
pair). In recent years, in Japan much work on machine translation has been 
done and Japanese seem to favour the transfer approach (Kay, 1996).
Interlingual approach is claimed to be adequate for economic reasons when 
many  languages  are  to  be  translated  (Dave,  Parikh  and  Bhattacharyya, 
2001),  but  experiments  have  also  shown  that  an  integration  of  the  two 
techniques  give  good  results,  as  in  the  KANT project  at  Carnegie  Mellon 
University (Nyberg, Kamprath and Mitamura, 1998).
11
Possible compromises are also those between human help in  pre-editing, 
post-editing,  or  answering  questions  to  disambiguate  the  source  text,  or 
Machine-Aided Human Translation, MAHT, where translation is performed by 
a human, and the computer offers supporting tools (Kay, 1996).
Despite the wealth of research and experiments, most researchers do not 
believe in the idea of machine translation as a fully automatic  process. In 
this regard Oard ([3], 1997) argues that accuracy and speed of full automatic 
machine translation are not adequate to support cross-language information 
seeking, but research must obviously continue.
3. RESEARCH, PROJECTS AND EXPERIMENTS: A BRIEF OVERVIEW
Early  research  in  the  1970s  mainly  regard  developments  in  thesauri 
construction and performance in two or three languages such as English-
French and German, research by experts such as Salton (1973) who worked 
at ranked retrieval with English-German dictionary and made early free-text 
experiments. In these years the National Library of Canada starts offering 
multilingual access to its users by implementing French and English authority 
files (Buchinski, Newmann and Dunn, 1976). In the 1980s commercial cross-
language IR systems start to be produced, like STAIRS by IBM.
An  important  event  is  the  mentioned  ISO  guidelines  for  developing 
multilingual thesauri. In the meanwhile the EUROVOC thesaurus is created, 
and  since  the  middle  of  the  1980s  multilingual  subject  access  and 
multilingual features of OPACs have been on the library agenda.
From 1990s multilinguality  concentrates on the provision  of  bilingual  and 
multilingual  lists  of  controlled  terms:  controlled  authority  files,  subject 
headings and thesauri and a strong commitment  is shown by the library and 
information specialist communities in developing relevant projects and co-
operative initiatives (Slater, 1991; Butcher, 1993).
For  its  intrinsic  language  dependency  searching  methods,  subject 
multilingual access has exploded as a key functionality. Cousins and Hartley 
(1994) recognise that classification schemes might initially seem optimal for 
multilingual  access,  as  language  independent  tools,  but  users  are  not 
generally familiar with classmarks and what is generally required is access to 
alphabetic indexes.
Some  projects  and  applications  are  mentioned  here,  as  examples  of 
implementations  of   multilingual  access  mainly  in  a  library  environment. 
Initiatives range from using authority files, to Web based linking approach to 
two or more thesauri, and to subject heading languages linking.
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) for their wide popularity are 
used  in  a  number  of  systems and  equivalencies  are  established  through 
translation  of  these  headings  or  with  other  subject  headings  languages. 
Slater  (1991)  reports  how  MultiLIS,  a  system  being  used  at  Laurentian 
University  in  Ontario,  provides  the  ability  to  link  authority  records,  and 
equivalence  links  are  created  between  the  English  LCSH and  the  French 
language subject headings (Repertoire de vedettes matière RAMEAU). This 
permits  a  subject  search  in  one  language  to  retrieve  records  indexed  in 
either language.
12
The  International  Labour  Organisation-ILO  in  Geneva  uses  a  specific 
thesaurus,  originated  in  English,  and  its  actual  processing  model  has 
changed from translating subject terms at the time the catalogue record is 
accessed for searching, to offline pre-processing the subject headings before 
the catalogue record is available so that a single concept is represented by 
different subject authority records in different thesaurus languages (English, 
French  and  Spanish  to  now)   This  functionality,  developed   within   the 
Voyager  system,  facilitates  re-use  of  records  for  exchange  purposes  and 
optimises multilingual access (Davies, 2003).
MACS, Multilingual Access to Subjects (Landry, 2001; Clavel-Merrin, 2000) is 
a co-operation project of four national libraries (Swiss National Library, Die 
Deutsche  Bibliothek,   Bibliothèque  Nationale  de  France,  and  the  British 
Library). These institutions are involved in the creation or maintenance of 
these  subject  heading  systems:  SWD/RSWK  (for  German),  RAMEAU  (for 
French), and LCSH (for English). It is through a linking process between the 
different  subject  headings  languages,  operated  by  the  institutions’ 
specialised  staff,  that  MACS  extends  the  use  of  subject  headings  on  an 
international networked multilingual level. Clavel Merrin (2003) argues that 
the creation of a new multilingual vocabulary, based on translation, would 
have been unrealistic and uneconomical.
It is significant that such national institutions have eventually come up with a 
practical  solution  to  multilingual  subject  access  in  respect  of  users’ 
international needs by adopting principles of co-operative link creation and 
management.
Strong  efforts  have  been  made  by  the  European  Union  in  supporting 
developments in  multilingual access in the framework of wide programmes 
like ESPRIT and the European Commission Telematics Application Program of 
DGXIII:  Language  Engineering  and  Library  sectors.  The  projects  follow 
various techniques as shown below.
The  TRANSLIB  system,  to  be  incorporated  in  library  OPACs   (Michos, 
Stamatos and Fakotakis, 1999), operates an integration of new and existing 
multilingual  information tools,  applications of  natural  language processing 
and  dictionary-based  term  translation  techniques.  English,  Greek  and 
Spanish  languages  are  supported  and  use  is  made of  utilities  such  as  a 
multilingual terminology lexicon allowing searching in several languages and 
a  multilingual  thesaurus,   EUROVOC,  based  on  ISO5964:1985,  enabling 
retrieval and navigation between terms. An additional functionality is offered 
in which a simplified translation tool, where English acts as interlingua, is 
used to translate titles in order to give users an idea of the content of a 
retrieved document.  For this  purpose Artificial  Intelligence-based methods 
are used, consisting in morphological analysers for recognition and synthesis 
of words in the different language.
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  choice  of  translating  retrieved  titles  is 
questionable,  or  at  least  its  adoption  should  be  considered  in  specific 
scientific domains, collections and user environments.
EMIR,  European  Multilingual  Information  Retrieval  is  a  project  aimed  at 
building domain-independent tools to perform large-scale free-text retrieval 
in French, English and German by using and extending the French SPIRIT 
system (Fluhr, Mordini, Moulin and Stegentritt, 1994).  Terms expressed in 
13
the  query  are  matched  with  terms  used  in  documents  by  means  of  an 
automatic  linguistic  (morphological  and  syntactic)  analysis  of  both  the 
queries  and  the  documents,  while  the  matching  procedure  relies  on  the 
lexical semantic knowledge integrated into the so called reformulation tool. 
This tool serves to infer, from the original natural language query words, all 
possible expressions of the same concept that can occur in the document 
whatever the language. Differently from machine translation approach where 
generally only  one translation of  each query word is  used,  EMIR uses all 
possible translations in its database search (EMIR: final report…, 1994).
The CRISTAL project (Conceptual retrieval of information …, 2001) has been 
designed  to  create  a  concept-based  information  retrieval  system,  with  a 
prototype providing access to textual information of newspapers articles by 
matching the query and the text concepts, rather than by matching words to 
words.  Queries  are  processed  for  Italian,  French  and  English;  linguistic 
methods  and  information  retrieval  techniques  have  been  integrated  and 
software  tools  developed  to  manage,  consult  and  update  a  multilingual 
conceptual dictionary.
CANAL  (Catalogue  with  Multilingual……)  develops  a  multilingual  natural 
language access system to library catalogues enabling users to enter queries 
in  different  European  languages.  A  linguistic  server,  allowing   for 
accommodation  of  additional  languages  beyond French,  Spanish,  German 
and  English  is  the  core  of  the  system,  communicating  with  library 
automation  systems.  The  server  is  open  in  so  far  as  it  allows  natural 
language input, recognition of normalised forms, recognition of compound 
words and multi words, translation of key words into other languages.
One  important  initiative  in  the  medical  area  is  the  widely  used 
metathesaurus  UMLS,  Unified  Medical  Language  System,  created  in 
collaboration  with  the  National  Library  of  Medicine  aiming  at  integrating 
medicine vocabulary of different medical applications in different languages 
(Jolibois, 2000).
Many  international  cooperative  initiatives  between  scientific  communities 
working on language processing and information retrieval are in place, and 
CLIR is  a common subject  within  these disciplines,  on which a wealth of 
research  and  experimentation  is  produced.  Examples  are  those  of   Text 
REtrieval  Conferences  (TREC),  Cross  language  Evaluation  Forum  (CLEF), 
Special  Interest  Group on Information Retrieval  (SIGIR),  and now also the 
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI), whose 2004 Conference is dedicated 
to  multilingual  metadata  (International  Conference  on  Dublin  Core  and 
metadata applications, 2004).
At the  SIGIR 1966 Conference CLIR issues were explored and since 1997 an 
annual  system evaluation exercise is in place where participating groups 
perform bilingual  and  multilingual  tasks,  querying  collections  in  different 
languages  and  analysing  indexing  techniques,  transfer  and  retrieval 
strategies,  ranking  results  over  languages  (Sheridan  and  Ballerini,  1996; 
Peters and Braschler, 2001).
14
Experiments on assigned collections undertaken by different working groups 
within the TREC Conferences are reported by Oard ([3],  1997) and Savoy 
(2003);  here  dictionary-based  query  expansion  methodologies  and 
combination  of  dictionary-based  and  corpus-based  techniques  in  a  single 
retrieval system are used. Techniques based on term-level alignment have 
also  been  developed,  offering  the  potential  for  integration  of  dictionary-
based and corpus-based techniques.
Automatic multilingual thesaurus construction has been experimented using 
neural networks in  applications on Chinese technical reports, many of which 
containing a mixture of Chinese and English words (Lin and Chen, 1996).
Experimental cross-language capabilities are implemented in the Web (Chan, 
Lin  and  Zeng,  2000)   and  some  search  engines  offer  multilingual 
functionality although, according to Oard ([1], 1997), the technology is not 
yet  widely  deployed.  Translation  software  is  starting  to  appear  as  an 
accessory for Web browsers (such as English-to-Japanese), while on search 
engines  translation  of  Web  pages  is  offered.  The  Japanese  TITAN  (Total 
Information Traverse AgeNt) search engine is described by Susaki, Hayashi 
and Kikui (1996). Its modules allow identification of character coding systems 
and of languages of individual Web pages, and machine translation.
While from 2000 TREC Conferences concentrated on additional  languages 
groups such as Chinese (Chen, 2002) and Arabic, an evaluation activity for 
European languages is established with CLEF, aimed at testing not just text 
collections, but also multimedia (Peters, 2002). Within CLEF, identification of 
real user needs is also considered a key factor: beyond document ranking, 
what is to be achieved is ease of use, speed response time and presentation 
of results (Peters and Braschler, 2001).
A  multidisciplinary  working  group  has  been  set  up  in  1997,  and  work 
continues,  supported  by  the  U.S.  National  Science  Foundation  and  the 
European  Commission  (NSF-EC);  digital  library  is  the  core  topic,  and 
multilingual information access is explicitly addressed. Klavans and Schäuble 
(1998) focus on broad areas such as data exchange (character encoding, 
font  displays,  browsing,  as  problems still  hindering  exchange of  primary 
data and metadata) and language processing and available resources to be 
tackled in multilingual retrieval. Crucial issues addressed are identification of 
user needs, how different users interact with multilingual information, and 
how to build a general infrastructure to evaluate approaches to multilingual 
information access.
4. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Access  to  information  regardless  of  language barriers  is  a  key  factor  for 
effective global sharing of knowledge. This need has created a convergence 
of  interests  from  various  research  communities  around  cross  language 
retrieval,  which is becoming more and more popular between information 
specialists.
15
Multilingual access has no easy and obvious solutions and so far there are no 
truly  multilingual  systems.  Different  approaches are used and no optimal 
method exists as each presents limitations.
Current trends are the use of a combination of more than one method, such 
as dictionaries or thesauri, corpora and user interaction. One major problem 
is  connected  with  the  process  of  mapping  between  languages.  As 
multilingual  systems  rely  on  such  process,  this  definitely  involves 
transferring the views of a particular culture in a different culture, that is 
translation  issues,  i.  e.   fitting  a  foreign  conceptual  structure  in  another 
language,  with  the  risk  of  generating  unrecognisable  and  meaningless 
expressions, strongly impacting on cross language retrieval.
On the basis of the amount of research, applications and co-operative efforts 
between  scientific  communities,  experts  in  the  domain  of  multilingual 
information retrieval are now envisaging future research directions. There is 
consensus on the need to develop tools and textual data resources, although 
their  construction is  costly (Oard [1],  1997;  Klavans and Schauble,  1998; 
Clavel-Merrin, 2003). In order to compare methods in an objective manner, 
large multilingual test corpora and databases of lexical semantic relations as 
general as possible are needed in a variety of languages. The difficulty of 
obtaining useful machine-readable dictionaries is a reality and a key factor is 
to work at incorporating new languages for which limited language resources 
exist (Oard, Ruiz, Klavans, Peters, Frederking and Sheridan, 1999).
The  socio-political  domain  is  identified  as  most  relevant,  needing 
developments as its knowledge allows processing and retrieval of large social 
significance. Availability of large electronic collections of documents and of 
actual techniques of term extraction allow the development of such socio-
political  thesauri  in  multilingual  environment  (Loukachevitch  and  Dobrov, 
2002).
Studies are also required on user queries, that is the multilingual aspects of 
query interpretation and expansion.  This  is  in  line with the issue of  user 
needs investigation,  which has emerged as a key point in these last  few 
years (Gey, Kando and Peters, 2002), together with evaluation of systems 
providing multilingual information access. As such, this requires integration 
between groups from different language and cultural backgrounds.
As regards retrieval and presentation of results, a topic which is to be further 
analysed  and  experimented  is  document  clustering.  This  implies  that  for 
efficient  access,  multilingual  documents  should  be organised into  classes 
that allow users to examine only most relevant documents and be presented 
all  results  in  the  query  language  having  information  merged  even  when 
results are in several languages (this procedure is called summarisation).
Retrieval  from collections  in  formats  other  than  character-coded  text,  as 
document images or recorded speech, is required, and technical challenges 
are emerging in handling and accessing multilingual speech and document 
images. An integration is needed of standard text-based access and media 
types such as video and sound  (Klavans and Schäuble, 1998; Oard, Ruiz, 
Klavans, Peters, Frederking and Sheridan, 1999).
16
Internationally  linked  funding  programs  are  needed  to  bring  different 
communities  together,  not  only  communities  with  different  language and 
cultural  backgrounds,  but  also  communities  by  different  research  areas. 
Furthermore the activities on evaluation of major multilingual systems should 
be better co-ordinated by making distinguishing institutions like the National 
Institute for Informatics of Tokyo with its  NTCIR project on Asian language 
evaluation covering Chinese, Japanese and Korean (NTCIR Test Collection …., 
2003), the TREC cross-language track (Text REtrieval Conference, 2004) now 
focusing  on  Arabi,  and  CLEF  (Cross-language  Evaluation  Forum)  work 
together with the aim of making CLIR progressing world-wide.
17
REFERENCES
(Web addresses have been last accessed on  April 15,  2004)
 ALIPRAND,  Joan.  Nonroman  scripts  in  the  bibliographic  environment. 
Information technology and libraries, vol. 11, no. 2, 1992, pp. 105-119
 ALIPRAND,  Joan  M.  Unicode  and  ISO/IEC  10646:  an  overview.  In 
Automated systems for access to multilingual and multiscript materials: 
proceedings of the second IFLA satellite meeting, Madrid, August 18-19, 
1993. München : K. G. Saur, 1994, pp. 87-102. ISBN 3598217978
 ALIPRAND, Joan M. The Unicode standard: its scope, design principles, and 
prospects  for  international  cataloguing.  Library  resources  &  technical 
services, vol. 44, no. 3, 2000, pp. 160-167
 ALTUNA,  Bélen.  Consideration  and  requirements  in  designing  Spanish 
multilingual  library  catalogues.  In  Automated  systems  for  access  to 
multilingual  and  multiscript  materials:  proceedings  of  the  second IFLA 
satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  August  18-19,  1993. München  :  K.  G.  Saur, 
1994, pp. 29-44. ISBN 3598217978
 BALLESTEROS, Lisa and CROFT, Bruce. Dictionary method for cross-lingual 
information  retrieval.  In  Proceedings  of  the  7th International  DEXA 
Conference on database and expert  systems,   September 9-13,  1996; 
Zurich, Switzerland. New York : Springer, 1996, pp. 791-801.
 BALLESTEROS,  Lisa  and  CROFT,  Bruce.  Phrasal  translation  and  query 
expansion  technique  for  cross-language  information  retrieval.  In 
Proceedings of  the 20th Annual  international  ACM SIGIR Conference on 
research  and  development  in  information  retrieval,  Philadelphia,  July 
1997, pp. 84-91
 BERRY, Michael and YOUNG, Paul G. Using latent semantic indexing for 
multilanguage information retrieval.  Computers and the humanities, vol. 
29, no. 6: December 1995, pp. 413-429
 BIAN, Guo-Wei and CHEN, Hsin-His. Cross-language information access to 
multilingual collections on the Internet.  Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science, vol. 51, no. 3, 2000, pp. 281-296
 BORGMAN,  Christine  L.  Multi-media,  multi-cultural,  and  multi-lingual 
digital  libraries, or how do we exchange data in 400 languages?  D-Lib 
magazine, June 1997
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june97/06borgman.html
 BOSSMEYER,  Christine.  What’s  next:  issues  arising  from  the  satellite 
meeting. In Automated systems for access to multilingual and multiscript  
materials:  proceedings  of  the  second  IFLA  satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  
18
August  18-19,  1993.  München :  K.  G.  Saur,  1994,  pp.  167-173.   ISBN 
3598217978
 BOSSMAYER, Christine and MASSIL, Stephen W. (ed.). Automated systems 
for access to multilingual and multiscript library materials: problems and 
solutions. Papers from the pre-conference held at Nihon Daigaku Kaikan 
Tokyo,  Japan,  August  21-22,  1986.  München  :  K.  G.  Saur,  1987.  ISBN 
3598217684
 BUCHINSKI,  Edwin.  J.,  NEWMAN,  William L.  and DUNN,  Mary  Joan.  The 
automated  authority  subsystems  at  the  National  Library  of  Canada. 
Library automation, vol. 9, no. 4, 1976, pp. 279-298
 BUTCHER, Roger. Multi-lingual OPAC developments in the British Library. 
Program, vol. 27,  no. 2, 1993, pp. 165-171
 CAIN, Jack. Practical applications of Unicode. In  Automated systems for 
access  to  multilingual  and  multiscript  materials:  proceedings  of  the 
second IFLA satellite meeting, Madrid, August 18-19, 1993. München : K. 
G. Saur, 1994, pp. 103-114. ISBN 3598217978
 Catalogue with Multilingual Natural Language Access / Linguistic Server - 
CANAL
http://saarland.sz-sb.de:2222/canal/can1.htm
 CHACHRA,  Vinod.  Subject  access  in  an  automated  multithesaurus  and 
multilingual  environment.  In  Automated  systems  for  access  to 
multilingual  and  multiscript  materials:  proceedings  of  the  second IFLA 
satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  August  18-19,  1993.  München  :  K.  G.  Saur, 
1994, pp. 63-76. ISBN 3598217978
 CHAN, Lois Mai  and ZENG, Marcia Lei.  Ensuring interoperability among 
subject vocabularies and knowledge, 2002
http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla68/papers/008-122e.pdf
 CHAN, Lois Mai, LIN, Xin and ZENG, Marcia Lei. Structural and multilingual 
approaches to subject access on the Web. IFLA journal,  vol.  26, no. 3, 
2000, pp. 187-197
 CHEN,  Kuang-hua.  Evaluating  Chinese  text  retrieval  with  multilingual 
queries. Knowledge Organisation, vol. 29, no. 3/4, 2000, pp. 156-170
 CLAVEL-MERRIN,  Genevieve.  Multilingual  problems  in  networking:  9th 
worksop report. In ELAG 1995 : quality of electronic service. 20th  ELAG 
Library Systems Seminar, Trondheim, 1995
http://www.kbr.be/elag/20seminar/workshops/shop13.htm
 CLAVEL-MERRIN,  Genevieve.  Multilingual  problems  in  networking:  9th 
Workshop report. In ELAG 1995 : quality of electronic service. 20th  ELAG 
Library Systems Seminar, Trondheim, 1995
http://www.kbr.be/elag/20seminar/workshops/shop13.htm
19
 CLAVEL-MERRIN,  Genevieve.  The  need  for  cooperation  in  creating  and 
mantaining multilingual subject authority files.  International cataloguing 
and bibliographic control, vol. 29, no.3: July/September 2000, pp. 43-45
 CLAVEL-MERRIN,  Genevieve.  MACS  (Multilingual  access  to  subjects):  a 
virtual  authority  file  across  languages.  In  International  Conference  on 
Authority Control, Florence, 10-12 February 2003
http://www.unifi.it/universita/biblioteche/ac/relazioni/clavel-merrin_eng.pdf
 CLEF - Cross-Language Evaluation Forum
http://www4.eurospider.ch/CLEF/resources.html
 CLEWS,  John.  Language  automation  worldwide:  the  development  of 
character  set  standards.  British  Library  R&D  report  5962.  Harrogate: 
SESAME Computer Projects, 1988. ISBN 1870095014
 CLEWS,  John.  Scripts  and  the  computer  environment.  In:  Automated 
systems for access to multilingual and multiscript materials: proceedings 
of  the  second  IFLA  satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  August  18-19,  1993. 
München : K. G. Saur, 1994, pp. 79-85. ISBN 3598217978
 COUSINS, S. A. and HARTLEY, Richard J. Towards multilingual Online Public 
Access Catalogues. Libri, vol. 44,  no. 1: March 1994, pp. 47-62
 Conceptual  retrieval  of  information  using  semantic  dictionary  in  three 
languages – CRISTAL, 2001
http://www.hltcentral.org/projects/detail.php?acronym=CRISTAL
 Cross-Language  Information  Retrieval  Resources.  Multilingual  text 
retrieval website, University of Maryland
http://www.ee.umd.edu/medlab/mlir/
 DAVE,  Shachi,   PARIKH,  Jignashu  and  BHATTACHARYYA,  Pushpak. 
Interlingua  based  English-Hindi  translation  and  language  divergence. 
Machine translation, vol. 16, no. 4, 2001, pp.251-304
 DAVIES,  Ron.  Models  for  multilingual  subject  access  in  online  library 
catalogues:  the  ILO  experience.  In  ELAG  2003  :  cross  language 
applications and the Web. 27th Library Systems Seminar, Bern, 2-4 April  
2003
http://www.elag2003.ch/pres/pres_davies.pdf
 DAVIS, Mark W. and OGDEN, William C. QUILT: implementing a large scale 
cross-language text retrieval system.  In Proceedings of the 20th Annual 
international  ACM  SIGIR  Conference  on  research  and  development  in 
information retrieval, Philadelphia, July 1997, pp. 92-98
 DOWLIN, Kenneth E. Issues in offering multilingual and multiscript library 
services: the key to the global villane library In  Automated systems for 
access  to  multilingual  and  multiscript  materials:  proceedings  of  the 
20
second IFLA satellite meeting, Madrid, August 18-19, 1993.  München : K. 
G. Saur, 1994, pp. 23-26. ISBN 3598217978
 EMIR:  final  report  of  the  EMIR  project  number  5312.  Technical  report, 
European  Multilingual  Information  Retrieval  Consortium  For  the 
Commission of the European Union, Brussels, October 1994
http://www.ee.umd.edu/medlab/mlir/papers/emirfine.doc
 ERICKSON, Janet C. Options for presentation of multilingual text: use of 
the Unicode standard. Library High Tech, vol. 15, no. 3/4, 1997, pp. 172-
88
 FISK, Martin and BRICKELL, Anthony. Final technical report of the CHASE 
project, January 1997
http://www.kb.nl/gabriel/projects/pages/cobra/chase.html
 FLUHR,  Christian,  MORDINI,  Patrick,  MOULIN,  André  and  STEGENTRITT, 
Erwin.  EMIR Final report, ESPRIT project 5312, DG III, Commission of the 
European Union, October 1994
 FLUHR, Christian. Multilingual Information Retrieval. In Survey of the State 
of the Art in Human Language Technology, 1996
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/HLTsurvey/ch8node7.html
 FRAGKOU, Anna, BALIOU, Anthi and KELLY, Michelle. Multilingual aspects. 
In COINE, Cultural Objects in Networked Environments, 2002
http://www.uoc.edu/in3/coine/eng/deliverables/Multilingual_Aspects_Task3
_7.pdf
 GEY,  Frederic,  KANDO,  Noriko  and  PETERS,  Carol.  Cross  language 
information  retrieval:  a  research  roadmap.  Summary  of  a  Worksop  at 
SIGIR-2002: 22nd International conference On Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval, Tampere, Finland, August 15, 2002,
http://www.acm.org/sigir/forum/F2002/gey.pdf
 GREFENSTETTE,  Gregory  (ed.).  Cross-language  information  retrieval. 
Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998
 HAEGER, John W. The CJK enhancements to the RLIN system: a review of 
basic  issues.  In   Automated  systems  for  access  to  multilingual  and 
multiscript library materials: problems and solutions. Papers from the pre-
conference held  at  Nihon Daigaku Kaikan Tokyo,  Japan,  August  21-22, 
1986. München : K. G. Saur, 1987, pp. 156-162. ISBN 3598217684
 HUCK TEE,  Lim.  Computer  processing  of  Southeast  Asian  scripts,  with 
particular reference to Jawi and Thai. In Automated systems for access to 
multilingual  and  multiscript  library  materials:  problems  and  solutions.  
Papers  from  the  pre-conference  held  at  Nihon  Daigaku  Kaikan  Tokyo, 
Japan, August 21-22, 1986. München : K. G. Saur, 1987, pp. 106-123. ISBN 
3598217684
21
 HUDON,  Michèle.  Multilingual  thesaurus  construction:  integrating  the 
views of different cultures in one gateway to knowledge and concepts. 
Knowledge Organisation, vol. 24, no. 2, 1997, pp. 84-91
 JILOVSKY, Cathie.  Unicode: a tool for system interoperability and human 
communication, 2004
http://www.vala.org.au/vala2004/2004pdfs/45Jilov.PDF
 International  Conference  on  Dublin  Core  and  metadata  applications. 
Metadata across languages and cultures, 2004, Shanghai,  China, 11-14 
October 2004
http://dc2004.library.sh.cn/english/
 INTERNATIONAL  ORGANISATION  FOR  STANDARDIZATION  (ISO). 
Documentation.  Guidelines  for  the  establishment  and  development  of 
multilingual thesauri. ISO, February 1985. English version ISO  5964:1985
 JOLIBOIS, Samuel. Un example d’utilisation de l’UMLS, base multilingue de 
connaissances biomédicales. Documentaliste, vol. 37, no. 2, 2000, pp. 94-
103
 JORNA, Kerstin and DAVIES, Sylvie. Multilingual thesauri for the modern 
world: no ideal solution? Journal of documentation, vol. 57, no. 2: March 
2001, pp. 284-95
 KAY,  Martin.  Machine Translation: the disappointing past and present. In 
Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology, 1996
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/HLTsurvey/ch8node4.html#SECTION82
 JARVELIN, Kalervo, PIRKOLA, Ari  and PUOLAMAKI, Deniz. Applying query 
structuring  in  cross-language  retrieval.  Information  Processing  and 
Management, vol.  39, no. 3: May 2003, pp. 391-402
 KLAVANS, Judith and SCHÄUBLE, Peter.  Summary review of the Working 
Group  on  Multilingual  Information  Access.  In  Report  of  the  Joint  US 
National Science Foundation-European Union Working Groups on Future 
Developments for Digital Library Research, ERCIM Technical Report, No. 
98/W004, 1998
http://www.iei.pi.cnr.it/DELOS/NSF/Brussrep.htm
 KOCH,  Traugott,  NEUROTH,  Heike  and  DAY,  Michael.  Renardus:  cross-
browsing European subject gateways via a common classification system 
(DDC), 2001
http://www.lub.lu.se/~traugott/drafts/preifla-final.html
 KSAR, Michael Y. Unitying tongues. ISO Bulletin, June 1993, pp.2-8
 KUNZ, Martin. Subject retrieval in distributed resources: a short review of 
recent developments. International Cataloguing and Bibliographic Control, 
22
vol.  32,  no.  1:  Jan/Mar  2003,  pp.17-20
 LANDAUER,  Thomas K.  and LITTMAN, Michael  L.  Fully  automatic  cross-
language  document  retrieval  using  latent  semantic  indexing,  1990.  In 
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the New 
Oxford  English  Dictionary  and  Text  Research.  Waterloo  Ontario:  UW 
Centre for the New OED and Text Research, 1990, pp.31-38. Available also 
at:  http://www.cs.duke.edu/~mlittman/docs/x-lang.ps
 LANDRY, Patrice. Cross lingual applications : Workshop 4. In ELAG 2003 : 
cross language applications and the Web. 27th Library Systems Seminar, 
Bern, 2-4 April 2003.
http://www.elag2003.ch/ws/ws_4.pdf
 LANDRY, Patrice. The MACS project: Multilingual Access to Subjects (LCSH, 
RAMEAU, SWD).  International cataloguing and bibliographic control,  vol. 
30, no. 3: July/September 2001, pp. 46-48
 LARGE,  Andrei  and  MOUKDAD,  Haidar.  Multilingual  access  to  web 
resources: an overview. Program, vol. 34, no. 1, 2000, pp. 43-58
 LEE, Kyung-Soon, KAGEURA, Kyo and CHOI,  Key-Sun. Implicit  ambiguity 
resolution  using  incremental  clustering  in  cross-language  information 
retrieval.  Information processing and management,  vol. 40, no. 1, 2004, 
pp. 145-159
 LEHTOLA, Aarno. Multilingual information services as a goal, 1999
http://www.vtt.fi/tte/language/publications/HCII_UI4ALL99.pdf
 LIN, Chung-Hsin and CHEN, Hsinchun. An automatic indexing and neural 
network approach to concept retrieval  and classification of multilingual 
(Chinese-English) documents, 1996
http://ai.bpa.arizona.edu/papers/chinese93/chinese93.html
 LOUKACHEVITCH,  Natalia  V.  and  DOBROV,  Boris  V.  Cross-language 
information retrieval based on multilingual thesauri specially created for 
automatic text processing, 2002
http://ucdata.berkeley.edu/sigir-2002/sigir2002CLIR-06-loukachevitch.pdf
 MARC-Charset-0.2 version 0.01, 2002
http://www.cpan.org/modules/by-module/MARC/MARC-Charset-0.6.readme
 MAYFIELD,  James  and  MCNAMEE,  Paul.  Three  principles  to  guide  CLIR 
research, 2002
http://ucdata.berkeley.edu/sigir-2002/sigir2002CLIR-18-mayfield.pdf
 McALLISTER, Caryl.  The Online Public Access Catalogue in DOBIS-LIBIS. 
Program, vol. 21, no. 1, 1987, pp. 25-36
 McCALLUM, Sally. Tokio to Barcelona: progress in multiscript automation. 
In  Automated  systems  for  access  to  multilingual  and  multiscript 
23
materials:  proceedings  of  the  second  IFLA  satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  
August  18-19,  1993.  München  :  K.  G.  Saur,  1994,  pp.  13-22.  ISBN 
3598217978
 MCILWAINE, I. C. Subject retrieval in a networked environment: a report. 
International  cataloguing  and  bibliographic  control,  vol.  31,  no.  1: 
January/March 2002, pp. 18-19
 MICHOS,  Stephanos,  STAMATATOS,  Efstathios  and  FAKOTAKIS,  Nikos. 
Supporting multilinguality in library automation systems using A. I., 1999
http://slt.wcl.ee.upatras.gr/papers/michos3.pdf
 NARDI-FORD, Loredana. VALA Conference Sponsor report : report on 1998 
VALA Conference to COLUG on 29/7/1998 at  the CIAC Italian Resource 
Centre  in  Forrest 
http://archive.alia.org.au/sigs/online/reports/vala.report.html
 NTCIR Test Collection for IR Systems Project, 2003
http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/
 NYBERG,  Eric,  KAMPRATH,  Christine  and  MITAMURA,  Teruko.  The  KANT 
translation system: from R&D to large-scale deployment, 1998.
http://www.lti.cs.cmu.edu/Research/Kant/PDF/lisanews.pdf
 OARD, Douglas W.[1]. Serving users in many languages: cross-language 
information retrieval for digital libraries.  D-Lib Magazine, December 1997.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/december97/oard/12oard.html
 OARD,  Douglas  W.  [2]Alternative  Approaches  for  Cross-Language  Text 
Retrieval, 1997.
http://www.ee.umd.edu/medlab/filter/sss/papers/oard/paper.html
 OARD, Douglas W. [3]Cross-language text retrieval research in the USA, 
1997. In   Third DELOS Workshop: Cross-Language Information Retrieval,   
Zurich, 5-7 March 1997. 
http://www.ercim.org/publication/ws-proceedings/DELOS3/Oard.pdf
 OARD, Douglas W. and HACKETT, Paul. Document translation for the cross-
language text retrieval at the University of Maryland. In  The Sixth Text 
REtrieval  Conference  (TREC-6).  National  Institutes  of  Standards  and 
Technology, November.
http://trec.nist.gov/pubs/trec6/papers/umd.ps.gz
 OARD,  Douglas  W.,  PETERS,  Carol,  RUIZ,  Miguel,  FREDERKING,  Robert, 
KLAVANS, Judith and SHERIDAN, Páraic. Multilingual information discovery 
and  access  (MIDAS).  
D-Lib Magazine, vol. 5, no. 10: October 1999
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october99/10oard.html
 OARD,  Douglas  W.,  PETERS,  Carol,  RUIZ,  Miguel,  FREDERKING,  Robert, 
KLAVANS, Judith and SHERIDAN, Páraic. Multilingual information discovery 
24
and  access  (MIDAS).  
D-Lib Magazine, vol. 5, no. 10: October 1999
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october99/10oard.html
 PENAS,  Anselmo,  VERDEJO,  Felisa  and  GONZALO,  Julio.  Terminology 
retrieval: towards a synergy between thesaurus and free-text searching, 
2002
http://terral.lsi.uned.es/%7Eanselmo/articulos/iberamia2002.pdf
 PETERS, Carol. The contribution of evaluation: the CLEF experience, 2002
http://ucdata.berkeley.edu/sigir-2002/sigir2002CLIR-16-peters.pdf
 PETERS,  Carol  and  BRASCHLER,  Martin.  Cross-language  system 
evaluation:  the  CLEF  campaign.  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for 
Information Science and Technology, vol. 52, no. 12, 2001, pp. 1067-1072.
 PETERS, Carol and SHERIDAN, Páraic. Multilingual access for information 
systems. In Libraries and librarians: making a difference in the knowledge 
age.  Council  and  General  Conference;  Conference  programme  and 
proceedings, 67th, Boston, MA, August 16-25, 2001
 PETERS,  Carol  and PICCHI,  Eugenio.  Across  languages,  across  cultures: 
issues in multilinguality and digital libraries. D-Lib magazine, May 1997. 
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may97/peters/05peters.html
 PETERS, Carol and PICCHI, Eugenio. Cross-language information retrieval: 
a system for comparable corpus querying. In Workshop on cross-linguistic 
information retrieval, SIGIR’96, Zurich, Switzerland, 1996, pp. 24-33
 PIRKOLA,  Ari.  CLIR  research  at  the  University  of  Tampere.  Information 
research, vol. 7, no.2, 2002. Available also at:
http://informationr.net/ir/7-2/CLIR.html
 SALTON,  Gerard.  Experiments  in  Multi-Lingual  Information  Retrieval. 
Information processing letters, vol. 2, no. 1: March 1973, pp. 6-11
 SAVOY, Jacques. Cross-language information retrieval: experiments based 
on CLEF 2000 corpora. Information processing and management, vol. 39, 
no. 1, 2003, pp. 75-115
 SHELDON, Kenneth M. ASCII goes global.  Byte, vol. 6, no. 7, 1991, pp. 
110-111
 SHERIDAN, Páraic and BALLERINI, Jean Paul. Experiments in multilingual 
information retrieval using the SPIDER system. In Proceedings of the 19th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develoment 
on Information Retrieval, August 1996.
 SIGIR: Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval
http://www.acm.org/sigir/
25
 SLATER, Ron. Authority control in a bilingual OPAC: MultiLIS at Laurentian. 
Library resources and technical services, vol. 35, no. 4, 1991, pp. 422-458
 SUSAKI,  Seiji,  HAYASHI,  Yoshihiko  and  KIKUI,  Gen-itiro.   Navigation 
Interface in Cross-Lingual WWW Search Engine, TITAN, 1996
http://www.csu.edu.au/special/auugwww96/proceedings/susaki/susaki.htm
l
 TOWNLEY,  Charles.  Recommended  actions  resulting  from  the  2nd IFLA 
satellite meeting on automated systems for access to multilingual and 
multiscript  libray  material.  In  Automated  systems  for  access  to 
multilingual  and  multiscript  materials:  proceedings  of  the  second IFLA 
satellite  meeting,  Madrid,  August  18-19,  1993.  München  :  K.  G.  Saur, 
1994, pp. 175-176.  ISBN 3598217978
 TREC: Text REtrieval Conference, 2004
http://trec.nist.gov/
 THE UNICODE CONSORTIUM. The Unicode Standard, Version 4.0. Reading, 
MA, Addison-Wesley, 2003. ISBN 0-321-18578-1
 The Unicode Standard: a technical introduction, 2003
http://www.unicode.org/unicode/standard/principles.html
 VTLS’s  VIRTUA  completes  implementation  of  Unicode  standard. 
Information Today, vol. 16, no. 3: March, 1999
http://www.infotoday.com/it/mar99/news19.htm
 ZHANG,  FOSTER.  J.  and  ZENG,  Marcia  Lei.  Multiscript  information 
processing on crossroads:  demands for  shifting  from diverse  character 
code sets to the Unicode standard in library applications. IFLA Journal, vol. 
25, no. 3, pp. 162-167.
26
CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF THE STRATEGIES USED IN THE LITERATURE REVIEW
SEARCH STRATEGIES
The  subject  of  multilingual  information  retrieval  was  rather  new  for  me 
before I started working at this literature review. The reason for choosing this 
topic lies in a newly planned project at the Institute of Theory and Techniques 
of legal information - Istituto di Teoria e Tecniche dell’Informazione Giuridica 
(ITTIG) where I  work,  concerning the mapping to English  of  terms of  the 
Italian legal classification notations used to index legal periodical  articles. 
This  project  intends  to  make  the  Dogi  –  Dottrina  Giuridica  database 
(produced  and  distributed  by  ITTIG)  also  accessible  in  English  and  I  am 
personally involved in such an effort. From the moment I started working at 
this project I came across with problems concerning translation not merely of 
words, but of concepts (which in the field of law is a really complex problem) 
and with additional issues strictly related to multilingual access. This is the 
main reason for choosing multilingual access as the subject of my literature 
review,  a  topic  I  appreciated  more  and  more  as  my  reading  and 
understanding were progressing.
Before searching for relevant materials on the subject, I felt it necessary to 
go  through  the  work  suggested  for  this  assignment1 containing  general 
recommendations for writing a literature review. I also searched materials on 
the Web about writing a literature review, just for examining also some quick 
synthetic  recommendations:  a  number  of  universities  world-wide  have 
prepared such guidelines for  their  researchers,  which I  used as summary 
outlines.
What I found most useful in the suggested reading for the assignment BP100 
are the specific recommendations on how to examine and read documents at 
different  times  during  the  literature  review  activity,  on  identifying  and 
understanding authors’ different methodological approaches, on structuring 
the review, on references handling.
I must admit that I had never done a literature review on its own like the one 
assigned in this module, although I use to read specialised literature for my 
research activity on legal information. One previous partial experience I have 
acquainted is the  literature review included in the survey we had to conduct 
as assignment LI614 on Applied Research in Information Studies.
As specifically regards the subject of my literature review, that is multilingual 
access, the first step was to identify key terms to be used to find appropriate 
primary  sources.  I  decided  I  had  to  use  different  types  of  materials  as 
primary  sources:  monographs,  periodical  articles,  web  resources,  but  I 
choosed to start, as I usually do in my research work, looking at indexing 
bibliographic  databases  such  as  LISA,  ERIC,  Linguistics  and  Language 
Behavior  Abstracts  and also Library literature and information  science by 
1 Hart, Chris. Doing a literature review. London : Sage, 1998
27
Wilson.  Here  I  used  “multilingual  access”  as  key-word  (in  titles  and 
anywhere) as first choice using no filters.
From the very beginning I  could find not  only  pertinent  primary sources, 
mainly periodical articles, but also discover, through the retrieved materials 
and their abstracts, what additional terms where pertinent for extending my 
search. These were: “cross-language retrieval”, “cross-lingual”, “multilingual 
search”, “multilinguality”. I  searched again using these terms and I  found 
additional references.
At  this  time  I  selected,  for  a  first  look,  those  articles  both  in  print  and 
electronic  which  seemed  to  tackle  multilingual  access  in  a  general  but 
comprehensive  way.  So  I  stopped  for  a  while  my  searching  activity  and 
decided to postpone looking in other sources such as OPACs and directly the 
Web because I felt it necessary to get a general basic understanding of the 
topic.
Apart from free electronic resources, I could rather easily locate most of the 
documents, as I live in Florence where a special library exists with a rich 
collection  in  library  science:  Biblioteca  dei  servizi  bibliografici  of  Regione 
Toscana. It was only later that through this library I could get some more 
articles appearing in periodicals not held by this library.
Some articles were so clear and comprehensive (i. e. Oard’s and Peters’) that 
I read them thoroughly and I started to write down some short notes about 
the issues of multilingual access which appeared to be the crucial ones.  In 
the meanwhile, as I understood these documents were fundamental for my 
review, I began to write down their bibliographic references as I was sure I 
would have used these materials as main reference points again to better 
explore specific aspects. While my literature review was progressing, I did 
the same with other documents.
When I perceived that a I got a general idea of the subject, I wanted to verify 
if monographs as general works existed on the topic of my literature review: I 
felt it necessary to somehow verify and clarify what I had understood and 
thus be provided with a more general and broader approach as it is  likely to 
be found in monographs. I searched the Northumbria University OPAC, the 
catalogue of  the  Biblioteca  dei  servizi  bibliografici,  and  also  the  National 
Library of  Florence web-OPAC to look for  Italian monographs.  Only  a few 
books  were  found:  the  proceedings  of  the  IFLA  satellite  pre-conferences 
published in 1987 and 1994, the collected papers edited by Grefenstette and 
the  proceedings  of  TREC and  SIGIR   Conferences  (cited  in  the  literature 
review).
Unfortunately  searching  the  Italian  union  catalogue   SBN Online  did  not 
produce results.
I found most of these documents in the Biblioteca dei servizi bibliografici in 
Florence and through it I got the rest of books via ILL.
Although the monographs found were ot very recent (except the TREC and 
SIGIR  proceedings),  they   resulted  to  be  extremely  useful  for  the  clear 
illustration of the main issues and their focus on required functionality and 
research undertaken so far. Here the basic approaches to multilingual access 
were  presented,  which  were  confirmed  and  thoroughly  debated  in  later 
research as resulting from the literature.
28
I also navigated through quite a number of references I found in the material 
I  was  examining.  I  selected  those  references  and  then  collected  those 
documents tackling the main issues which were relevant to my subject.
I  also  choosed  documents  dealing  with  specific  sub-topics  I  came across 
during my reading and that I wanted to explore in depth.
It is at this time that I went back to LISA and searched directly its database 
by keywords using significant terms expressing these sub-topics, such as, for 
example,  multilingual  thesaurus/i,  character  sets  representation  and 
manipulation,  query  translation,  machine  translation,  corpus-based  and 
dictionary-based  approaches,  translation  disambiguation.  Almost  all 
documents found were pertinent to my review. At this time, when searching 
for  such  sub-topics,   I  did  not  make  any  combination  with  terms  like 
“multilingual access” or “cross-language retrieval” as LISA covers library and 
information science areas and these sub-topics resulted to be dealt with in 
the appropriate context for this research.
In order to verify if I missed possible additional relevant contributions, once I 
had identified the most authoritative authors as my reading was progressing, 
I used also Author as a search parameter, (i.e. for Oard, Peters, Hudon, Fluhr 
and others). This allowed me to find some additional material.
As regards information sources on the Web, first I accessed those electronic 
resources  which  were  referenced  in  the  documents  I  had  examined,  and 
processed them following the same criteria that I  used for paper documents.
I also searched the Web from scratch to verify if additional useful resources 
were available and I integrated information found so far.
For this purpose I used a general search engine such as Google not only by 
entering  the  ordinary  general  terms  mentioned  above  for  expressing 
multilingual  access,  but  also  searching  by  the  specific  sub-topics 
investigated,  using “multilingual access” and “cross-language retrieval” in 
combination with specific sub-topics. This I found necessary as the sub-topics 
were likely to be found also in documents in the broader areas of linguistics, 
language engineering, natural language processing, hardware and software 
components which were likely to be out of the scope of my research.
I  also  used  the  Web repeating the  search  by  Author  as  I  did  in  LISA to 
discover new outputs by  experts in the field.
In general the materials found in the Web appeared to be very useful; there 
were of course duplications with those I had already examined, but I could 
get  diverse additional  resources  such as some specialised Web sites  and 
even power point presentations and tutorials which I used as a confirmation 
of the most crucial issues I had identified.
Some  main  Web  resources  were  particularly  helpful  to  me,  the  one 
maintained  by  the  Digital  Library  Research  Group  of  the  College  of 
Information Studies at the University of Maryland, under the supervision of 
Douglas W. Oard.  This page, although listing links which were not all  still 
active, points to CLIR research groups, existing systems, papers presenting 
29
research results. I used this source to find material from which I extracted 
methods employed in multilingual  access applications and information on 
projects.
REVIEW OF THE SOURCES
As specifically regards the review of the sources found and the organisation 
of my work, I have mentioned already how I started skimming a number of 
periodical articles found in the first stage of my research, which addressed 
multilingual  access from a wide perspective,  but  with reference to actual 
research and challenges. I was lucky to come across, at this stage, with some 
clear and significant pieces of work which provided me with a general, but 
comprehensive understanding of the topic. As my reading was progressing, I 
could appreciate the richness and complexity of approaches adopted by the 
various authors in tackling the problems of multilingual access.
It  is  at  this  time  that  I  wrote  down some notes  on  key  points  of  cross-
language retrieval, just to use them as a basis on which to structure, expand 
and refine my future literature review.
The materials I had collected were quite a lot. At first I skimmed them to 
check  if  they  were  relevant  for  my  research.  Very  few  resulted  to  be 
somehow less important or not as well structured as others (and I decided to 
leave  them aside),  some others  were  even irrelevant  despite  their  titles. 
Those dealing with the same topics of previously selected ones I kept for 
consideration, in order to report on the addressed arguments, emphasising 
where opinions were shared or not by different authors.
As I was progressing in the retrieval and collection of material addressing 
both general and specific issues of multilingual access, I felt it necessary to 
organise  the  documents  in  groups,  such  as,  for  example,  general 
functionality and requirements, technical aspects, linguistic aspects, state of 
the  art  of  research,  projects,  challenges,  trends.  It  is  a  matter  of  fact 
however, that quite a lot of documents tackled at the same time different 
points  and  I  had  to  manage  to  take  information  from them for  different 
purposes. However it was very interesting and illuminating to discover how 
these different aspects were related to each other in the various authors’ 
view.
In  reviewing  the  material,  little  by  little  I  tried  to  identify  the  trends  in 
research  and  application  of  cross-language  retrieval  and  figure  out  how 
different authors focused on various approaches. These however most often 
were not in contrast, yet complementary, showing how multilingual access is 
a multifaceted topic, where different methodologies are used to implement 
related systems.
Once I  thought I  had acquainted a slightly clear idea, although not yet a 
thorough knowledge of the subject, I wrote down an outline of my review. I 
have revised these headings as long as I  was writing the review, but the 
main structure has been maintained.
30
WRITING THE REVIEW
Writing the review has been a rather smooth activity because at that time I 
thought  I  had  grasped   the  main  components  and  issues  of  multilingual 
access and the outline prepared allowed me to focus on the specific aspects I 
wanted to illustrate. The introduction came rather straightforward, as from 
the very beginning of my searching and reading activity I tried to clarify to 
myself the scope and focus of my review, that is multilingual information 
access in a library and information systems environment. This is reflected in 
the introduction, where various definitions of the topic are also provided.
While writing my review I  used to record the references in  the text  and, 
although at the beginning this disconcentrated me a while, I  immediately 
used to write down the bibliographic references in the appropriate section. 
Later  on,  when  I  felt  more  confident,  it  was  only  after  completing  a 
paragraph that I used to write the detailed references in the related section.
I came across some different problems during my writing. One question was 
to find out different views of researchers and experts on the various issues 
concerning multilingual access. This resulted to be not very feasible as so 
many  aspects  are  involved  in  cross-language  retrieval  that  differences 
mainly regard the diverse approaches taken by authors on the basis of their 
specific  competence  and  involvement  in  this  area,  rather  than  a  real 
divergence of views on a specific issue. In cases where I could find different 
opinions or a real debate on some specific questions, I tried to report them.
The level of specificity in describing the many aspects of multilingual access 
is another question I had to face. Multilingual access is such a complex topic 
that I thought I had to  try to focus on (and possibly clarify) the main issues 
rather than entering into many details. This was especially the case when 
very  technical  aspects  were  involved,  such  as,  for  example,  translation 
disambiguation, character sets encoding, etc. In such cases I decided not to 
go  in  depth  not  only  because  it  was  sometimes  very  difficult  to  fully 
understand all the peculiarities and this would have required to extend the 
time and length of my review, but also because after all it seemed to me not 
appropriate  to  expand too  much  in  such technicalities  and  I  would  have 
rather to stick to the essential features of cross-language retrieval.
The choice of  projects  to  report  on  also  caused  me some problems as  I 
wanted to provide a wider overview of applications and programmes, but 
here again owing to the limited length of the review I had to compromise and 
opt for a strict selection where different methods were used.
As  regards handling and recording references, although I imposed myself to 
carefully write them down as my writing was progressing, I admit that I had 
to spend quite a lot of time in revising them, checking for completeness and 
consistency, and verifying the validity of Web addresses.
Eventually I  want to say that I  enjoyed very much being involved in this 
exercise.  I  am not  sure  if  this  work  fully  match  the  requirements  of  the 
assignment although I have tried to do my best, but it  made me discover a 
31
very interesting subject.  I  am definitely  in  favour of  the ultimate goal  of 
multilingual access and I could appreciate the variety of issues involved, the 
amount of research undertaken so far and the fruitful links created between 
different disciplines where cross-language information retrieval stands at the 
heart. 
32
