13
Multilingual Legal Information 
 Access: an Overview
Ginevra Peruginelli
Multilingualism is a phenomenon which greatly affects the efficiency of information exchange 
among people in every sector of life. Cross-language retrieval systems are tools that contribute 
to such exchange, supporting research and world-wide communication, helping to search for 
data irrespective of the language in which information objects are expressed. In particular, in 
the domain of law a vast category of users need to exchange legal information world-wide and 
carry out activities in a context where a common understanding of law beyond language barri-
ers is highly desired. However, this requirement is hard to meet, due to the variety of languages 
and modes in which the legal discourse is expressed as well as to the diversity of legal orders and 
the legal concepts on which these systems are founded.
The phenomenon of multilingualism in the law1. 
Internationalisation and increasing globalisation of the market economy and social pat-
terns of life have created a situation where the need for legal information from foreign 
countries and from different legal systems is greater than ever before. There is no doubt 
that the exchange of information is largely dependent on language, to be intended not only 
as a system of symbols, but also as a means of communication (Wittgenstein 1997) and 
thus as a tool for mediating between different cultures (Kjaer 2004b). If we consider the 
language of the law, we notice that the properties of such a language have a major impact 
on the exchange of legal information. In fact, the language of the law is the expression of 
legal identities that vary according to systems and countries, where different languages 
are used to express legislation, case law and doctrine as main components of the various 
legal cultures (Sacco 2005, Fletcher 2005).
In the current multilingual and multicultural environment there is a significant need – 
in the academic area, in the legal profession, in business settings as well as in the context 
of public administration services to citizens – of common understanding and exchange of 
legal concepts of the various legal systems, while there is a strong pressure for the preser-
vation of their basic sense and value. Both requirements are quite difficult to meet, com-
plicated by the complexity of the legal language and by the variety of modalities used to 
express law within the various legal systems.
Ginevra Peruginelli
14
Unlike a number of technical and scientific disciplines, where a fair correspondence 
exists between concepts across languages, serious difficulties arise in interpreting law across 
countries and languages, due to the system-bound nature of legal terminology. In fact, 
each legal order is situated within a complex social and political framework originating 
from the history, traditions and habits of a particular community. Multilingualism in 
the legal domain is almost unanimously perceived as a very complex issue. It is a highly 
debated topic not only among professionals and scholars of comparative law, linguistics, 
translation theory and practice (de Groot 1998, Sacco 1996), but also among govern-
ment officials in institutional settings at national and international level, as demonstrated 
by the efforts made for the preservation and management of the plurality of languages 
in a number of countries as a guarantee of cultural diversity. This is the case of Belgium, 
Switzerland, Canada and the EU.
Europe in particular is a typical example of a multi-language and multi-system en-
vironment where decisions on linguistic policy are now receiving considerable attention 
(Gallo 1999). The European Union subscribes to full multilingualism in its 23 official 
languages, causing a huge amount of translation work for legal documentation. Lin-
guistic policy is faced with the economic and practical problems of handling so many 
languages. Hence, there is a certain pressure to simplify, at least for certain contexts and 
specific types of documentation. Two opposite positions are often discussed (Moréteau 
1999) when dealing with the management of multilingualism. These are represented by 
a multilingualism embracing all European languages and being as egalitarian as possible 
on the one extreme (indeed a very expensive solution) and on the other by the adoption 
of one single language, in particular a sort of international English, which is already used 
in some fields of law and specific legal areas such as international trade as well as in the 
scholarly and professional literature.
In this chapter the various aspects of multilingualism that are crucial for the devel-
opment of cross-language legal information retrieval will be examined. These are to be 
identified on the one hand in the intimate link between language and law, covering the 
crucial issues of conveying legal concepts across languages, and on the other hand in the 
broad spectrum of comparative issues, more precisely, in the relation between legal systems. 
While a problem in its own, the situation is exacerbated in a multi-language environment. 
In fact, every attempt to exchange legal knowledge among different communities and to 
reach a common understanding of different legal systems must inevitably cope with the 
problems posed by language and the diversity of the systems. These topics are examined 
with a view to the extent in which they influence and impact on the development and 
performance of cross-language legal information retrieval systems.
It seems appropriate to first give a brief overview over the definition and scope of 
multilingual information access in general, and then highlight the main aspects of cross-
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
15
language retrieval of information. In particular, legal information will be dealt with, which 
is a topic in its own due to the complexity associated with mapping legal concepts across 
languages and systems.
Multilingual information access: definition and scope 2. 
Multilingual information access can be defined as the functionality allowing anyone to 
find information that is expressed in any language. Oard (1997c) identifies it as a selection 
of useful documents from collections that may contain several languages. Multilingual ac-
cess is the general expression used to refer to the development, research and applications 
concerning the above-mentioned functionality. Another expression widely used in litera-
ture, also adopted in this study, is cross-language information retrieval (CLIR), often as 
opposed to within-language (or monolingual) retrieval (Oard 1997b).
The need for multilingual access stems from the acknowledgment that cultural diver-
sity is vital to the maintenance of society and that languages are a strong element of the 
different cultural traditions. The role of information professionals in this context is cru-
cial, as clearly stated by Clews (1988), who points out that the commitment of libraries 
to providing access to multilingual information resources means that they should lead the 
way in developing systems and services to foster cross-language retrieval. As the diversity 
of the world’s languages and cultures generates a wealth of knowledge and ideas, it is es-
sential to develop research studies and tools to preserve and successfully use the variety 
of resources produced.
With the increasing integration of the EU and the increasingly multicultural nature of 
modern society and its globalisation, stimulated by the development of digital informa-
tion and telecommunications networks, the need for multilingual information access has 
become more and more pressing and the issues connected with cross-language retrieval 
have increased in importance. Language barriers are critical to the effectiveness of resource 
sharing and world-wide common access. This problem is also connected with the growing 
number of information databases now available on networks (Hudon 1997, Oard 1997a, 
Michos et al. 1999). 
Multilingual access to information is a complex and multifaceted topic, embracing tech-
nical, functional and strategic issues which have been under discussion in the community 
of information specialists for many years (and still are). The main issues are functionali-
ties such as thorough and proper handling of characters (their presentation, arrangement, 
transfer), putting queries in a preferred language and script, retrieving resources irrespec-
tive of the language used in searching and indexing, facilitating world-wide communica-
tion no matter what the language.
Ginevra Peruginelli
16
Literature in the late 1960s concentrated mainly on character encoding, font facilities, 
filing and display of multiscripts1. The challenge of accessing multilingual resources in 
single libraries and on a world-wide scale was perceived as being mostly of technological 
nature. It was mainly in the late 1970s that careful attention was paid to cross-language 
retrieval functionalities and tools, software solutions, research projects and studies where 
CLIR is often associated with disciplines like artificial intelligence and computational 
linguistics (Michos et al. 1999), machine translation (Kay 1996), language engineering, 
and natural language processing (Fluhr 1996).
Another important aspect of multilingual access concerns strategic issues and manage-
ment issues. These refer to the need for general consensus and recommendations to achieve 
multilingual functionality in information systems. Emphasis is put on the need for a para-
digm shift in the community of information professionals to overcome language barriers 
in information retrieval, taking into account language variety in building information 
systems. These themes are not as popular in the literature as those concerning technical 
and functional aspects, but are specifically addressed by some authors such as Borgman 
(1997) and Nardi-Ford (1998), who focus on the issue of English language dominance. 
In addition, it is worth noting that, despite the technological developments which have 
occurred in the 1990s, until recently digital library research and development have some-
how neglected the issues of multilingual presentation and access and have concentrated 
more on monolingual environments, mainly in the English language. Development of 
tools and applications embracing different languages, including Asian ones, has neverthe-
less progressed in these last few years (Peters & Picchi 1997).
Multilingual Information Retrieval (MLIR) and Cross-Language 2. 1. 
Information Retrieval (CLIR)
The field of study that addresses the problem of accessing collections of documents is called 
Information Retrieval (IR). People use IR systems to get (the documents that contain) the 
information they need. These systems are based on techniques and tools to compare and 
match the need for information with the information content of documents. In reality, 
what the IR systems compare are surrogate expressions, as the query and the document 
characterisations are an approximation of the two data to be matched: the information 
need of the user and the information content of documents which are indexed (Salton 
1989, Blair 1990). Information retrieval is based on a conceptual model that has been 
1 One main concern of the library system has been the management of different character sets in bibliographic data-
bases. Efforts have been made to follow ISO encoding standards to represent the various alphabets, so to allow the 
exchange of data between systems. The aim is to provide all possible opportunities of data presentation and data 
exploitation.
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
17
extensively discussed (Salton 1989, van Rijsbergen 1979). It includes three information 
processing functions: indexing, query formulation and matching.
Information retrieval across languages is undoubtedly an application of information 
retrieval. These two fields share the same goals and a number of information retrieval 
techniques for matching documents as well as for processing queries are equally useful 
in a multilingual application. However, cross-language retrieval differs from information 
retrieval in a significant way as the standard monolingual information retrieval process 
involves no translation component, which is the main issue to cope with when searching 
in a multilingual environment.
While nowadays large-scale digital collections help dismantling the geographic barri-
ers to information access, language barriers are still critical to the effectiveness of resource 
sharing and world-wide common access. In the current digital environment the number of 
languages texts are written in is considerably increasing and, as a consequence, the prob-
lem of handling multilingual information resources is to be connected with the growing 
number of diverse information databases now available on networks (Hudon 1997, Oard 
1997a, Michos et al. 1999). For this reason cross-language information retrieval has be-
come an important area in both research and practice (Oard & Diekema 1998, Peters & 
Picchi 1997). 
Cross-language information retrieval is defined as the capability for users to retrieve 
material written or expressed in a language different from the query language (Lee et al. 
2004), whereas multilingual information retrieval (MLIR) is concerned with the retrieval 
of information, following a search request in one language, from a collection covering 
documents in multiple languages. In this chapter general reference is made to CLIR to 
mean retrieving and accessing information in a multilingual context. The underlying func-
tionality implies the ability of a system to process a query for information in any language, 
search a multi-language collection and return the most relevant documents. 
Cross-language information retrieval has also been referred to as the problem of find-
ing documents for somebody who cannot read the results; otherwise, they would trigger 
the search in that language (Oard 2000). This is, however, too restricted. In fact, multi-
lingual users might issue a single query into a multilingual collection. Also, there may be 
the case of users with a limited active vocabulary but good reading comprehension in a 
second language, who prefer to issue queries in their most fluent language. As such, CLIR 
is a complex phenomenon, embracing technical, functional and strategic issues.
It is a matter of fact that in the last decade research and development on CLIR have 
progressed rapidly and issues of multilingual querying, presentation and retrieval have 
been extensively tackled, mainly in the area of general domain information. A rather lim-
ited number of studies and applications have been provided in domain-specific areas (e.g. 
medicine, environment); cross-language retrieval of legal information has received limited 
Ginevra Peruginelli
18
attention. Despite recent developments in CLIR and the efforts made in this direction 
by a number of international initiatives and fora, such as the Cross-Language Evaluation 
Forum (CLEF)2 and Text Retrieval Conferences (TREC)3 promoting synchronisation 
between researchers working in the area by developing systematic tasks, test-suites and 
evaluation of results, no optimal solution for CLIR is available yet.
The requirements of a cross-language information retrieval system can be clarified by 
stating that in a multilingual access environment information is searched, retrieved and 
presented effectively, without constraints due to the different languages and scripts used 
in the material to be searched and in the metadata, that is bibliographic and semantic 
information allowing the retrieval of documents. This implies that in creating multilin-
gual access services, both the users’ native language and the multiplicity and richness of 
languages world-wide are to be accommodated. Also, methods have to be developed to 
allow users to put queries expressed in any language and retrieve information resources 
independently of the language of the documents and indexing.
One of the main questions arising in the context of CLIR is how the language barrier 
between the search requests and the documents should be crossed. This involves decisions 
about what to translate: search requests into the language of the documents, documents 
into the language of the request, or even both.4 From a practical point of view the approach 
followed for large collections is usually based on the most economical method, consisting 
in simply translating the query at retrieval time into the document (or metadata) languages. 
This method presupposes that the query can be translated in a reasonably accurate way 
and that monolingual retrieval systems are available for all languages of the documents. 
Although many experiments have been carried out using query translation techniques, in 
the real world they pose a number of problems related to the need of contextualisation 
and interpretation, which increases when dealing with legal information (Francesconi & 
Peruginelli 2004, Sheridan et al. 1997).
Retrieving information over languages implies facilities such as multiple language 
recognition, translation, manipulation of information of both the queries and the docu-
ments, cross-language search and retrieval, displaying and merging of results (Peters & 
Picchi 1997, Bossmeyer 1994). Basically, these components reflect different sides of the 
problem of multilingual access, covering technical and linguistic aspects. These two aspects 
2 CLEF: http://www.clef-campaign.org. The purpose of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF) is to support 
global digital library applications by developing an infrastructure for the testing, tuning and evaluation of informa-
tion retrieval systems operating on European languages in both monolingual and cross-language contexts. 
3 TREC: http://trec.nist.gov. The objective of the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC), co-sponsored by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the U.S. Department of Defense is to support research within 
the information retrieval community by providing the infrastructure necessary for large-scale evaluation of text re-
trieval methodologies.
4 In section 3 approaches to carry out this translation and how far such translation can be successful when legal in-
formation is concerned will be considered.
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
19
are very rarely dealt with in parallel in research studies and reports on implementations. 
Issues concerning the presentation of results following a search session, standard charac-
ter encoding and the development of multilingual thesauri for subject headings gener-
ally appear in strictly library-related literature, while topics such as matching queries and 
documents, query translation, expansion techniques and ranking methods are discussed 
in wider information professional settings.
The main components of a cross-language retrieval system can be identified in mul-
tilingual resources, machine translation, multilingual information retrieval, multilingual 
information extraction and summarisation as well as user evaluation and studies. In the 
context of CLIR, multilingual resources include corpora (parallel and comparable, use-
ful to generate translations), lexicons and ontologies, which can be defined as inventories 
of concepts organised on the basis of some internal structuring principle, which serves 
to categorise and organise information. The problems connected with such multilingual 
resources are generally due to their scarce availability and to the high cost, as their devel-
opment requires specialised human skills. Machine translation, which plays quite an im-
portant role in current CLIR systems, consists of an automated process that transforms 
written text from one language into another and is usually based on bilingual dictionaries 
or model parameters that can be learnt from a large parallel corpus. As regards free text 
retrieval, techniques like information extraction and summarisation are generally used. 
These techniques refer to extracting semantic information from documents to be searched 
according to their relevance for the users’ tasks. Usually a set of extraction rules are de-
veloped, either manually or automatically, and after a training phase the knowledge or 
rules learnt can be used to carry out automatic information extraction and to produce a 
summary of the document. Due to grammatical and lexical differences between languages 
these techniques may not be directly applicable in cross-language retrieval.
Legal information retrieval and cross-language access3. 
As mentioned above, while much attention has been given over the past years to the study 
and development of methodologies for accessing multilingual information in general, re-
search has been limited to the specific areas of legal information retrieval and of related 
cross-language indexing and search tools. It is worth noting that major attention has 
been paid by scholars and legal experts to linguistic and conceptual aspects of the legal 
languages: these themes are undoubtedly relevant to multilingual access and can provide 
important insights into this topic.
The difficulty in effectively accessing multilingual legal material through information 
retrieval systems definitively lies in the matching and weighing of legal terms across lan-
guages (Sacco 1998). This generally implies translating from the language of the query to 
Ginevra Peruginelli
20
that of the material to be found or vice versa and addresses the problem of word disam-
biguation, which is greatly increased when mapping over legal languages. In fact, cross-
ing the language barrier between search requests and documents implies addressing the 
problems of the system-bound nature of legal terminology and devising methods to map 
concepts between different legal systems.
Most projects and system implementations are confined to making legislative and ju-
risprudential information available at national level; however, in the last few years there 
has been a wide production of digital legal repositories made available over the Internet 
in a variety of languages. Hence, the need for accessing such a wealth of information by 
a wide variety of users all over the world has rapidly increased.
The above-mentioned issues regarding the peculiarities of legal information and infor-
mation retrieval mechanisms have been highlighted as an introduction to the subject of 
cross-language retrieval of legal information, where problems are exacerbated due to the 
linguistic and systemic diversity to be handled in multilingual searching. 
Aspects which seem worthy of analysis, being closely related to the development and 
effectiveness of legal information retrieval systems, are essentially of a linguistic, transla-
tional and comparative law nature.
Linguistic issues in the legal domain3. 1. 
It has been said more than once that “the law is a profession of words” (Mellinkoff 1963, 
Sacco 1998). Many of the problems about meaning that are of concern to language spe-
cialists turn out to be of interest to legal professionals too and to impact on the exchange 
and retrieval of legal information. In fact, information retrieval systems are based on lan-
guage, as queries are matched with the documents to be searched (be they free-text or 
metadata) through strings. 
The relationship between language and law has since long attracted the interest of both 
jurists and linguists. It is a big concern in our modern society, where the interrelation 
between different legal orders is common. Both the comparatists operating in academic 
environments and the legal professionals are faced more and more with issues and cases 
where disparate legal models and concepts are involved. As these are expressed in different 
languages, the linguistic problem arises, with the practical implications of multilingual-
ism, as well as with its theoretical principles. 
Like language, the law is, in its origin, development and structure intimately linked 
to the history and culture of each country. A number of linguists and historians of the 
law have compared law and languages from the point of view of their origins as well as of 
their patterns of evolution and have pointed out that both law and language have, at their 
essence, rules which are constitutive of a system (Grimm 1816, Sacco 1993). Moreover, 
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
21
there is a functional relationship between language and law as knowledge of the law re-
quires language; the legal experts themselves have greatly contributed to the elaboration of 
the legal languages to better fit them to the needs of the law within the various countries 
and communities. In this context, the transfer of legal knowledge is entrusted to written 
or spoken language. This leads a specialist in the field to state that the law cannot mani-
fest itself without language (Vanderlinden 1995).
As language is essentially a communication tool, it is successful when the parties un-
derstand each other, even in their disagreement. But while language is a means of under-
standing, it is also a means of misunderstanding between people belonging to different 
social groups or cultures. This synchronisation is more than elsewhere fundamental in 
the language of the law (Vanderlinden 1999), where equivalence of meanings across legal 
systems are difficult to find and assess, even when the same language is used!
In fact, legal language consists of legal terms, phrases and stable conventions and as 
such reflects one particular legal system. The system-specificity of legal terms makes a rel-
evant number of legal scholars and professionals state that the language of the law is to be 
learnt and communicated in its close relationship with a given culture, the related country 
and the people’s history and heritage, conceived as a socially acquired pool of knowledge, 
which represents its richness and uniqueness. (Moreteau 1999, de Groot 1998). As legal 
language is culture-bound and entwined with one particular society and its legal system, 
it is seen as the collective memory of the legal actors belonging to a given legal system. 
In addition, the multiple languages of law are a concern also among speakers of the same 
language in so far as, in principle, each category of receiver (citizen, lawyer, judge, public 
officer, etc.) requires a specific vocabulary for his or her understanding of the law.
While the dependency of legal concepts from a particular legal system is the key char-
acteristic of legal language as a system of signs, such concepts are claimed not to be forever 
fixed and unchangeable, because they change when legal experience changes (Luhmann 
1993). The change of legal concepts is brought about through legal argumentation (Kjaer 
2004b). This is evidenced in the multifaceted role of language in establishing, maintain-
ing, and changing concepts, which makes cross-system interoperability even harder to 
achieve (Kjaer 2004b, Gémar 1982). 
A further argumentation is based on the branch of linguistics known as ‘linguistic 
relativity’, focusing on the fact that what one language system conceptualises in one way 
is not conceptualised in the same way in all other language systems. This is especially true 
of legal terminologies at system level (Engberg 2004).
Legal language, like language in general, can be viewed both as a system of conven-
tional symbols and as a means of communication for people belonging to a particular 
social group or culture. When it is viewed as discourse, the focus is on its function as a 
means of communication. Discourse is defined as language used in social practice, com-
Ginevra Peruginelli
22
municative practice in a particular social group (Fairclough 1992, 1995). So discourse is 
dependent on the social context in which it is used; it is shaped by that context, which is 
not an immutable entity. 
In this view legal discourse consists of legal rules produced within the framework of a 
legal system, with the double function of sustaining and reproducing the system and of 
changing and transforming it. All this has implications on the possibilities of legal com-
munication and, since these changes are brought about in legal discourse, it is possible 
for the national legal systems and their languages to converge. In addition, today legal 
discourse is no longer confined to the individual national legal systems, but it transcends 
national boundaries. This implies that different legal practices, diverse legal languages and 
cultures are exposed to each other and it is likely that, for example in Europe, the national 
legal traditions will gradually change along with the emerging intercultural communica-
tion of legal actors, who in that way adapt themselves to the changing institutional con-
text of law (Kjaer 2004a). 
From another perspective, similar conclusions have been drawn (Gadamer 1975), based 
on the assumption that reason, as the universal human faculty of intuition by which one 
sees reality, is the common language of people belonging to different speech communi-
ties, but the fact that our experience of the world is bound to language, does not imply an 
exclusiveness of perspectives. An example clarifies this concept: even though the French 
legal concept of contrat is radically different from the English concept ‘contract’, due to 
opposite approaches to contract formation, an English lawyer can understand the French 
concept and vice versa. 
However, coming to an understanding across legal languages and legal systems is a 
hard process and establishing a common understanding can only be done if the actors 
base their interpretation on the same tacit suppositions about the world, which forms 
the point of departure for communicative action. Incorporating these requirements in 
cross-language information systems requires interpretation and adaptation strategies over 
languages and systems, which is hard to accomplish without a high expertise in linguis-
tics and comparative law.
Legal translation3. 2. 
There is a general consensus that translation is a complex form of action, requiring much 
feeling and understanding of cultural aspects. There are lots of ongoing discussions among 
linguists, scholars and professionals working in various settings and disciplines, all sharing 
the opinion that this activity is much more than the substitution of lexical and grammati-
cal elements between two languages (Capellas-Espuny 2004). Jakobson (1959), a leading 
linguist and expert in the subject of translation, defines translation as “the interpretation 
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
23
of verbal signs by means of some other language”. Further argumentation is based on the 
nature and scope of translation, depending on the nature and scope of the translated ma-
terials in a way that quite often “the process of translation requires the art of leaving aside 
some of the linguistic elements of the source text to find an expressive identity among 
the elements of the source and the target texts” (Capellas-Espuny 2004). To this regard 
it is also worth mentioning a statement on translation made by an outstanding author 
who makes an ongoing contribution to legal translation issues: “la traduction est néces-
sairement une lutte. Le bon traducteur est celui qui cherche, qui se pose des questions, qui, loin 
de se contenter de ce qu’il a trouvé d’abord, commence par s’en méfier; il est comme le médecin 
scrupuleux qui, son diagnostic a été à peine posé, cherche les indices qui pourraient le conduire 
à le remplacer par un autre mieux fondé. En matière de traduction, on ne pourrait dire que 
la première idée n’est jamais la meilleure» (Gémar 1979).
The significance of translation is multifold, allowing different cultures to connect, in-
teract and enrich one another. When taking an element from one particular cultural sys-
tem and introducing it into another, translation serves as a tool for cultural exchange. As 
Ralph Linton (1955) points out: “The comparatively rapid growth of human culture as a 
whole has been due to the ability of all societies to borrow elements from other cultures 
and to incorporate them into their own”. Despite the ever increasing exchange and com-
munication between cultures, coping with language differences and conveying meanings 
across languages is still a complex process. As regards the area of law, the relation between 
law and language can significantly broaden the scope of legal translation theory. In fact, 
while it can be assessed that everyday language already implies a formalised way of com-
munication, legal language introduces a supplementary system of formalisation (Prakken 
& Sartor 1995). Differences between legal language and ordinary language lie, in the view 
of a number of authors (White 1985, Phillips 2003, Pozzo 2005), in the use of words and 
in the connotations they bear when they are incorporated in legal speech. 
Translation is seen by White (1990) as “a set of practices that can serve as an ethical and 
political model for the law and, beyond it, as a standard of justice”. In particular, in legal 
translation the demand for precision is greater than in literary translation (Avalos 1998), 
since what is to be carefully taken into account is not only compliance with the rules of 
the foreign language, but also with the rules of the foreign legal system. Further complex-
ity is due to the fact that, although legal translation demands precision and certainty, it 
is bound to use abstractions, the meanings of which derive from particular (changing) 
cultural and social contexts. These contexts generate a certain degree of ambiguity that 
increases when the legal cultures and systems are vastly different from each other (Rot-
man 1995). It is also claimed (Harvey 2002) that law is an unstable discipline, largely 
indeterminate, and that legal discourse is fluctuant, with its meaning depending on the 
language in which it is expressed and even on the target audience.
Ginevra Peruginelli
24
There are several arguments for the specific status of legal translation, which are widely 
debated. Legal translation is claimed having a special status (Weston 1990, Gémar 1995), 
due to the peculiarities of legal language, which is defined as a special-purpose commu-
nication between specialists (Šarčević 1997, Harvey 2002). In addition, it is pointed out 
that the characteristics of legal discourse make legal language not restricted to specialists, 
but understandable also by the layman (Heutger 2003). Furthermore, the point is made 
that not only prescriptive documents are to be considered in legal translation, but also the 
expressive or persuasive function which is found in legal discourse, occurring, for exam-
ple, in the explanatory parts of a judicial decision or in a doctrinal work. It is the complex 
communication situation which is peculiar to the language of the law and the perspective 
nature of legal discourse that makes legal translation so special, in a way that in transfer-
ring a source legal text into a target one, this latter must produce the same legal effects of 
the original (Šarčević 1997, Gémar 1995).
In contrast to what happens with disciplines as mathematics or chemistry, where there 
is an objective extra-linguistic reference, legal realities are conceived as the result of legal 
discourse, which creates its own reality from different or shared historic traditions, in one 
or several languages. Thus, legal realities cannot coincide or can coincide only partially 
when they focus on a common international legal phenomenon.
However, several different opinions are expressed denying the special status of legal 
translation, and arguments are offered on equally specific disciplines, as, for example, astro-
physics, where the target text must have effects in the special subject area (Harvey 2002). 
Furthermore, the characteristics of the law as a system-bound discipline are also typical 
for several subject areas like religion and political science, where the notion of system is 
an inherent feature. On the whole, the opinion is widely shared that legal translators are 
more rigidly bound to specialised knowledge than the translators of everyday language or 
the humanities (Gizbert-Studnicki 1987) and that finding out terminological equivalence 
between terms is a serious problem when comparable concepts do not exist in the legal 
systems expressed by the languages to be mapped. In this context the danger of ambigu-
ity and miscomprehension is considerable.
A field where the significance of legal translation is evident in many respects is in-
ternational law. Since the right of the States to communicate in their own language has 
been accepted, translation has become more important than ever in this field of law. Yet, 
very little attention has been devoted to language in international law and there is still 
the danger of a communication gap between nations. Translation also matters greatly for 
international law in the area of international organisations. For example, the plurality of 
languages in the United Nations creates a serious challenge to communication: this task 
is faced by the multilingual system ODS – Official documents of the United Nations, 
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
25
which covers all types of official UN documentation available in the six official languages, 
namely Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish.
On a practical level legal translation requires both a comparative study of the differ-
ent legal systems and an awareness of the problems created by the absence of equivalents 
(Capellas-Espuny 2004). This means that legal translators must be familiar with the legal 
culture of the target context in order to reformulate an equivalent meaning through what 
they judge to be the most appropriate linguistic and legal expressions. In fact, a particular 
concept in a legal system may have no counterpart in other systems, or a particular concept 
may exist in two different systems but may refer to different realities. In other words, law 
lacks a common knowledge base or “universal operative referents” (Pelage 2000), which 
makes it very difficult to find equivalents for culture-bound terms, especially those con-
cerning legal concepts, procedures and institutions (Harvey 2002). To this regard there is 
an important distinction to be taken into account: the normative language of the law (as 
found in statutes and judicial reports), where translation is likely to be more constrained 
by the words of the positive law, and the language of the legal doctrine (used in law review 
articles, or monographs) where translation can be adapted to the spirit of the message. 
Finally, translating a text from the language of a civil law country to the language of an-
other civil law country is generally less complicated than translating the same text to the 
language of a common law country (De Vries 1969). 
Addressing the problem of functional equivalence is a major task of legal translators, 
who need to find an equivalent in the target language legal system for the terms of the 
source language legal system. Because of the system-specificity of legal terms, full equiv-
alence can only be achieved between the languages of the same legal systems, as is the 
case when translating within a bilingual or multilingual legal system, such as Belgium, 
Finland, Switzerland and – to some extent – Canada (Gémar 1988). Where the source 
and target language relate to different legal systems, equivalence is rare (Sandrini 1994). 
To this regard de Groot (1996, 1998) points out that near-full equivalence can be found 
when the legal systems related to the source language and the target language have one 
legal area relevant to the translation in common. This is the case of the implementation 
of treaties, EU harmonisation or one legal system willingly adopting the legal solutions 
of another system. 
Where the source language and the target language relate to different legal systems 
and the above exceptions are not at issue, perfect equivalence is rare. Nevertheless, certain 
terms relating to different legal systems will readily be seen as equivalents by translators. 
Kisch (1973) states that translatability is achieved if the terms correspond in essence and, 
according to this author, “this is a question of pragmatic order”.
It is possible that in a particular context, such as the legal domain, certain words are 
acceptable equivalents where they are not in a different context. Relevant is also whether 
Ginevra Peruginelli
26
a translation needs to be prepared to give somebody who does not master the source lan-
guage a summary impression of the contents of the text, or whether the translation will 
receive the status of authentic text in addition to or in substitution of the source text. In 
the latter situation it is important that the meanings of the terms in the target text are not 
narrower or broader than those in the source text (de Groot & van Laer 2006). 
On the principle of expressing a source language term by a ‘functional’ equivalent of 
the target language, there is a general consensus on the principle that the first method is 
that of functional equivalence: using a term or expression in the target language which em-
bodies the nearest situationally equivalent concept (Šarčević 1988, Weston 1990, Šarčević 
1997, Temorshuizen-Arts 2003). However, doubts about this approach are justified, as for 
a target language term to be identified as an equivalent to a source language term there 
must not only be functional equivalence, but also a similar systematic and structural em-
bedding (de Groot 1999).
If no acceptable equivalents in the target language legal system can be established, dif-
ferent solutions must be sought. Basically, three subsidiary solutions may be distinguished 
(Šarčević 1997, Wiesmann 2004): 
1. preserving the source term (loanword): Here no translation is provided and the term 
may be explained by adding information in parentheses or in a footnote. But in this case 
the main purpose of conveying the meaning of the source terms through a target term is 
definitely not fulfilled.
2. neologism: A new term is created in the target language that does not form part of 
the terminology of the target language legal system, if necessary in combination with an 
explanatory footnote.
3. paraphrasing: A description is used to render the source language term in the tar-
get language. If the paraphrase in the target language is a perfect definition of the source 
language concept, such a paraphrase approximates an equivalent composed of several 
words. Šarčević (1997) qualifies this as a descriptive equivalent. This is the case of a legal 
entity that is described, even though it does not exist as such in the target language legal 
system; however, the combination of its elements makes the term accessible to a lawyer 
trained in that system.
While interpreters often tend to choose the solution involving cognates, literal trans-
lation, synonyms and neologisms, these, however, have undesirable effects on both the 
accuracy and the effectiveness of communication. This tendency reveals a lack of aware-
ness concerning the semantic discrepancies between the legal terms in the source language 
and in the target language on the part of interpreters. For these reasons, paraphrase is 
perhaps the most effective technique, involving re-formulation at sentence level in order 
to transfer the speaker’s intention and highlight a specific context. A significant lexico-
grammatical shift that helps to achieve this should not be seen as resulting in free or in-
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
27
accurate interpreting. It may be the only way of achieving listener-centred interpretation 
and conveying the meaning in the target language. It is important to remember that, un-
like in other technical contexts, finding an adequate solution that combines the accuracy 
necessary for the faithful conveying of legal concepts and the need of communication is 
very challenging. 
One serious practical problem legal translators are faced with is the limited help pro-
vided by legal dictionaries, which fail to meet their expectations for conveying the meaning 
of the source legal language into the target legal language. According to de Groot and van 
Laer (2006), who extensively analyse the problem of functional equivalence of legal terms, 
only very few dictionaries are reliable tools. These authors propose to indicate the degree 
of equivalence and to provide alternatives according to area of law, legal system and use.
As illustrated above, the comparison of law and translation studies shows differences 
of perspective, especially in the application of the rule of equal authority, which has not 
been used in translation studies, but also reveals similarities, with regard to the weaknesses 
attributed to translation (secondary nature of translation, authority of the original text). In 
spite of these common views, law and translation studies continue to develop separately, 
even though it would plainly be an advantage if they shared some of their theoretical ap-
proaches (Lavoie 2005). 
Legal translation is an essential function for cross-language retrieval systems. One major 
question concerns the translation strategy to be adopted in order to ensure that users ac-
cess legal information independently of the language used in a query. As described above, 
legal translation mainly refers to texts, whereas in cross-language retrieval what mainly 
matters is handling single or combined units of information as searched by users. There 
are different approaches to legal translation that can be used for accessing multilingual 
legal information. 
In general the approach of fidelity to the letter of the original document, that is the 
strict adherence to the original, has long lasted over the centuries. Little by little the method 
of simple linguistic equivalence has given way to a target-oriented translation adopting a 
functionalist approach, where it is not formal correspondence between source and target 
text that is to be sought, but rather the equivalent legal effects principle (Šarčević 1997). 
Despite the functionalist approach having received much attention, so far linguistic fidel-
ity is still a popular approach, being recommended by the United Nations instructions 
for translators (Harvey 2000). Furthermore, a narrow view of fidelity to the original text 
is favoured by Court interpreters (Morris 1995).
Other methods of translation, such as borrowing (translation procedure whereby the 
translator uses a word or expression from the source text in the target text) and creation of 
neologisms are scarcely significant in cross-language information retrieval, where the objec-
tive is to find materials in any language, irrespective of the language used in searching.
Ginevra Peruginelli
28
Issues of comparative law3. 3. 
The problems raised by multilingualism are strictly connected to those related to the va-
riety and diversity of legal systems and as such to comparative law. Far from the opinion 
that pursuing comparisons may be limited to descriptive translations or summaries of 
foreign law, a number of comparatists (van Hoecke 2004, Schlesinger 1995, Sacco 1991) 
express their doubts about the possibility of a real comparison of legal systems. This does 
not mean ignoring that comparative research has reached very good results in putting 
scholars and legal professionals to work together in comparative projects, launching har-
monisation activities and, at EU level, having codes drafted as well as having directives 
fitted with the legal concepts and structure of the Member States.
Retrieval systems for legal information across different legal systems represent a prac-
tical approach to the confrontation and exchange of legal cultures. Since comparison in-
volves observation and explanation of similarities and differences, comparative research 
can give a major contribution to the development of these information systems. In fact, 
the implementation of retrieval functionalities implies taking into account and properly 
managing the peculiarities of legal concepts across systems, handling the variety of lan-
guages used to express these various concepts as well as addressing the terminological is-
sues of representing the various legal cultures.
A glance to worldwide legal orders shows that several countries have been operating in 
a multi-system and multilingual environment for many years: Canada, Switzerland, Bel-
gium, Spain are only some examples of this, not to mention the European Union, with its 
27 countries with their respective systems, languages and families of law. This pluralism 
is managed using different methods and practices, based on translation, interpretation, 
adaptations of legal terms and in a number of cases on multi-language drafting.
Multilingualism and comparison among systems are often addressed as a joint main 
issue in cooperative efforts promoting harmonisation activities for the creation of uniform 
law in various areas (at EU level efforts have mainly been made in contract, private and 
trade law). It is a matter of fact that the direct implications of comparing and possibly in-
tegrating different legal concepts and structures are intimately linked to language issues. 
Many comparatists are strongly concerned with the implications of the differences 
existing between the cultural contexts underlying the various legal languages and with 
the difficulties in transferring legal meanings and legal concepts from one legal system 
to another, even when the same language is used (Kjaer 2004a). A number of frequently 
mentioned examples refer to this phenomenon, such as societé in the French legal lan-
guage in France, which has not the same meaning as société in the French legal language 
in Belgium (Vanderlinden 1999). Similarly, Besitz means factual possession for a Ger-
man. However, an Austrian lawyer understands Besitz as the factual possession including 
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
29
the animus domini, that is Innehabung. So even German-speaking lawyers from Austria, 
Germany, Liechtenstein and Switzerland will not automatically understand each other’s 
legal terminology (Heutger 2004).
In recent years research studies increasingly concentrate on the relation between legal 
language and the comparative analysis of different legal orders. This topic, mainly debated 
in conferences, is often tackled from the point of view of the validity and performance 
of legal translation and of the analogy between legal translation and legal interpretation. 
Many are the initiatives aimed at laying the foundation for a common frame of reference 
and at promoting, for example at EU level, a pan-European terminology (Pozzo 2003). 
In addressing the issues related to the development of systems and tools for accessing 
legal information across legal systems, consideration is to be given to the methods em-
ployed in the comparative process of legal systems: integrative as opposed to contrastive 
(Schlesinger 1955). Looking at the methods followed, it is likely that these comparative 
law approaches can influence the cross-system retrieval techniques adopted in the imple-
mentation of retrieval systems. 
In continental Europe a jus commune emerged over a number of centuries, which did 
not mean an entirely uniform law, but certainly a set of shared formative elements of the 
law, called by Sacco ‘legal formants’ (Sacco 1991). With the age of codification, two facts 
contributed to the creation of intellectual barriers between the legal systems of the several 
nations: the abandonment of Latin and the adoption of national codes in the language 
of each country. This introduced a contrastive approach in the practice of comparative 
law and legal professionals treated the national systems as foreign law. It is only under 
the recent influence of transnational exchange and increasing cross-border transactions 
in every sector of life, that a common core of legal systems is being looked for and that 
an integrative comparison has newly emerged among legal scholars. 
The current debate among comparative scholars is extremely rich and complex. It is 
claimed that original innovation in law is very small and borrowing and emulation are of 
central importance in understanding the course of legal change (Sacco 1991). Neverthe-
less, the focus is also on the divergences and peculiarities of common and civil law sys-
tems, namely in their formants, principles and rules, manner of reasoning of lawyers and 
use of authorities guiding them in legal questions. However, the possibility for fruitful 
convergence and mutual understanding is envisaged and encouraged (Schlesinger 1995). 
Reciprocal influences, even though not necessarily direct legal transplants, are likely to 
happen and the point is made that in the first decades of the twentieth century the differ-
ences between common law and civil law traditions were emphasised, whereas today, at 
least in a number of fields of law, the common elements are sought for, rather than dif-
ferences stressed (Orucu 1999).
Ginevra Peruginelli
30
The convergence or divergence approaches mentioned above are key elements for im-
plementing multilingual retrieval tools and services: according to the chosen approach, 
the methods followed in these systems will facilitate terms and concepts to be matched 
across legal systems, adapting concepts of different systems and helping contextualisation 
to approach the most similar concept in the target language and system. In a more restric-
tive approach, only broad correspondences will be established focusing on broad concepts 
which are likely to be commonly understood by a variety of users.
Conclusion4. 
Access to information regardless of language barriers is a key factor for effective global shar-
ing of knowledge. This need has created a convergence of interests from various research 
communities around cross-language retrieval, which is becoming more and more popular 
between information specialists. Referred to legal information, it is to be intended both as 
a de-facto situation characterised by the existence of different legal languages, and as the 
set of issues involved in the management of legal information across language barriers.
In order for legal material to be accessible worldwide, interoperability is paramount, 
but so far there are not many solutions for cross-language legal information access and no 
truly multilingual information system is available yet. In this sense, the LexALP Project5 
is a pioneer project within Europe, aimed at harmonising the terminology of the Alpine 
Convention in the four official languages (French, German, Italian and Slovene), in a 
way that member States can achieve fruitful cooperation and a common understanding 
of their respective regulations and strategies in the fields of environmental law, sustainable 
development and spatial planning. 
All this implies a labour-intensive work as the model of legal multilingualism is not 
simply to be confined to the transposition of legal concepts from one system to another, 
but it is likely to require a cooperative venture, an orchestration process involving all 
stakeholders responsible for the various legal systems: legislators, judges, legal profession-
als and eventually citizens in an effort towards a common understanding of law beyond 
language and system barriers.
5 The methodologies and instruments developed by LexALP allow to compare the specialised terminology of six dif-
ferent national legal systems (Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Slovenia and Switzerland) and more than one supra-
national system (EU law, International law and, within the latter, the particular frame of the Alpine Convention) in 
four different languages, and to harmonise it. Further information in the following chapters.
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
31
Bibliography
Altuna, Bélen (1994): Considerations and requirements in designing Spanish multilingual library cata-
logues. In Automated systems for access to multilingual and multiscript materials: proceedings of 
the second IFLA satellite meeting, Madrid, 18th–19th August, 1993. München: K. G. Saur, 
29-44. 
Avalos, Francisco (1998): Legal translations: some tips. Lecture delivered at National Language Resource 
Center, San Diego State University. 
 http://www.law.arizona.edu/Library/Research/Guides/legal_translations.cfm?page=research
Blair, David C. (1990): Language and representation in information retrieval. Amsterdam [etc.]: Elsevier 
Science. 
Bobrow, Daniel G./ King, Tracy H./ Lee, Lawrence C. (2007): Enhancing legal discovery with linguistic 
processing. http://www2.parc.com/isl/groups/nltt/papers/bobrow.pdf
Borgman, Christine L. (1997): Multi-media, multi-cultural, and multi-lingual digital libraries, or how do 
we exchange data in 400 languages? In D-Lib magazine. 
 http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june97/06borgman.html
Bossmeyer, Christine (1994): What’s next: issues arising from the satellite meeting. In Automated systems for 
access to multilingual and multiscript materials: proceedings of the second IFLA satellite meet-
ing, Madrid, 18th-19th August, 1993. München: K. G. Saur, 167-173. 
Cappellas-Espuny, Gemma (2004): The problem of terminological equivalence in international mari-
time law: the case of hypothèque and mortgage in the document Final Act and International 
Convention on maritime liens and mortgages. In Journal of diplomatic language, 1:4. 
CLEF - Cross-Language Evaluation Forum. http://www.clef-campaign.org
Clews, John (1988): Language automation worldwide: the development of character set standards. British 
Library R&D report 5962. Harrogate: SESAME Computer Projects. 
de Groot, Gerard-René (1996): Het Vertalen van Juridische Informatie. In Preadvies Nederlandse Vereniging 
voor Rechtsvergelijking, 53. Deventer: Kluwer, 1-77. 
de Groot, Gerard-René (1998): Language and law. In Netherlands report to the fifteenth International Congress 
of Comparative Law. Antwerp/ Groningen: Intersentia, 21-32.
de Groot, Gerard-René (1999): Das Übersetzen Juristischer Terminologie. In de Groot, Gerard-René & 
Schulze, Reiner (eds.): Recht und Übersetzen. Baden-Baden: Nomos, 11-46.
de Groot, Gerard-René & van Laer, Conrad J.P. (2006): The dubious quality of legal dictionaries. In 
International journal of legal information, 34:1 (spring), 65-86.
De Vries, Henry P. (1969): Foreign law and the American lawyer: an introduction to the civil law method and 
language. New York: Parker School of Foreign and Comparative Law, Columbia University.
Dowlin, Kenneth E. (1994): Issues in offering multilingual and multiscript library services: the key to the 
global village library. In Automated systems for access to multilingual and multiscript materials: 
proceedings of the second IFLA satellite meeting, Madrid, 18th-19th August, 1993. München: K. 
G. Saur, 23-26. 
Engberg, Jan (2004): Statutory texts as instances of language(s): consequences and limitations of interpretation. 
Ginevra Peruginelli
32
http://www.brooklaw.edu/students/journals/bjil/bjil29iii_engberg.pdf
Fairclough, Norman (1992): Discourse and social change. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press. 
Fairclough, Norman (1995): Critical discourse analysis: the critical study of language. London/ New York: 
Longman. 
Fletcher, George P. (2005): The language of law: common and civil. In Pozzo, Barbara (ed.): Ordinary lan-
guage and legal language. Milano: Giuffrè, 83-107. 
Fluhr, Christian (1996): Multilingual Information Retrieval (Chapter 8.5). Battista Varile, Giovanni & 
Zampolli, Antonio: Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology. 
 http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/HLTsurvey/ch8node7.html
Francesconi, Enrico & Peruginelli, Ginevra (2004): Opening the legal literature portal to multilingual 
access. In DC-2004: Proceedings of the International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata 
Applications, 11th-14th October, Shanghai, 37-44. 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg (1975): Truth and method. New York: Seabury Press. 
Gallo, Giovanni (1999): Les linguiste juristes de la Cour de Justice des Communautés européennes. In 
Sacco, Rodolfo & Castellani, Luca (eds.): Les multiples langues du droit européen uniforme. 
Torino: L’Harmattan Italia, 71-89. 
Gémar, Jean-Claude (1979): La traduction juridique et son enseignement: aspects théoriques et pratiques. 
In La traduction juridique. Meta, 24:1, 35-53.
Gémar, Jean-Claude (1982): Langage du droit et traduction : essays de jurilinguistique. In Gémar, Jean-
Claude (ed.): The Language of the Law and Translation: Essays on Jurilinguistics. Québec: 
Linguatech-Conseil de la langue française. 
Gémar, Jean-Claude (1988): Le Traducteur Juridique ou l’interprète du Language du Droit. In Nekeman, 
Paul (ed.): Translation, our Future/ La Traduction, Notre Avenir, Proceedings of the Xlth World 
Congress of FIT. Maastricht, 422-430.
Gémar Jean-Claude (1995): Traduire ou l’art d’interpréter, langue, droit et société: éléments de jurilinguistique. 
Québec: Presses de l’Université du Québec.
Gizbert-Studnicki, Tomasz (1987): Is an empirical theory of the language of the law possible? In Ziembinski, 
Zygmunt (ed.): Polish contributions to the theory and philosophy of law. Amsterdam: Bodopi, 
99-114.
Gollins, Tim & Sanderson, Mark (2001): Improving Cross-Language Retrieval with Triangulated 
Translation. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research 
and Development in Information Retrieval, New Orleans, 9th-13th September, 90-95.
Grimm, Jacob (1816): Von der Poesie im Recht. In Zeitschrift für geschichtliche Rechtswissenschaft, 25.
Harvey, Malcolm (2002): What’s so special about legal translation? In Meta, 47:2, 177-185.
Heutger, Viola (2003): Law and language in the European Union. http://www.jus.uio.no/pace/law_and_lan-
guage_in_the_european_union.viola_heutger/landscape.pdf
Heutger, Viola (2004): A more coherent European wide legal language. In European Integration online 
Papers (EioP), 7:2. http://eiop.or.at/eiop/pdf/2004-002.pdf
Hudon, Michèle (1997): Multilingual thesaurus construction: integrating the views of different cultures in 
one gateway to knowledge and concepts. In Knowledge Organisation, 24:2, 84-91.
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
33
Jakobson, Roman (1959): On linguistic aspects of translation. In Brower, R. A. (ed.): On Translation. 
London & New York: Oxford University Press.
Kay, Martin (1996): Machine Translation: the disappointing past and present. In Survey of the State of the 
Art in Human Language Technology. 
 http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/HLTsurvey/ch8node4.html#SECTION82
Kisch, Isaac (1973): Droit comparé et terminologie juridique. In Rotondi, Mario (ed.): Inchieste di diritto 
comparato. Padova/ New York, 407-423.
Kjaer, Anne Lise (2004a): A common legal language in Europe? In Van Hoecke, Mark (ed.): Epistemology 
and Methodology of Comparative Law. Oxford: Hart. 
Kjaer, Anne Lise (2004b): Convergence of European legal systems: the role of languages. In Language and 
culture, 29, 125-137.
Landry, Patrice (2003): Cross-lingual applications: Workshop 4. In ELAG 2003: cross-language applications 
and the Web. 27th Library Systems Seminar, Bern, 2nd-4th April. 
 http://www.elag2003.ch/ws/ws_4.pdf
Lavoie, Judith (2005): Droit et traductologie: convergence et divergence. In Gémar Jean-Claude & Kasirer, 
Nicholas (eds.): Jurilinguistique entre langues et droits. Bruxelles: Bruylant, 523-536. 
Lee, Kyung-Soon/ Kageura, Kyo/ Choi, Key-Sun (2004): Implicit ambiguity resolution using incremental 
clustering in cross-language information retrieval. In Information processing and management, 
40:1, 145-159.
Linton, Ralph (1955): The tree of culture. New York: Knopf.
Luhmann, Niklas (1993): Das Recht der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp. 
Matthijssen, Luuk (1999): Interfacing between lawyers and computers: an architecture for knowledge-based 
interfaces to legal databases. The Hague/ Boston: Kluwer Law International. 
McCarley, J. Scott (1999): Should we translate the documents or the queries in cross-language informa-
tion retrieval? In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL 99), University of Maryland, College Park, June 20th-26th, 208-214.
Mellinkoff, David (1963): The Language of the Law. Boston/ Toronto: Little, Brown.
Michos, Stephanos/ Stamatos, Efstathios/ Fakotakis, Nikos (1999): Supporting multilinguality in library 
automation systems using A. I. http://slt.wcl.ee.upatras.gr/papers/michos3.pdf
Moens, Marie-Francine (2006): Improving access to legal information. In Oskamp, Anja and Lodder, Arno 
(eds.): Information technology and lawyers. Dordrecht: Springer, 119-136. 
Moreteau, Olivier (1999): L’anglais pourrait-il devenir la langue juridique commune en Europe? In Sacco, 
Rodolfo & Castellani, Luca (eds.): Les multiples langues du droit européen uniforme. Torino: 
L’Harmattan Italia, 143-162. 
Nardi-Ford, Loredana (1998): VALA Conference Sponsor report: report on VALA Conference to COLUG on 
29/7/1998 at the CIAC Italian Resource Centre in Forrest. 
 http://archive.alia.org.au/sigs/online/reports/vala.report.html
Morris, Marshall (ed.) (1995): Translation and the law. Amsterdam/ Phialdelphia: Benjamins. 
Oard, Douglas W. (1997a): Serving users in many languages: cross-language information retrieval for digital 
libraries. In D-Lib Magazine, December. 
Ginevra Peruginelli
34
 http://www.dlib.org/dlib/december97/oard/12oard.html
Oard, Douglas W. (1997b): Alternative approaches for cross-language text retrieval. 
 http://www.glue.umd.edu/~dlrg/filter/sss/papers/oard/paper.html
Oard, Douglas W. (1997c): Cross-language text retrieval research in the USA. In Third DELOS Workshop: 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval, Zurich, 5th-7th March. 
 http://www.ercim.org/publication/ws-proceedings/DELOS3/Oard.pdf
Oard, Douglas W. & Diekema, Anne R. (1998): Cross-language Information Retrieval. In Williams, Martha 
E. (ed.): Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 33. Medford: Information 
Today.
Oard, Douglas W. (2001): Evaluating interactive cross-language information retrieval: Document selec-
tion. In Peters, Carol (ed.): Proceedings of the First Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, Lisbon, 
21st September. 
Orucu, Esin (1999): Critical comparative law: considering paradoxes for legal systems in transition. 
 http://www.ejcl.org/41/art41-1.doc
Pelage, Jacques (2000): La traductologie face au droit. In Proceedings of the International Colloquium University 
of Geneva, 17th-19th February. Berne: Association Suisse des Traducteurs, Terminologues et 
Interprètes (ASTTI), Ecole de traduction et d’interprétation de Genève (ETI), 125-131.
Peters, Carol & Picchi, Eugenio (1997): Across languages, across cultures: issues in multilinguality and dig-
ital libraries. In D-Lib magazine, May. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may97/peters/05peters.html
Peters, Carol & Sheridan, Paraic (2001): Multilingual access for information systems. In 67th IFLA Council 
and general Conference, August, 16-25. http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla67/papers/099-183e.pdf
Phillips, Alfred (2003): Lawyer’s language: how and why legal language is different. London/ New York: 
Routledge. 
Pozzo, Barbara (2003): Harmonisation of European contract law and the need of creating a common ter-
minology. In European review of private law, 11:6, 754-767.
Pozzo, Barbara (ed.) (2005): Ordinary language and legal language. Milano: Giuffrè. 
Prakken, Henry & Sartor, Giovanni (1995): On the relation between legal language and legal argument: 
assumptions, applicability and dynamic priorities. In Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law. New York: ACM, 1-10. 
Rotman, Edgar (1996): The inherent problems of legal translation: theoretical aspects. In Indiana 
International and Comparative Law review, 6:1, 187-196.
Sacco, Rodolfo (1991): Legal formants: a dynamic approach to comparative law. In The American 
Comparative Law, 1, 343-358.
Sacco, Rodolfo (1996): Riflessioni di un giurista sulla lingua (lingua del diritto uniforme e il diritto al 
servizio di una lingua uniforme). In Rivista di diritto civile, 42:1, 57-65.
Sacco, Rodolfo (1998): Langue et droit. In Rapports nationaux italiens au XVéme Congrès International de 
Droit Comparé. Bristol/ Milano: Giuffrè. 
Sacco, Rodolfo (1993): Il diritto muto. In Rivista di diritto civile, 6, 689-702.
Sacco, Rodolfo (2005): Language and law. In Pozzo, Barbara (ed.): Ordinary language and legal language. 
Milano: Giuffrè, 1-21. 
Multilingual Legal Information Access: an Overview 
35
Salton, Gerard (1989): Automatic text processing: the transformation analysis and retrieval of information by 
computer. Reading (Mass.): Addison-Wesley.
Sandrini, Peter (1994): Deskriptive Begriffsorientierte Terminologiearbeit im Recht, Problemstellung und 
Lösungsansätze vom Standpunkt des Übersetzers. Doctoral Thesis, University of Innsbruck.
Šarčević, Susan (1988): Bilingual and Multilingual Legal Dictionaries: New Standards for the Future. In 
Revue Générale de Droit, 970 ff.
Šarčević, Susan (1997): New approach to legal translation. The Hague/ Boston: Kluwer law International. 
Schlesinger, Rudolf B. (1995): The past and future of comparative law. In American Journal of Comparative 
Law, 43, summer, 477-481.
Sheridan, Paraic/ Braschler, Martin/ Schauble, Peter (1997): Cross-language information retrieval in a mul-
tilingual legal domain. In Peters, Carol & Tanos, Costantino (eds.): Proceedings of ECDL-97, 
1st European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, Pisa, 1st-3rd 
September, 253-268.
Temorshuizen-Arts, Marjanne (2003): Juridische Semantiek. Een Bijdrage tot de Methodologie van de 
Rechtsvergelijking, de Rechtsvinding en het Juridisch Vertalen. Doctoral Thesis, University of 
Leiden.
TREC: Text REtrieval Conference (2004): http://trec.nist.gov
Vanderlinden, Jacques & Snow, Gérard (1995): Francais juridique et science du droit. Bruxelles: Bruylant. 
Vanderlinden, Jacques (1999): Le future des langues du droit ou le dilemma du dernier orateur. In Sacco, 
Rodolfo & Castellani, Luca (eds.): Les multiples langues du droit européen uniforme. Torino: 
L’Harmattan Italia, 193-222. 
van Rijsbergen, Cornelis J. (1979): Information Retrieval, 2nd ed. London/ Boston: Butterworths. 
Weston, Martin (1990). Theoretical and practical approaches to translation. In An English Reader’s Guide to 
the French Legal System. New York: Berg.
White, James B. (1985): Law as rhetoric, rhetoric as law: the art of cultural and communal life. In The 
University of Chicago law Review, 52:3, 684-702.
Wiesmann, Eva (2004): Rechtsübersetzung und Hilfsmittel zur Translation. Wissenschaftliche Grundlagen und 
computergestützte Umsetzung eines lexikographischen Konzepts. Tübingen: Narr.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1997): Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. 
