Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
1 
Linguistic variation in Ancient Egyptian 
Genres and registers in the scribal repertoire of Amennakhte son of 
Ipuy during the 20
th
 Dynasty 
 
To Eitan, 
In remembrance of an improbable year 
 
§1. Introduction 
The aim of this paper
1
 is to investigate the diaphasic dimension of the texts written by the 
Deir el-Medina scribe Amennakhte son of Ipuy in New Kingdom Egypt (ca. 1150 BCE), 
i.e. to analyze the parameters of linguistic variation according to genre and, thereby, to 
describe the written registers or selections operating within the scribal repertoire
2
 of his time 
(which could profitably be conceived of as a language space
3
). 
This study focuses primarily on the micro-level of the scribe Amennakhte and, more 
specifically, on the linguistic features of the registers available to this single individual when 
writing texts belonging to different genres. At an empirical level, it is also intended as a first 
step in the direction of a comprehensive description of the different dimensions of linguistic 
variation found within the written production of the Deir el-Medina community in New 
Kingdom Egypt (c. 1500-1050 BCE) and, at a more methodological (or even epistemological) 
level, as a case study testing the applicability of historical sociolinguistic methods
4
 in the field 
of Ancient Egyptian, which should ultimately result in refining our approach to its diachrony. 
 
§2. Dimensions of variation: the situation in pre-Demotic
5
 Egyptian 
As is well-known, “variability is inherent to human languages”.
6
 The intrinsic heterogeneity 
and the complexity of the linguistic data observed in any language are generally linked to 
non-linguistic factors, the four traditional dimensions of linguistic variation
7
 or — as Coseriu 
(1980) puts it — the four dia-dimensions: the temporal-historical (or diachronic) dimension, 
the spatial-geographical (or diatopic) dimension, the social (or diastratic) dimension, and the 
situational (or diaphasic) dimension. These dimensions of variation have long been 
                                                          
1
 I am very grateful to Andreas Dorn (Basel), Todd Gillen (Liège), Ben Haring (Leiden), Joachim Friedrich 
Quack (Heidelberg), Baudouin Stasse (Liège), Pascal Vernus (Paris) and Jean Winand (Liège) for their extensive 
comments and criticisms on first drafts of this paper. Many thanks are also due to Andréas Stauder (Basel – 
Chicago) and Daniel Werning (Berlin) who gave me access to unpublished material. I finally wish to thank 
warmly the editors, Jennifer Cromwell (Macquarie) and Eitan Grossman (Jerusalem), for their suggestions and 
the numerous improvements to the manuscript. 
2
 On scribal repertoires and the need to study them in a dialectic process with the language emerging from a text 
community, see Stenroos in the current volume. 
3
 On the concept of language space, comprising language varieties and intrinsically heterogeneous, see especially 
Berruto (2010: 226 and Fig. 2). 
4
 On this label and the concept and methodologies behind it, see Bergs (2005: 8-21). 
5
 In this paper, the labels “pre-demotic” and “pre-Coptic” have a purely chronological meaning, i.e. refer to the 
written material of Ancient Egypt that predates respectively the appearance of the Demotic and of the Coptic 
scripts. None of the connotations sometimes linked to the “pre-Coptic” label are implied here (on this point, see 
Schenkel 1983: II, 11-13 and Loprieno 1995: 371). 
6
 Biber (1995: 1), see already Sapir (1921: 147). 
7
 This is why one may legitimately talk, after Labov (1994: 19), of ordered heterogeneity. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
2 
acknowledged in linguistic studies and result from “the impact of extralinguistic
8
 
macrofactors on linguistic structures”
9
: the architecture and evolution of languages are heavily 
dependent on socio-cultural contexts. 
Traditionally, one considers the temporal dimension to be diachronic in essence whereas 
the three other standard loci of variation are defined as synchronically oriented. However, this 
conception is misleading: on the one hand, the temporal dimension may have obvious 
“synchronic” orientations, e.g. when it comes to explaining variations related to generational 
effects,
10
 for which see, for example, the famous case of Gauchat arguing against the 
Neogrammarian
11
; on the other hand, the dynamics of spatial, social and situational variation 
often mirrors language change in progress, i.e. the diachronic dimension
12
 (this is sometimes 
called the Labov Principle; see also Givón’s comparison with synchronic variations within a 
biological population
13
). 
Therefore, for each “synchronic” corpus, one can adopt a multidimensional approach to 
variation that includes, at least, the four aforementioned parameters. Additionally, it should be 
stressed [a] that historical socio-linguistics is not diachronic in essence but may deal with 
motivated linguistic variations in “synchronic” corpora of the past
14
 and [b] that considering 
the dimensions of variation synchronically — because they behave independently with respect 
to the speed and types of evolution depending on internal variables — appears to be a 
prerequisite to any sound diachronic study that focuses on the evolution of the language as a 
whole. 
 
This being said, the attempt to apply sociolinguistic methods to Ancient Egyptian material, 
while paying due respect to the principles just advocated, confronts us with two main issues 
that are actually common to any socio-historical study of text languages.
15
 First, the data at 
our disposal are limited both in quantity (putting aside the discovery of new written material, 
                                                          
8
 The question of extralinguistic motivation for language change in Ancient Egypt has been recently broached by 
Stauder (2011) in the introduction of his study focusing on the relation to the linguistic past in the Thutmoside 
inscriptions (i.e. during the first part of the 18
th
 dynasty). 
9
 Berruto (2010: 227). 
10
 To the best of my knowledge, the analysis of generational factors in a given “synchronic” corpus has not been 
explicitly set about in Ancient Egyptian linguistics. However, this is one of the numerous side contributions of 
Sweeney’s innovative approach (1994) to idiolects in the Late Ramesside Letters (a corpus of c. 60 letters dating 
from the very end of the twentieth dynasty and the beginning of the Third Intermediate Period) in comparing 
Dhutmose’s and Butehamon’s styles (two scribes of the Necropolis being father and son). 
11
 Labov (1994: 19). 
12
 This idea is now becoming trivial due to the spread of grammaticalization studies. In Egyptological linguistics, 
see already the comments made by Loprieno (1994: 370-371) about the “need to recognize the ‘trace’ of history 
within any synchronic stage of the language.” 
13
 Givón (2002: 19-20). In this vein, methods of historical sociolinguistics enable us to dynamicize synchronic 
models of variation, just as “diachronic typology ‘dynamicizes’ the extant synchronic model by reinterpreting 
synchronic languages states as stages in a diachronic process” (Croft, Denning & Kemmer 1990: XIII). This 
perspective has been adopted by Winand in his 1992 study of verbal morphology in Late Egyptian. (Roughly 
following Winand’s definition, the label ‘Late Egyptian’ will be used here as a cover-term referring to the 
varieties occurring in the non-monumental written documents dating from the New Kingdom and Third 
Intermediate Period.) 
14
 See Bergs (2005: 12). 
15
 The notion of text languages has been coined by Fleischman (2000: 34) in order “to reflect the fact that the 
linguistic activity of such languages is amenable to scrutiny only insofar as it has been constituted in the form of 
extant texts […]. […] the data corpus of a text language is finite […].” 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
3 
the corpora are closed and we are unlikely to elicit additional data from dead speakers in the 
near future
16
) and in quality
17
 (the written medium mostly gives access to levelled or 
standardized varieties [“normative dialects” in Labovian terminology]
18
). Second, metadata 
are often lacking,
19
 making it difficult to produce definitive conclusions about the dating of 
texts
20
 and to assess the exact status of scribes and authors, when we are lucky enough to 
know them: what is their place of origin?
21
 What is the social structure of the community they 
lived in and their actual position therein for each period?
22
 
In the historico-cultural setting of Pharaonic Egypt, this leads to clear epistemological 
restrictions with respect to the possible questions that one may put to the documentation. 
However, as long as one accepts that it is not possible to describe a whole language with the 
limited set of information at our disposal, the data are not as “bad” for variationist analyses as 
one might expect, but they do need problematizing (see n. 16). 
 
§2.1. General Issues 
§2.1.1. Quantitative Analysis 
A clear restriction, whatever the type of variation under investigation may be, is related to the 
use of quantitative analysis, a prominent heuristic tool in contemporary socio-linguistics.
23
 
The problem is not in producing quantitative data, obviously, but in their lack of significance: 
except for large-scale diachronic phenomena (mostly irrelevant in the perspective addressed 
here), the low token frequencies of variables and their highly unequal distribution across types 
often makes the use of statistics meaningless (random distribution): no generalizations are 
possible. Consequently, - given the extremely low density of textual material and the 
correlatively high linguistic diversity of registers (as well as their disparity across periods) - 
any quantitative approach is profitably supplemented by a qualitative one that evaluates actual 
number of occurrences against an “expected” body of evidence
24
 in order to offset the alea of 
preservation. 
 
                                                          
16
 The “unpredictable series of historical accidents” leading to uneven corpora, the “normative” nature of written 
varieties (and distortion imposed on the varieties by the medium), as well as the impossibility of confirming 
negative evidence (gaps in the documentation are definitely unequal to statements of ungrammaticality), explain 
Labov’s (1994: 11) pessimistic statement about historical linguistics which he considers to be “the art of making 
the best use out of bad data.” Several scholars took this remark at face value, recently see inter alii Beal 2008. A 
refreshing counter-perspective is offered by Bergs or Stenroos (in the current volume), arguing that the data are 
excellent for whoever is inclined to ask questions they can answer. 
17
 Vernus (1994: 330) clearly draws the attention of the Egyptological community to this fact: “[f]aute 
d’informateur, nous ne disposons que d’un registre plus ou moins étendu d’énoncé qui ne reflète pas 
nécessairement toutes les variétés théoriquement possibles.” 
18
 See, for example, Nevalainen, Klemola & Laitinen (2006: 16-17). 
19
 For this, see especially Nevalainen (1999). 
20
 The question becomes especially vexing when it comes to dating literary texts. Recently, see the conference 
Dating Egyptian Literary Texts held in Göttingen (June 9
th
-12
th
 2010), to be published in the Lingua Aegyptia – 
Studia Monographica series. 
21
 Place is understood here both as location, in objective physical terms, and as meaning, an idealization of the 
physical resulting from a social construct, see Johnstone 2004. The second dimension is most certainly 
determinant in the case studied by Uljas 2010, which shows that the region an individual is born in is part of his 
social identity. 
22
 This was underlined by Funk (1988: 151) concerning the Coptic dialects. 
23
 On methodological issues in quantitative sociolinguistics, see the conclusions of Bailey & Tillery 2004. 
24
 This issue will be discussed with further details in Polis & Stauder 2012 and Stauder (forthcoming). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
4 
§2.1.2. Text Language 
As a text language (see n. 15), Ancient Egyptian is best not described in relation to any kind 
of spoken vernacular but studied as written performance in its own right.
25
 The impression of 
having access to written as if spoken Ancient Egyptian is a pure illusion
26
 ignoring the 
demarcation line between written and spoken realms,
27
 two independent semiotic universes 
that deserve distinct, even if commensurable (because of the fact that they ultimately 
represent the same language) methodologies.
28
 This rather uncontroversial statement holds for 
any language, but is of paramount importance in the cultural environment of Ancient Egypt. 
As a matter of fact, l’espace de l’écrit is characterized by a strong tendency towards a high 
degree of formality
29
 and ensues from converging cultural and sociological factors
30
: Ancient 
Egyptian documents may be organized on a graded continuum of sacralisation,
31
 which is 
characterized by an increasing degree of formality indexed by artefactual
32
 and linguistic
33
 
                                                          
25
 This is much in agreement with Kammerzell (1998 : 21-23) who argues that spoken Egyptian and written 
Egyptian may be considered as two distinct linguistic systems since they show marked differences on all levels 
of linguistic description. 
26
 See, for example, Allen (1994: 1), in reference to the letters of Heqa-Nakht that are “generally understood to 
represent what Middle Egyptian must have been like as a spoken language.” Another enduring myth is the 
conception of Late Egyptian documentary texts as low variety directly reflecting the spoken vernacular of the 
time, see n. 37. In Egyptian linguistics, the labels “colloquial”, “spoken”, “vernacular” have been used as near 
synonyms to refer to the registers of some texts, texts varieties, sub-corpora or genres according to two, usually - 
but not necessarily - co-occurring, principles: [1] the function of the text has to be anchored in daily life 
(e.g. letters, administrative documents such as account, court reports, etc.) and [2] formal features characteristic 
of later stages of the language occur in the text (the functional dimension of these formal features is usually 
downplayed). Against this position, it is argued that the written language is inevitably levelled in different ways - 
no matter how close its function to daily life and how numerous the innovative features -, and should not be 
evaluated against a virtual spoken variety (even less so when this idealized speaking is seen as a coherent and 
monolithic variety with a linear diachronic evolution). Additionally, innovative linguistic features access the 
numerous written registers through complex processes of legitimization (granted by the power-holders, by the 
competing elite or by the scribal intelligentia itself; the first two aspects are developed in Goldwasser (1999: 
312-313 & 316-317)) that involve inevitably drastic selections in the spoken repertoire. Conversely, some 
written varieties may be the very locus of innovation (the relation between spoken and written varieties is far 
from being unidirectional, see e.g. Chafe & Tannen 1987): some changes may originate in the written medium 
directly (and spread afterwards, if ever, to the spoken one; see Smith 1996:15-17); one just has to think of 
literary findings, documentary idioms (e.g. in legal texts) or even complete registers (e.g. of the égyptien de 
tradition, see n. 33) which most certainly never occurred in the spoken medium. On the relation between public 
speech and the written language in Ancient Egypt, see Baines (2002: 12). 
27
 This does not quite mean, of course, that parts of the spoken registers may not be reflected in writing, see 
e.g. the case of quoted discourses and slang idioms in the Tomb Robberies papyri mentioned by Vernus (1993) 
and Winand (in the current volume). In this respect, the linguistic differences between the registers of narratives 
and discourses (this Benvenistian distinction is especially prominent in Egyptological linguistics, see 
esp. Winand 1995b) are particularly striking, both registers showing different patterns of variation in a single 
text and having distinct speeds of evolution. 
28
 In this respect, see Goldwasser’s (1999: 312) insightful comments. 
29
 The notion of formality is well-established in sociolinguistic theories (see Bergs 2005: 18) and is not 
unproblematic (see already Halliday 1978: 224). It has been recently used (with a non-technical - informal so to 
say - sense) in Egyptological linguistics by Stauder (2011: esp. n. 20). 
30
 See below the comments about literacy, access to writing and the status of the scribe in §2.2.2. 
31
 See Vernus (1990 : 41-43) and his fundamental distinction between documents that are “sacralisés” and those 
“qui ne le sont point”; “[l]a sacralisation est le terme marqué de cette opposition, ce qui veut dire qui les 
documents sacralisés ont des marques positives qui les classent comme tels, alors que les documents non 
sacralisés n’ont pas de marques spéciales.” 
32
 Such as the medium (from the most perennial, like monuments, to the most temporary ones, like ostraca), the 
link with the iconic sphere (complementarities and interaction with pictures and, crucially, the use of the 
hieroglyphic script, of which the capacity to refer figuratively to the essence of things, is an important 
component in the Ancient Egyptian writing system). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
5 
parameters that combine in complex ways. This continuum has no endpoints: the registers 
range from greater vernacularity to greater formality
34
 and each of them are of equal 
importance for variationist studies. The more “vernacular” registers
35
 have no characteristics 
that make them more or less interesting than other more formal registers for linguistic 
studies.
36
 Paraphrasing Stenroos (in the current volume), every register displays patterns of 
variation that are strictly patterns of written convention and deserve to be analysed as such: no 
register has ontological qualities that makes it better suited for linguistic analysis on account 
of being closer to the spoken language.
37
 Due to the overall cultural context of written 
production, we may take for granted that even the text varieties situated at the bottom of the 
scale of formality (i.e. the closest to the written “vernacular” pole), have few features and 
types of variations in common with the spoken realizations of Ancient Egyptian. If 
generalizations about the written data and their relationship to spoken language - or, better, 
varieties - have to be made, they belong to a second stage of analysis which is not always 
necessary.
38
 
 
§2.2. Dimensions of variation related to the user (scribes) 
Two dimensions of linguistic variation are reflections of reasonably permanent characteristics 
of the social man, the user, in any language situation
39
: the geographical (diatopic) and social 
(diastratic) dimensions. These two dimensions are merged in every single text, which is by 
definition the product of a scribe who both originates from some place and lives in a social 
milieu. In other words, the separation between the two dimensions is nothing more than a 
                                                          
33
 At the linguistic level, it does not only involve the selection of formal and standardized registers at a given 
point in time (see Fig. 2), but - given the postulated relation between language and essences in Ancient Egypt - 
the use of a linguistic variety (called égyptien de tradition after Vernus 1978: 139 n. 136; 1982: 18 & 81) that 
aims at imitating and emulating, ideologically, the language of the First Time (zp tpy) and, in practical terms, 
parts of the Earlier Egyptian repertoire (mutatis mutandis one may think here of the Greek Katherevusa, a high 
and artificial variety based on earlier written standards). With time, this led to a genuine diglossia between 
written registers (the literature is abundant, see e.g. Jansen-Winkeln 1995, Loprieno 1996 and Vernus 1996). I 
would favour the term “multiglossia” familiar to scholars of Arabic in order to refer to the continuum of 
registers, see §2.2.2. Nowadays, we still lack a comprehensive description of the language ideologies in Ancient 
Egypt, defined (following Silverstein 1979:193) as “sets of beliefs about language articulated by users as a 
rationalization or justification of perceived language structure or use.” However, the identification of evaluative 
attitudes held by writers remains an important prerequisite when dealing with variation and conventionalization 
(see esp. Ferguson 1994: 18; 25-26), for they play a crucial role in the diachronic spread of certain features at the 
expense of others. 
34
 See Bergs (2005: 18). 
35
 Their description has been distinctly favoured in the grammatical studies of Late Egyptian. The nature of the 
Earlier Egyptian corpus made this option impossible. 
36
 A similar observation applies to the distinction between dialects and standard languages which is a by-product 
of social, historical and cultural factors: “from a merely linguistic point of view there is no difference between 
standard and dialect” (Berruto 2010: 231). In the same vain, see already Hudson (1996: 36) who argues that 
there is no difference to be drawn except with reference to prestige which is impossible to define based on 
linguistic features. 
37
 Contra, see e.g. Černý & Groll 
4
1993: XLIX-L.  
38
 It is evidently the case when it comes to the phonological level of analysis, see Peust 1999: 19. 
39
 I refer explicitly to Halliday’s viewpoint in his chapters (1978: 8-35 & 211-235) entitled Language and the 
social man, where he states (p. 12) that “language and society — or, as we prefer to think of it, language and 
social man — is a unified conception, and needs to be understood and investigated as a whole. Neither of these 
exists without the other: there can be no social man without language, and no language without social man.” 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
6 
convenient abstraction that allows us to focus on specific aspects
40
; for argument’s sake: local 
tradition in the Coffin Texts spells from Deir el-Bersha [+diatopic] vs evolution of 
draughtsmen writings during the New Kingdom [+diastratic]. 
 
§2.2.1. The diatopic dimension 
The diatopic dimension has attracted the attention of several scholars. Two main trends of 
research have been pursued: the identification of local varieties
41
 per se and the investigation 
of possible correlations between diachronic stages on one hand and parts of Egypt where the 
written “standard” variety of a given period might originate on the other hand. In this 
perspective, the “standard” written language of one period is seen as predominantly reflecting 
a geographic dialect
42
. 
Most of the local varieties that one may reasonably assume to have existed (given the 
considerable north-south extension of the country
43
) are elusive in pre-Coptic Ancient 
Egyptian. In the present state of affairs, “[I]t has been almost impossible to find clear 
linguistic characteristics typical for a specific geographical region”.
44
 The only convincing 
case of diatopic variation that has been identified so far is the Napatan Egyptian
45
 attested by 
a small set of royal inscriptions in the northern half of the Sudan (5
th
 to 3
rd
 centuries BCE): it 
shows morphological and syntactic variations that diverge strikingly from the written norm of 
similar registers attested in Egypt at the same period. 
None of the hypotheses correlating macro-diachronic stages of pre-Coptic Ancient 
Egyptian with a standard variety coming from one particular part of Egypt has proven to be 
really persuasive.
46
 This is reflected most immediately by the lack of agreement between 
scholars: if one puts Demotic aside, Old, Middle and Late Egyptian have all been linked in 
turn to Lower, Middle, and Upper Egypt depending on the linguistic features scholars paid 
                                                          
40
 Both dimensions are obviously always pregnant: every place has some social “depth” and one may be 
interested in the repertoire of a social group scattered in several places. 
41
 For the suggestions that have been put forward, see the literature quoted in Peust 1999: 33 n. 15; add Vycichl 
1958; Davis 1973: 168-202; Osing 1975; Meltzer 1980; Leahy 1981; Doret 1986: 14 n. 24, with previous 
literature; Allen 2004; Peust 2007. The suggested patterns of variation are generally relevant, but their matching 
with a place is usually not conclusive: the number of texts considered is small (e.g. Johnson 1977), the argument 
highly disputable (e.g. Davis 1973: 168-202) or the phenomenon under investigation at the fringes and 
inaccurately described (e.g. Groll 1987; compare Shisha-Halevy’s 2007a thorough investigation of 
determination-signaling environments). 
42
 This position is obviously convenient when it comes to explaining the quick emergence of a given linguistic 
feature; however, the argument is generally ad hoc and, consequently, irrelevant. See e.g. Meltzer 1990: 75. 
43
 Cf. the well-known sentence of P. Anastasi I, 28,6: st mi md.t n s idH.w Hna s n Abw “they [i.e. your words] are 
like the speech of a man from the Delta to a man of Elephantine” with Loprieno’s (1982: 76-77) critical 
comments. See also Greenberg 1986: 505, commenting on the differing local dialects in Ancient Egypt. 
44
 Peust 1999: 33. 
45
 See Peust 1999b (with Quack 2002 regarding the similarities with Demotic); Breyer (2008) rejects the label 
‘dialect’, arguing that Napatan is better characterized as “eine Art hyperkreolisierte Schriftsprache”. For earlier 
material (early Third Intermediate Period), see Darnell 2006 about Queen Katimala’s inscription with the critical 
reviews and papers of Zibelius-Chen 2007 & Collombert 2008. 
46
 The divergent suggestions are summed up in Peust (1999a: 33 n. 15) with the previous literature on the topic. 
Note that Edgerton’s (1951b) identification of Old and Late Egyptian with northern varieties was recently joined 
by Allen (2004: 6-7) based on the analysis of the prothetic verbal forms in the Middle Kingdom versions of the 
Pyramid Texts: the more northern the texts, the more frequent the prothetic yod. On the other hand, Allen (2004: 
7-10) argues for a southern origin of Middle Egyptian given the occurrence of the negation nn, characteristic of 
Middle Egyptian, instead of nj in the middle and lower Egypt versions of Pyramid Text spells during the Middle 
Kingdom. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
7 
attention to. Definitely more promising are the approaches that identify diaglosses between 
texts coming from specific geographical areas at different stages of the language and that 
focus on some linguistic features without overgeneralization
47
; furthermore, in-depth studies 
of this kind appear to be a prerequisite for further generalizations. 
This apparent lack of major geographic variation
48
 points to the need for detailed analyses 
that envision all the possible dimensions of variation
49
 and take into consideration the 
evanescent metadata concerning the place of origin of the authors of texts.
50
 Indeed, combined 
sociological and cultural factors (see §2.2.2) lead to a high degree of standardization (or 
normalization
51
) of the written performance at any stage of the Egyptian language
52
; therefore, 
the dialectal variables are evidently not numerous and mostly to be found at the fringes of the 
attested registers: there can be no doubt that the dialectal study of pre-Coptic Egyptian is still 
in its infancy. 
 
§2.2.2. The diastratic dimension 
The social (or diastratic) dimension of variation is not more self-evident than the dialectal 
one.
53
 In both cases, this appears to follow directly from the way Ancient Egyptians 
conceived of their national identity and from the ideology maintaining their sense of 
                                                          
47
 See e.g. Shisha-Halevy (1981), who discusses the degree of similarity between Late Egyptian and Bohairic, 
exploring “descriptive similarities of grammatical entities; Winand (1992: 502-504), between Upper Egypt Late 
Egyptian and Akhmimic constructions of the Third Future with nominal subject; Winand (2007: 302-303 & 
2011: 547 & 550), between Wenamun and Coptic dialects from Upper Egypt (Sahidic excluded) concerning the 
compatibility of the relative converter with the perfective sDm=f and the past converter wn; recently, Vernus 
(2012) identified Akhmimic features in the Teaching of Amenemope and suggested (p.c.) that, given the temporal 
proximity of Wenamun and this teaching, “de très maigres manifestations de variétés locales pourraient déjà être 
reconnues frémissantes dès le début de la Troisième Période Intermédiaire.” This observation fits well with a 
progressive opening of the written registers to diatopic variation, a dimension which is definitely identifiable in 
the Demotic corpus (Quack p.c.). 
48
 Even if it falls outside of the scope of the present paper, it is worth mentioning that the situation in Coptic is 
somewhat different given that “geographical distance is the most powerful factor behind the range of variation in 
Coptic as a whole” (Funk 1988: 152). The non-defective writing system allowed scholars to identify several 
“dialects” (see e.g. Kasser 1991). It is not the place here to enter the debate regarding the exact nature of the 
variations at stake behind the graphical level, i.e. whether it actually reflects regional linguistic variation at the 
phonological level or merely different ways and norms of transcribing the same language according to the place 
in which a text has been written (for the latter option, see esp. Loprieno 1992); anyhow, morphological and 
syntactical distinctions between dialects have been fruitfully identified, see e.g. Polotsky 1960; Shisha-Halevy 
2007b for the peculiarities of the Bohairic dialect; Grossman 2009 about the grammaticalization of periphrastic 
perfects in the Coptic dialects and Grossman (forthcoming) about the prohibitive constructions across dialects. 
49
 In this respect, it seems methodologically unsound to assume that one or two linguistic features in common 
between “dialects” may be sufficient to equate an entire stage of the language with another. Additionally, the 
grammatical consonances usually occur between specific corpora displaying similar patterns of variation and not 
between idealized and linguistically heterogeneous stages of Ancient Egyptian (this fact was already mentioned 
in Doret 1986: 14 n. 24). Here, Shisha-Halevy’s statement about Coptic (1981: 314) could be profitably extended 
to pre-Coptic Egyptian; “there is really no justification, either syn- or diachronic, descriptive or comparative, for 
tackling Coptic en bloc as a monolithic phenomenon, previous to examining its components.” Here I deliberately 
cast aside as a premature enterprise the further attempt to match one stage of the language with an actual 
geographical area. 
50
 E.g. of the type produced by Uljas (2010) in his study of the writings of the 3
rd
 person plural suffix pronoun 
=sn without the final -n in Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate period inscriptions. 
51
 Regarding the spectrum of Coptic literary dialects, Funk (1988: 151) speaks of “normalized texts”. 
52
 On this point, see recently the pessimistic (but quite realistic) view expressed by Loprieno (2006: 167) 
concerning the identification of dialectal features in the Deir el-Medina documentation. 
53
 Loprieno (2006: 168) uses the label “diastratic” for referring to what is called “diaphasic” variation in the 
present paper. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
8 
community. To be sure, the Ancient Egyptian language - and more specifically the mastery of 
its reading and writing
54
 - was a component of paramount importance in the building of this 
identity and “must have come close to being the qualifying test for Egyptianness”
55
. In this 
context, the knowledge of cursive and, all the more, of hieroglyphic writing was of paramount 
importance, even if it remained chiefly the prerogative of a scribal elite being dependent on 
various administrative and religious institutions (and, ultimately, on the central sate). 
Consequently, the social dimension of variation is limited due to at least two parameters. 
The first applies also to other dimensions of variation (see the comments in §2.1.2), but is 
worth describing more explicitly in relation to sociological variation. Writing is an instrument 
of knowledge (in the framework of this paper, it is enough to quote the famous idiom sStA n 
mdw-nTr “the secret of the hieroglyphs”56), and knowledge an instrument of power.57 (This 
truism is of special pregnance in Ancient Egypt.) As such, written performance was in the 
grip of a close and closed group of individuals at the top of the social hierarchy and 
undoubtedly subject to control: it was situated within a complex system of decorum that 
imposed
58
 a set of conventions and restrictions on the written language.
59
 In linguistic terms, 
this led ipso facto to a limitation of the space for socially motivated variation: each Ancient 
Egyptian genre was linked to registers (see below, §2.3.2) conventionalized to a degree hardly 
reached by any other text language. As mentioned earlier, this conventionalization of registers 
can be conceived of as a scale
60
 ranging from greater vernacularity to greater formality and 
does not necessarily entail highly formal registers (even if one observes a strong tendency 
towards greater formality in the case of pre-Demotic Egyptian). Assuming four ideal registers, 
this may be schematized as follows
61
: 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Scale of formality of the written registers 
 
Even if the situation varied quite a bit in the course of the history,
62
 the proportion of 
literate individuals among the population most certainly remained under five per cent of the 
                                                          
54
 According to Baines 1983 and Baines & Eyre 1983, no more than one percent of the population had a fair 
degree of literacy (highest estimate). Baines & Eyre (1983: 67) see no place for a “high-ranking literate class of 
non-office-holders” and underline the fact that “illiteracy could also occur among officials.” 
55
 Kemp (2006: 34). 
56
 See Baines (1990: 9-10) and Vernus (1990: 37). 
57
 On this point, see Baines (1990: 6-10 & 2007: 146-171) who problematizes the opposition between oral and 
written knowledge and its repartition among the literate elite. On the subversive and possibly noxious uses of 
speech in the literary texts, see Coulon 1999. 
58
 The lexicon referring to the language of literature is itself tinged with axiological values (md.wt nfr.wt “the 
good words”, TAs.w stp.w “the chosen maxims”, etc.); see the examples quoted by Moers 2002 and the remark in 
Stauder 2011b. 
59
 See Junge (2001 : 18), and also Loprieno (2006: 167), who provides two examples “in which writing 
conventions torpedo the recognition of dialectal, and to a certain extent even of linguistic realities altogether”. 
60
 See e.g. Bergs 2005: 18. 
61
 This description of the written registers may be compared with Milroy’s “structured varieties” (1992: 66). 
62
 See Baines & Eyre 1983: 67-69. 
Greater formality Greater vernacularity 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
9 
total adult population in pre-Coptic times.
63
 Literacy, understood as a social practice,
64
 was 
the prerogative of a small group of individuals, a scribal elite occupying a position of prestige. 
This community of knowledge and writing
65
 was always prone to self-promotion through 
iconic and textual representations; scribes shared values, interests and, accordingly, acted as a 
highly cohesive group in the social stratification. In their writings, this is reflected by the 
conformity to norms acquired both through teaching and scribal practices,
66
 conventions 
probably often best understood as an implicit or tacit agreement within the group of literates 
(paying due respect to decorum,
67
 etc.) than as a proper prescriptive standard.
68
 To put it 
otherwise, the mastering of the linguistic norm attached to each conventionalized register was 
indexical of their belonging to the upper class.
69
 Therefore, one may refine the schema of 
Fig. 1 by adding a second dimension, a continuum ranging from greater variation to greater 
standardization. This two-dimensional graph delimits what might be labelled as an idealized 
“language space”, a purely theoretical construct encompassing all the linguistic features likely 
to be actualized by a scribe at any given point in time: 
                                                          
63
 This estimation (disputed by Lesko 1990 without much argument) may be compared with Harris’ evaluation 
(1989: 328) of the degree of literacy in classical Athens: 5% (or possibly a bit more) of the total adult population. 
This percentage was to rise to 10-15% in the next centuries. Quack (2006: 95-98), based on his work on the 
Book of the Temple (especially the number of hands) and taking into account various degrees of literacy (people 
working periodically for temples, etc.), argues that, at least in urban areas, a high percentage of the male adult 
population must have been literate (during the later periods). 
64
 On this point, see Barton & Hamilton’s introduction (1998: 1-22). Literacy is described as integral to its social 
context and may be accessed through literacy practices which are patterned by social institutions and power 
relationships. 
65
 As stated explicitly by Ragazolli (2010: 158). 
66
 This assertion does not take sides on the question of the existence of centralized teaching in Ancient Egypt 
(see the well-known sentence in the Instruction of Kheti [P.Sallier II, 3,9-4,1] referring to “a scribal school in the 
midst of the children of the officials and the foremost of the Residence” and the comments in McDowell 2000: 
217-218): the scribal practices and the assumed mobility of individual scribes are self-sufficient in explaining the 
emergence of levelled written registers. However, one should not downplay the influence of teaching, centralized 
or local, in reinforcing the convention attached to registers in the direction of greater normalization, especially 
during the New Kingdom when the “Classics” of earlier times were learned and copied at school. See e.g. Junge 
(2001: 21). On scribal education, see Brunner (1957 as well as “Erzieher” and “Erziehung” in LdÄ II, 20-2 & 22-
27). On the first steps of scribal training (writing exercises [from individual signs to the copying of whole 
sentences], grammatical paradigms, onomastic lists, etc.), see Venturini 2007. On scribal education during the 
Ramesside period, see Hagen 2006 & 2007; Goelet 2008 with previous literature. 
67
 This concept was introduced by Baines (see e.g. 1985: 277-sq.) in order to account for the interaction of 
pictorial and written representation “emphasizing the integration of socio-cultural norms which it is intended to 
convey” (Junge 2001: 18) and recently received a fuller and exemplary treatment in Baines (2007: 3-30). On the 
relation between texts and ideology, see more recently Parkinson’s penetrating remarks (2002: 86-87 & 91-98 
about literary decorum). 
68
 See Ferguson’s definition of “conventionalization” (1994: 15): “Human language […] is nevertheless largely a 
matter of convention, that is an implicit contract among a community of users of a language variety that certain 
expressions will mean certain things when used in combinations under certain social conditions. Just how this 
‘contract’ is constantly being achieved, maintained, and changed is the problem of conventionalization.” There 
always seems to be “an expected norm for any single utterance, and any deviance from this expected norm is of 
interest to the sociolinguist and the student of language change” (Bergs 2005: 18); see also Croft’s Theory of 
Utterance Selection (2000: 31). 
69
 If we understand it correctly, the most famous declaration of Montuweser (St. MMA 12.184) is definitely 
symptomatic of this fact: ink mdw r r-a sr.w, Swy m Dd pAw “I was someone speaking like the officials, free from 
saying pAw” (literature in Stauder 2011: n. 36). This would be a clear case of first order indexicality in 
Silverstein’s terminology, i.e., the association by a social actor of a linguistic form with some meaningful social 
group, the officials. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
10 
 
Fig. 2. The linguistic features of the levelled scribal repertoire 
 
However, due to the sociological factors acknowledged above, the scribal repertoire (i.e. the 
sum of written forms available for the scribe) is limited to tightly levelled
70
 registers (usually 
lacking significant linguistic variation) reflecting the sociological context of production. This 
graph shows that a given register may be low on the formality scale (e.g. the content of a 
letter), but will nevertheless display a considerable degree of regularity.
71
 Therefore, the 
Egyptian language we access through writing is, glossing Pierre Bourdieu, an object 
ideologically pre-constructed by a set of socio-historical conditions. It is worth mentioning in 
this context that the scribal repertoire of the extant documentation is close enough to what 
Heinz Kloss labelled “Dachsprache”
72
, if we understand this term as referring to the 
continuum of levelled registers whose prestige succeed in obscuring the dimensions of 
variation related to the user. 
As such, the identification of diastratic variation has not been a successful enterprise in 
pre-Demotic Egyptian up until now. The issues we are facing in this domain may be 
                                                          
70
 The notion of “Levelling” is preferred here as a cover-term to the surprisingly undertheorized concept of 
“standardization”. Following Milroy (2004: 162-165), “levelling” may be describe as a linguistic process “that 
has the effect of reducing variability both within and across language systems and which in principle operates 
independently of an institutional norm”, but does not exclude it. The result of this process is “levelled registers”. 
“Standardization”, on the other hand, is the marked term, for it typically displays an orientation to an 
institutionally supported norm. Levelled registers may therefore be the result of various types of agentivity: 
authorization from the power-holders, cohesive norms of the scribal elite, etc. 
71
 This analysis is somewhat different from, but compatible with, Goldwasser’s (1999: 312-314) description of 
the language of the Ramesside Period. She accounted for the existence of two main “social dialects”, both 
comprising the Standard variety (i.e. occupying the top of the standardization scale in the present approach): the 
first is the one attested in the non-literary corpus (Alltags or Umgang realm) and is called “low variety” whereas 
the second occurs in literary texts and is called “high variety”. 
72
 The notion of koineization might be relevant to describe the evolution of language (inflectional reduction, 
avoidance of syntactic redundancy, etc.) attested in the documentary text of the Ramesside period (19
th
-20
th
 
dynasties), but this hypothesis - that has been put forward by Goldwasser (199: 314) - remains to be investigated. 
Greater variation 
Greater standardization 
Idealized 
Language Space 
Linguistic features of the levelled scribal repertoire 
Greater vernacularity Greater formality 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
11 
illustrated by Sweeney’s (1995) case-study. She investigated whether Ancient Egyptian 
women used language differently from men in non-literary letters from the Ramesside Period 
and tried to identify “genderlectal” features. Her results are, not surprisingly, mostly negative: 
“what women have in common with each other linguistically, they also have in common with 
men, by and large. Almost all the morphological and syntactic elements which appear in 
women’s letters also appear in those of men.” Interestingly enough from a methodological 
viewpoint, the author noticed some peculiarities in the phrasing of Late Ramesside Letter no 
37 (less “standardized” than other letters), sent by the chantress of Amun Henuttawy; 
however the infrequent linguistic features that appear in this document seem to point rather to 
an individual style or idiolect than to a proper sociolect for they do not occur in other letters 
sent by women. 
Finally, a note of Gilula (1991) regarding the king’s Egyptian in the tale of P.Westcar 
will serve here as a bridging context between the diastratic and the diaphasic dimensions of 
variation. While studying two sentences with “majestic licence” uttered by the King, Gilula 
argues that they may reflect “a level of speech that is higher than that of common people and 
might indicate special breeding, erudition or sensitivity to the language and its eccentric 
usage.” This observation is probably valid,
73
 but one should not be tempted to correlate it with 
the actual position of the King at the top of the social hierarchy: we are dealing with a literary 
text and the kinds of variation observed show mostly, if not solely, that the author and scribe 
who wrote down this piece on papyrus was able to play in a masterly fashion with the written 
registers at his disposal, depending on the character. 
 
§2.3. Dimension of variation related to the use or diaphasic dimension  
If we have had to acknowledge the elusiveness of the dimensions of variation related to the 
user, the variations related to the use (i.e. the diaphasic dimension of variation) are 
indisputably more salient in pre-Demotic Egyptian.
74
 This results directly from two related 
parameters: the high degree of conventionalization of the registers (see §2.2.2) attached to 
each genre and the sizeable differences in the distribution and in the repartition of the 
linguistic features between registers. In Ancient Egyptian, the overwhelming regularity of 
correlation between genres and registers is especially striking. Each situation of written 
performance required the use of a specific genre and each genre was linked to well-defined 
(often prescribed) registers.
75
 In other words, paraphrasing Berruto, linguistic variation 
according to registers is an indirect reflection of the recurrent characteristics of the way the 
scribes used the language according to the situation of writing.
76
 
                                                          
73
 For “poetic licence” induced in documentary texts by the topic dealt with, see Goldwasser 2001. 
74
 See Ferguson’s (1983: 154) general statement: “register variation, in which language structure varies in 
accordance with the occasion of use, is all-pervasive in human language.” Biber (1995: 1-2) adds: “[a]lthough 
linguistic differences among geographic and social dialect have been more extensively studied, it turns out that 
the linguistic differences among the registers within a language are in many ways more noteworthy.” 
75
 This is, of course, immediately dependent on the socio-cultural settings of the written performance (see B.2). 
76
 Berruto 2010: 228. On this point, see especially Goldwasser (1999: 314-315): “the use of the different 
language varieties is in no way arbitrary, but prescribed; the choice of linguistic and lexical items within the 
literary dialect is usually conditioned by the required registers of language in every single linguistic situation.” 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
12 
The investigation of this dimension of variation has been far and away the most fruitful in 
variationist accounts of pre-Demotic Egyptian.
77
 For the sake of clarity (and given the lack of 
agreement on the definition of these terms
78
), the relations between the notions of genre and 
register are to be specified further,
79
 as they will be central in the case-study on Amennakhte’s 
writings. 
 
§2.3.1. Genre 
The notion of genre is not seen here as referring directly to varieties associated with particular 
situations of use or specific communicative purposes. “Genre” is rather envisioned as an 
analytical abstraction
80
 based on the structural regularities of the written production 
depending on the situation of use
81
: the form of the written performance within a culture (the 
structure of a text [including phenomenon such as versification], the registers selected, etc.) is 
constrained by socially shared organizational features
82
 that are characteristic of whole texts.
83
 
For example, a letter will typically contain an addressee, a main body with some content and 
some final salutations as well as expressions of politeness, whereas poetry is expected to be 
written in verses and to resort to a specific register. The notion of genre is certainly best 
defined prototypically
84
 — based on the extant text varieties during one period: a text is 
expected to have some properties that identifies it as belonging to a genre, but all the 
prototypical features need not occur
85
 (a letter without final salutations is still a letter) and 
non-prototypical features may also appear (a letter might embed accounts of commodities or 
be written in a highly poetic register). Genre is a place of tension and negotiation between 
extra-linguistic determinations and linguistic actualizations; as such it is an unsteady (but 
notionally not fuzzy) concept reconfigured by every single new text
86
 that will, in a way or 
                                                          
77
 See especially Goldwasser (1991a, 1991b & 2001) where numerous theoretical insights are to be found; Junge 
(2001: 18-23) who stresses the importance of the social functions of texts as well as of grasping the linguistic 
register of any given text; Quack (2001: 168-169); David (2006 & 2010). It is noticeable that such analyses have 
not been properly attempted for Earlier Egyptian (i.e. Old and Middle Egyptian), see however Junge’s innovative 
general overview in LdÄ V, 1190-193 & 1985. 
78
 Recently, see Biber & Conrad (2009: 21-23). 
79
 For the relationship between genres and registers in Late Egyptian, see Martin Leon, Gohy & Polis 2011. 
80
 This is much in agreement with the definition of genre in Systemic Functional Linguistics. On the 
epistemological issues linked with the modelling of Ancient Egyptian genres, see Baines 2003: 5. 
81
 See especially Ferguson (1994: 21). The situation of use or circumstances in which the text was produced is 
the main criterion used by Junge (2001: 19-20) in his survey of the textual genres in Late Egyptian. 
82
 The intelligibility of any text is hugely facilitated by the genre, for writers and readers share a set of implicit 
conventions. However, this may become an issue for modern scholars dealing with text languages, given the 
elusiveness of this tacit code which is often far from easy to reconstruct. 
83
 Nowadays, there is a general recognition that genres exist “just as much in nonliterary spoken or written 
‘texts’ as in literary texts” (Ferguson 1994: 17). On the problem of “genres” in relation to literary pieces, 
especially of the Middle kingdom, see Parkinson 2002: 32-36. 
84
 See Parkinson (2002: 34): “[a] genre is not a mutually exclusive class, not ‘all (of whose) characteristic traits 
need be shared by every embodiment of the type’ [quoting Fowler].” 
85
 In the literary sphere, an author is therefore able to play consciously with the expected features of a genre: 
illustrious examples like Sinuhe or Wenamun will immediately pop up in the Egyptologist’s mind, as are the 
literary letters of the New Kingdom (see Caminos in LdÄ I, 858 & III, 1066; Goldwasser 1991b: 130-131 speaks 
of “embedding” into the genre of letters) like P.Anastasi I or the Letter to Menna. In Late Egyptian, see the 
recent case-study of Gohy 2012. 
86
 See Parkinson 2002: 34. Following, inter alii, Parkinson, Bickel & Mathieu - as well as Genette and Todorov 
in the French tradition of literary criticism -, this point has been recently underlined by Ragazzoli (2008: 99-
100). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
13 
another, play with the universe of expectation of the reader which explains the “fluid 
transition between individual texts” that “may be combined into text clusters” displaying 
permeable exterior boundaries.
87
 Distinctions between genres are essentially defined in non-
linguistic and emic
88
 terms: differences in purpose (monumental display, archiving process, 
actual communication), production circumstances (Sitz im Leben), relation between the text 
producer and the intended audience, etc. When switching between genres, the scribes use the 
written performance to achieve different goals, and the registers selected by the genres yield 
language choices that are functionally motivated.  
 
§2.3.2. Register 
The notion of register is often considered to be an overarching concept designating “a variety 
according to use”
89
 (as a dialect is a “variety according to the user”) or a “situationally 
defined variety”
90
: it is therefore used “as a cover term for any variety associated with a 
particular situational context or purpose”
91
. As a result, there is a possible confusion between 
genre and register and the latter often turns out to be used in order to refer to well-identified 
text types within a culture, e.g. novels, letters, debates, etc. I would suggest here restricting 
the term “register” to the description of the regular selections of linguistic features in the 
scribal repertoire in accordance with text genre. Indeed, the language of a genre will tend to 
display identifiable linguistic features, which are in some ways (see below) different from the 
language of other genres. Now three questions still hold: what kind of relation may we posit 
between registers and genres (§3.2.2.1)? how do registers differs from one another (§3.2.2.2)? 
at which level of generality do we define registers (§3.2.2.3)? 
 
§2.3.2.1. Relationship between genre and register 
The relation between genre and register is not a one to one - or biunique - relation, but rather a 
n to n relation. This modelling means (a) that several registers may be used in a single genre
92
 
(distinctive phrases are sometimes used as signals for the change of register, like the so-called 
initiality marker ky Dd r-nty in letters) and (b) that a single register may occur in texts from 
                                                          
87
 Moers 2010: 687. 
88
 This point is crucial since the types of collections of texts in single manuscripts unmistakably show that the 
projection of our modern understanding of the genres onto the Egyptian texts, without acknowledging the 
cultural settings, would lead to ineffective and inadequate categorization. Parkinson (2002: 34) labels this “emic” 
approach to the genres “historical and inductive”. 
89
 See e.g. Halliday (1978: 31) who states that register is “a very simple and yet powerful notion: the language 
that we speak or write varies according to the type of situation.” However, Halliday’s interest was in building a 
theory that attempts to uncover the principles which govern these variations: “what situational factors determine 
what linguistic features; which kind of situational factor determines which kind of selection in the linguistic 
system.” On this point, see below §2.3.3. 
90
 In the Egyptological literature, see Junge (2001: 21): “[t]he conventional norm for a given situation can also be 
called ‘Register’.” 
91
 Biber 1995: 1. 
92
 See especially Baines (2002: 13): “[a]ny literary phase exhibit a plurality of registers. For the Middle 
Kingdom this is clear in teachings, which include several different styles, and more clearly in narratives, where 
much in the Shipwrecked Sailor and P. Westcar may travesty oral types.” In P.Anastasi I, Goldwasser (1991a) 
showed that three distinct registers may be identified using as sole criterion the grammatical forms, i.e. the 
verbal morphology in the present case: the registers of adulation, of congratulation and of subject discourse (the 
latter being itself described as a “multi-layered register” in Goldwasser 1991b). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
14 
different genres; e.g. there are few, if any, differences between discourse in Late Egyptian 
tales and direct (or reported) speech in actual letters of the same period. 
 
Fig. 3. Relation between genres and registers 
 
§2.3.2.2. Distinctions between registers 
Distinctions between registers are not discrete, but are rather to be understood as a continuous 
space of variation.
93
 Most of the time, registers differ in the characteristic distribution of 
pervasive linguistic features.
94
 Therefore, the identification of a register generally depends not 
on the occurrence (vs. non-occurrence) of an individual feature, but on the relative frequency 
of this feature among the various registers: the use of quantitative methods is necessary.
95
 
Second, the distinction between registers does not reside in one linguistic parameter only, but 
in several parameters to be investigated at once: the co-occurrence relation among the 
linguistic features themselves is therefore crucial. Third, some distinctive linguistic features 
(that may be as strong as “register markers”), are found in some particular registers only
96
; in 
this case, the genre itself may be responsible for inducing or preserving specialized lexemes, 
idioms (thematic dimension) or constructions in some registers
97
: in Ancient Egyptian, the 
phenomenon of multiglossia
98
 makes the multidimensional approach to register variation 
                                                          
93
 See Biber’s sub-title (1995: 7-8; 31): “register as a continuous construct”. 
94
 Fore example, see Biber 1995: 28. 
95
 In fig. 3, this is what is meant by the overlapping registers 1-2-3-4: the registers 1 and 2 share some linguistic 
features that are susceptible to quantitative variation; the same holds for the other theoretical registers. Needless 
to say, but, for the sake of clarity in a two dimensional configuration, this schematization is oversimplifying the 
relation between registers themselves: registers not only overlap, but may also be embedded in one another or be 
embedded in a first one, but overlap with a second one. This has to do with the level of generality in the 
definition of registers, see below in §2.3.2.3. 
96
 The situation of multiglossia in the New Kingdom is of special interest here. In the more formal registers, the 
emulation of the past led to filtering the “innovative” linguistic features of the scribal repertoire and to 
remobilizing or refunctionalizing linguistic patterns of the past (on this phenomenon, see Stauder 2011 [texts of 
the 18
th
 dynasty] and Werning 2011 [Books of the Netherworld]). This yields registers with actual distinctive 
patterns of diaphasic variation. As a side remark, it is worth noticing that the historical knowledge of the 
language (see already Saussure or Labov concerning the influence on the state of the language of the individual 
speaker) does not seem to influence the less formal registers, as will be demonstrated in the case-studies below: 
scribes seem to have had a full consciousness of the registers they were using and of the related linguistic norms. 
97
 In fig. 3, genres A and B have one register in common (2), but genres A and C do not. Of course, this does not 
mean that they do not share any linguistic features (it is still the same language, after all), but that the 
characteristic features of their registers are always strictly properly distinctive and not distributionally 
determined. 
98
 See n. 33 & 96. For diglossia as an extreme case of register variation, see Hudson 1994. 
Greater formality Greater vernacularity 
Genre A 
Genre B 
Genre C 
1 2 3 4 
Registers 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
15 
especially illuminating, for a wide variety of lexical, morphological, syntactical and 
constructional parameters may combine in complex ways in the conventionalization and 
evolution of registers. 
 
§2.3.2.3. Defining registers 
There is no level of generality in the definition of register that is better suited for linguistic 
analysis than another; the aim of each study should lead to the selection of an ad hoc 
granularity for distinguishing registers. As an illustration, in his study of verbal morphology 
in Late Egyptian, Winand identifies three main registers
99
 across the whole corpus (using 
morphological features and spelling habits) while Goldwasser acknowledges the existence of 
three registers in a single literary text belonging to the same corpus (see n. 92): different goals 
lead to different levels of generality in the selection of the relevant patterns of variation. This 
being said, some recurrent issues in the Egyptological literature, such as the distinction 
between literary and non-literary texts based on linguistic criteria,
100
 are probably misleading. 
To put it bluntly, the epistemological impossibility of such an enterprise is the result of an 
over-simplified conception of the notion of literature itself and of the relation between genres 
and registers: the texts belonging functionally to the “literary sphere” (envisioned as an 
overarching genre) select a significant number of different registers in the scribal repertoire,
101
 
ranging from the more formal ones to the ones closer to the vernacular pole. Consequently, 
some literary registers are close, if not identical, to the ones used in the non-literary texts, 
making the identification of a language of literature as a whole dubious: the language of 
written registers does not determine the genre that a text belongs to. 
 
§2.3.3. Relationships between participants: the situational parameter 
The variation according to genres and registers is not the only locus of variation within the 
diaphasic dimension. In every individual situation of written performance, the selected 
registers are susceptible to variation according to the role structure governing the relationships 
between participants (the tenor dimension in Halliday’s 1978 perspective). As a result, some 
registers in which this kind of relationship matters (i.e. in the sphere of discourse where 
speaker and addressee interact in the speech situation) have an intrinsic and specific 
‘thickness’ (see fig. 4). By way of illustration, Allen showed quite convincingly that the 
alternation between the negation nj and nn of an infinitive clause in the letters of Heqa-nakht 
is probably not syntactically motivated.
102
 Indeed the only occurrence of nn is found in a 
formal letter from Heqanakhte to a high-ranking official, which obviously prompted the writer 
to use more formal and more levelled parts of the register typical to letters. This points to the 
                                                          
99
 Winand (1992: 13). “Néo-égyptien complet”, a register that, in addition to the common linguistic features of 
classical and Late Egyptian, displays all the resources of Late Egyptian at a given time; “néo-égyptien mixte” 
characterized as a Late Egyptian with additional features inherited from Earlier Egyptian; “néo-égyptien partiel” 
that preserves some resources of Earlier Egyptian instead of the ones proper to Late Egyptian. This tripartition is 
similar to Junge’s (2001: www) between “Late Egyptian”, “Medio-Late Egyptian” and “Late Middle Egyptian”. 
100
 Groll (1975) is admittedly among the first exponents of this method. Criticisms of this approach have already 
been put forward, see inter alii Quack 1994: 29-31. 
101
 On the continuum between the literary and documentary registers in Ancient Egyptian, see the case-study on 
the cleft-sentences presented in Vernus (1987: 175-181). 
102
 Allen (1994: 9-10). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
16 
very existence of - at least individually, but most expectedly socially - constructed language 
ideologies (accessible through indexical markers of various kinds, see e.g. Silverstein 1992). 
Crucially, this scribal consciousness of the possible variations in terms of formality and 
conventionalization
103
 among registers according to the situation of use has had an 
unquestionable impact on language change in pre-Demotic Egyptian, as recorded in the 
written documentation. 
In provisional conclusion, there is little doubt that acknowledging the dimensions of 
variation broached briefly above in their complexity could profitably enrich our description 
and understanding of the diachronic evolution of the Ancient Egyptian language, one of the 
longest attested text languages (c. 3000 BCE – 1100 AD); some suggestions based on the 
case-studies presented below will be made in the conclusions of this paper. 
 
§3. Deir el-Medina: Contextualizing a text community 
In the following section, I would like to focus on the effects that the specific socio-cultural 
environment of Deir el-Medina might have had on the language of the written productions 
emanating from its community. Accordingly, the aim is not to suggest new insights about the 
social history of the village itself,
104
 but - elaborating on previous studies - to evaluate the 
impact that the quite unique configuration of this community might have had on the shared 
scribal repertoire shaped by education and configured by experience. 
Deir el-Medina is an isolated village
105
 on the West bank of Thebes (modern Luxor) 
located on the border with the desert in a small valley behind the hill of Gurnet Mura’i. The 
texts written by the artisans who lived in this settlement - whose main task was to build the 
royal tombs during the New Kingdom (from the 18
th
 to 20
th
 dynasty; c. 1500-1050 BCE) - 
make it a priori a favourable site for investigating the conditions of written performance in 
Ancient Egypt and their influences on the language preserved in the documentation for at 
least two reasons. 
The quantity of available linguistic data is sizeable, partly thanks to the fact that the site 
is located in the gebel, i.e. far from the Nile floods, and was abandoned sometime during the 
reign of Ramesses IX when the community moved away
106
 from the village (mainly because 
                                                          
103
 One has to stress that the actual situation of the written performance may have an impact both on level of 
formality (specific selections in the repertoire for a given register) and on the level of conventionalization 
(e.g. regularities at the graphemic, morphological and constructional levels). An examination of this dimension 
of diaphasic variation in the Late Egyptian corpus will be proposed in Polis & Winand (forthcoming). 
104
 A comprehensive synthesis on the social status of the members of this community is unfortunately still 
lacking in the Egyptological literature. However, based on the evidence at our disposal, it seems quite clear that, 
between the Thutmoside and the Late Ramesside periods, it evolves significantly in the direction of an increasing 
social prominence of its members (not least at the level of individual’s self-representation) who were apparently 
increasingly involved in official matters unrelated to the business of the Tomb itself. 
105
 The classical references are Černý 2004 and Valbelle 1985. A systematic bibliography compiled by the 
Leiden team is available online, see http://www.leidenuniv.nl/nino/dmd/dmd.html. 
106
 The opinion communis is that the crew moved nearby to the safer funerary temple of Medinet Habu (see 
e.g. Valbelle 1985: 219), but, except from the scribes Dhutmose and his son Butehamun, “there is no evidence at 
all that the workmen ever lived within the Medinet Habu temenos” (Haring 2006: 111). It appears to have been 
inferred from the putative place of discovery of a great number of late Ramesside papyri (see Demarée 2008: 46) 
that many inhabitants of the Theban west-bank found refuge in the Medinet Habu temple that had turned into 
some kind of fortress. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
17 
work had stopped
107
) and left behind them a lot of written material. According to Gasse,
108
 
Černý & Posener estimated that ca. 15
 
000 ostraca (pot sherds or limestone flakes) originating 
from Deir el-Medina are now kept at the French Archaeological Institute in Cairo [IFAO] 
(among which there are ca. 7000 copies of literary texts and ca. 8000 non-literary texts). To 
this number one must add a considerable number of documents scattered in Egyptological 
collections all over the world (Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago, Florence, London, Oxford, 
Paris, Turin, etc.) coming from Deir el-Medina
109
: 20
 
000 non-literary ostraca might have 
been excavated in total.
110
 Thus a proper linguistic contextualization is a viable project for the 
registers of almost every genre: that avoids risky inferences while trying to reconstruct an 
entire text community based on a small set of linguistic data; each text may be studied as 
representative of a group, in the context of other surviving texts. 
This wealth of material gives access to invaluable metadata of the kind that is too often 
lacking in historical sociolinguistics:
111
 “[t]he mass of documentation uncovered both in the 
environs of the village and from the royal work sites affords a detailed insight into the 
cultural, political and economic identity […], in addition to information concerning the 
working techniques and bureaucratic organisation employed by the ancient craftsmen”.
112
 
Moreover, personal data about the official curriculum of individuals is available through the 
titles they bear as well as the function they occupy in the extant documents and it is therefore 
possible to reconstruct accurate prosopographies and extensive genealogical lineage.
113
 
This rather optimistic picture concerning the quantity and quality of data at our disposal 
is however counterbalanced by two factors. Up until now, only a small part of the texts related 
to Deir el-Medina has been made available through publication. Using the database of the 
Leiden team of scholars (see n. 105), it appears that no more than 3344 ostraca and 308 papyri 
have been properly published up until now; there is still a long way to go in this area and - 
even if new documents are published each year
114
 - decades will be needed to have fuller 
access to the full range of the documentary material. 
In the framework of this study, a more crucial issue is the problematic matching between 
the dependent linguistic variables that are found in the documents and the independent social 
variables when one tries to reach an optimum degree of precision, i.e. to connect a text with 
                                                          
107
 See Demarée 2008: 51. 
108
 See Gasse 1992: 51. 
109
 This body of evidence does not only originate from the settlement of Deir el-Medina itself, but may also come 
from various places on the Nile west bank in which the crew was active at some point: Valley of the Kings, 
Valley of the Queens and the Tombs of the Nobles, and the funerary temples of Thutmosis IV, Ramesses II, 
Ramesses III, etc. 
110
 This estimation is put forward in the “Einführung” of the Deir el-Medineh Online website (http://dem-online. 
gwi.uni-muenchen.de/einfuehrung.php). According to Ben Haring (p.c. April 2011), this estimation is certainly 
too optimistic; based on the number of IFAO ostraca that have been transcribed by Černý and on the proportion 
of documentary ostraca in the Deir el-Medina Database that are kept in other collections, he would rather 
estimate that the number of usable ostraca coming from Deir el-Medina is closer to 13 000 (this approximate 
figure is much in agreement with Mathieu (2003: 199) who refines Gasse’s view (see n. 108): “on recense 
environ 7
 
400 ostraca dits ‘littéraires’, par opposition aux ‘documentaires’, sur les 13
 
000 inventoriés”. 
111
 As succinctly noted by Loprieno (2006: 170). 
112
 Davies 1999: xviii. 
113
 Among the general studies, see e.g. Černý 2004, Bierbrier 1975, Davies 1999. 
114
 In this domain, Grandet’s rhythm of publication for the IFAO documentary texts is admirable; see Grandet 
2000, 2003, 2006, 2010. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
18 
an actual scribe. Indeed, even if we do have a lot of metadata, we do not have much 
personalized data. Here and there, it is possible to correlate the two dimensions with some 
precision. The documents written by Qenhirkhopshef may be a good illustration of the 
methodological possibilities and limitations in terms of linguistic studies. This prominent 
member of the Deir el-Medina community probably occupied the office of “scribe of the 
Tomb” for more than 50 years (year 40 of Ramesses II to year 1 of Siptah
115
) and was most 
interested in matters “concerning the written word, lexicography, the development of 
language, literature and historiography”
116
, which would make his writings - easy to single out 
thanks to his rather unique cursive handwriting
117
 - especially worth studying. However, for 
such a long tenure, no more than 30 extant documents can be attributed to him with any 
certainty; “this is disappointingly little”
118
. Furthermore, if all the documents are good sources 
for the examination of scribal practices
119
 (use of drafts, etc.), only five of them can really be 
exploited linguistically,
120
 the rest being administrative texts dealing with things like lamps 
used, labour absences and progress of work in the Tomb, deliveries of commodities and 
accounts, etc. Given the scarcity of material, a variationist study of the documents he wrote is 
not the most promising avenue of investigation.
121
 Nevertheless, if one broadens the scope to 
the entire scribal network of his time and takes into account the written production of the 
other members of the community, a variationist approach becomes much more interesting. 
                                                          
115
 See Černý 2004: 331, with emendations in Davies 1999: 84-86. 
116
 Davies 1999 : 86. Qenhirkhopshef commissioned a cryptographic inscription for a limestone funerary head-
rest (BM EA 63783 = KRI VII, 200; picture in Andreu 2002: 133), wrote down onomastic lists (bureaucratic 
titles beginning with the grapheme Hry “superior” = O. Cairo 25760 [KRI III, 642-643]; a list of ten kings of the 
18
th
 and 19
th
 dynasties = O. Cairo GC 25646, see Sauneron 1951: 46-49), possessed a list of son of Ramesses II 
= (O. Carnarvon ‘300 PP’, rt [KRI IV, 188,9]; for Černý (
3
2004: 295) the hand of the recto “does not seem to be 
the same as that of the verso’ that is definitely written by Qenhirkhopshef), is shown adoring the cartouches of 
eighteen different kings and queens on the offering table in Marseilles (n
o
 204, see PM I
2
, 743; see also another 
offering table of our scribe ibid. [KRI III, 640,11-13] mentioning the Sms.w @r “companion of Horus”, i.e. the 
Pharaoh of the past, cf. Vernus 2002: 64); see McDowell (1992: 96-97) who adds to this list the Ritual of 
Amenhotep of which his archive (see n. 145) contains a copy (P. Chester Beatty IX, rt 7,5-8,9 & rt 12,11-13; 
cf. Gardiner 1935: I, 90 & 95, II, pls. 53 & 55). Furthermore, he made two copies of the beginning of the Battle 
of Qadesh based on the Ramesseum inscription (P. Chester Beatty III, vs. = P.BM EA 10683), cf. Gardiner 1935: 
pl. 9-10a and the comments in Lesko 1994: 133-138). This papyrus also contains the notorious Dream-Book for 
some time in his possession; see Sauneron 1959b). 
117
 Gardiner (1935: 23) asserts that: “The writing of kenhikhopshef is undoubtedly the most cursive and least 
legible of all the scripts that have survived from the Nineteenth Dynasty”; Sauneron (1959: XVIII and n. 7) 
famously spoke of an “enfant terrible du hiératique”; see also Černý 
3
2004: 332 and Vernus 2002: 62. 
118
 Donker van Heel 2003. 
119
 List and detailed discussion in Donker van Heel (2003: 41-48). 
120
 A note about a special event (O.Cairo CG 25552), a list of workmen (O.Carnarvon ‘300 PP’), two drafts of 
letters to viziers (O. Cairo CG 25832 & P. Chester Beatty III, vs.) and the beginning of a third letter (O. Cairo 
CG 25807), as well as a copy of a magic spell (known by two other ostraca) against a demon shqq that he filled 
in a letter by a fan-bearer and vizier addressed to him (P.BM EA 10731 [KRI IV, 181-182], see Černý 2004: 335-
336). 
121
 Even in the case of the letters, we may expect the situational parameter (i.e. the relationship between 
participants) to be neutralized: all of them are drafts or model letters to (or from) high-ranking officials 
(regarding the socially motivated distribution of the introductory formulae in letters form the Theban Necropolis, 
see especially Haring 2009). Nevertheless, some questions related to Qenhirkhopshef’s distinct habits as copyist 
of literary texts (including the process of transposition from hieroglyphic to hieratic script) and as scribe would 
be worth further investigation. In this respect, the examination of the idiosyncrasies found in the texts copied by 
a single scribe, like Ennene (P.D’Orbiney, P.Anastasi IV, VI, VII and P.Sallier II), Pabasa (P.Anastasi III, 
P.Koller), Pentaweret (P.Sallier I), Pawehem (P.Bologna 1094) or Wentaiamun (P.Lansing; see Moers 2001) 
would definitely be fruitefull; on the “signed” papyri, see Quirke 1996: 382; Goelet 2008: 104; Dorn 2009: 75. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
19 
Most of the time, though, such a matching is difficult if not impossible, in the present 
state of affairs. Indeed, the identification of scribes relies on convergent criteria such as (a) 
palaeography
122
 (but we have to acknowledge the fact that scribes and authors are not always 
one and a single individual
123
), (b) internal evidence (usually combining prosopographical 
information with the context of production; e.g. a literate person figuring among the witnesses 
of a judicial case might be the scribe), (c) linguistic features.
124
 
Yet, these remarks should not obviate the fact that the community of Deir el-Medina is, 
generally speaking, a remarkable place for socio-historical approaches to variation (in many 
respects, better suited for such analyses than many other places later in time, down to the 
Middle Ages at least). Indeed, on the scale of individuation of linguistic data (established by 
Bergs, see below), the correlation between dependent linguistic variables and independent 
social data most of the time oscillates between stage 2 and 3, which is exceptional for a 
cluster of writers dating back more than three millennia.
125
 
 
Individuation of historical linguistic data:
126
 
1. Data that is completely “un-social” (scribes unknown; social context cannot be 
established). 
2. Data can be ascribed to certain groups or locales (social context can only be established at 
some macro-level, but social data on the groups and/or locales is available). 
3. Data can be ascribed to single scribes, whose social data are more or less available. 
 
Therefore, in pre-Demotic Egyptian, the community of Deir el-Medina is undoubtedly the 
best place to study the diaphasic dimension of variation.
127
 On top of the advantages cited 
above, two significant parameters might have led to an increase of variation - or 
destandardization - of the scribal repertoire. As Grossman 2011 puts it, the notion of 
destandardization may be conceptualized basically as a weakening of the norm resulting in an 
increase in linguistic heterogeneity, in other words, as a relaxation of the selections in the 
scribal repertoire usually conditioned by situational constraints. This presupposes that 
                                                          
122
 The identification of Ramesside hands is admittedly a tricky issue and a field that is still very much in its 
infancy. Concerning the identification of handwritings, see the pessimistic remarks in Janssen (1987, who 
comments on the possibility of distinguishing the handwriting of various scribes by looking at the most frequent 
graphemes and by observing the statistical repartition; 1994: 96, “[h]ow difficult it is to recognize an individual 
hand has recently been demonstrated by Mme Gasse [see 1992 : 56-70 esp. n. 27]”). However, Baines & Eyre 
(1983: 87) argue that “[f]ew texts reveal their authorship through internal evidence, so that progress would come 
only from a palaeography of individual hands.” (See also n. 210-211). 
123
 On dictating in pre-Demotic Egyptian, see Baines & Eyre (1983: 87) and Sweeney (1994: 277). But, using 
internal evidence (requests for letters in the actual handwriting of a given scribe), she rightly points out that the 
scribes themselves did not always write the letters they sent. In the case of literary texts and school exercises 
(“miscellanies”), two good indications that the texts have been copied are: (a) the presence of a colophon (for 
colophons in school exercises, see McDowell 2000: 223, Luiselli 2003; Lenzo Marchese 2004: 365; in its fullest 
form, a colophon reads “It has come well and in peace, for A [the teacher], his assistant B.”), and (b) the mention 
of the date of copying. In the case of copies, a recent typology of the kinds of variation of the written 
performance for which the copyists are responsible is still lacking in the Egyptological literature, see however 
Burkard 1977 and the literature quoted by Baines 2002: 26 n. 129-130. 
124
 See Sweeney’s (1994) identification of idiolectal features in the Late Ramesside Letters; cf. n. 10. 
125
 This has also been stressed by Grossman 2011. 
126
 Bergs 2005, 51. 
127
 In the same vain, see Loprieno 2006: 168. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
20 
individual scribes wish to and may actually exploit parts of the repertoire that are, according 
to the conventions linked to genres, not parts of the written registers. 
During the New Kingdom, i.e. the period of activity of the craftsmen of Deir el-Medina, 
the movement of individualization, which began during the First Intermediate Period (some 
five hundred years before) and went top-down in Ancient Egyptian society,
128
 emerges clearly 
in the documentation through the affirmation and self-promotion of personal agentivity in 
numerous contexts,
129
 e.g. the religious sphere (with an increase in the manifestations of 
personal piety
130
), the artistic domain (where several hands and actual signatures of artist are 
documented
131
), the literary realm
132
 (with non-fictive authorships, see below under §4). At a 
linguistic level, this personal agentivity possibly led to the relaxation of the norms attached to 
written registers. As a matter of fact, in this specific socio-cultural setting, an increasing 
emulative freedom of composition among the literate would be anything but surprising. In this 
respect, the extension of belles lettres for that time is symptomatic, for it involves the creation 
of new literary genres
133
 (especially linked to fictional emotional landscapes, such as literary 
letters, love letters and songs, lyric poetry, fables, hymns to the City, etc.) and the 
authorization of registers previously excluded from literary and sacralized productions.
135
 
However, in spite of all this, it seems that the above-mentioned relative emancipation from 
the conventionalized pole did not result in a similar increase of linguistic variation in all the 
registers
136
 of the Deir el-Medina written performance. 
As a result of the specialized nature of the work in digging and decorating tombs,
137
 that 
made the workmen familiar with several types of written performance, the level of literacy in 
the village was undoubtedly higher
138
 than the average 1% of the population in the country as 
a whole (see above §2.2.2). According to a first estimation, between 5-7.5% of the entire 
community (25-30% of the male personnel, Baines & Eyre 1983) was literate, i.e. more than 
                                                          
128
 Recently, see Ragazzoli 2010: 167 with previous literature. 
129
 In general see Vernus 1995. Egyptologists, influenced by the cultural context of production, generally tended 
to accept the anonymity of the works they studied. 
130
 See e.g. Assmann 1997; Vernus 2003 (with previous literature) and, most recently, Luiselli 2011. 
131
 See Keller 1984 & 2003. 
132
 See e.g. Assmann (1991: 307) who speaks of an “Individualisierung der literarischen Überlieferung in 
‚Werke‘ und ‚Autoren‘”. Correlatively, this societal evolution is reflected in the literature itself with scribes and 
middle-class people becoming prominent figures, see e.g. Ragazolli 2010. 
133
 See especially Mathieu 2003: 126-127. On love songs, see Mathieu 2008. On Butehamon’s famous letter to 
his departed wife (O.Louvre 698), see Goldwasser (1995: 191). 
135
 On the relationship between language and literary genres during the New Kingdom and the artificial caesura 
of the Amarna Period, i.e. a caesura largely projected on the written material by the Egyptologists themselves 
based on historical data, see Baines 2002: 14. 
136
 See Loprieno (2006: 167): “[t]he main problem we are facing in dealing with linguistic variety in Deir el-
Medina material is the highly conventional nature of Egyptian writing altogether. This highly conventional 
character of Egyptian writing is less pronounced in the second portion of the linguistic history of Egyptian, i.e. in 
the Late Egyptian language we know from the vast majority of Deir el-Medina documents, but infinitely more 
invasive than the levels of intrusion of extralinguistic conventions we are used to in our own linguistic and 
graphic experience.” 
137
 As noted by Davies 1999: XVIII. 
138
 “The community is likely to have been one of the most literate of all in relation to its social status” (Baines & 
Eyre 1983: 86 & 90). See also Mathieu (2002: 219): “la petite communauté de Deir el-Médineh n’est pas 
représentative de l’ensemble de la société égyptienne, puisque le pourcentage de lettrés, sachant lire et écrire, y 
était nettement supérieur”. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
21 
five times the global rate. But Janssen
139
 goes as far as to state that, if one includes also semi-
literates, i.e. people having passive competence sufficient to recognize hieratic signs and to 
understand the content of a not too intricate text, the number comprised virtually the entire 
male adult population, and he presents evidence showing that several ordinary workmen were 
definitely literate
140
 (and called themselves sS “scribe” when writing ostraca or graffiti 
although they were definitely not professional scribes or draughtsmen
141
). As is often the case, 
the figures depend heavily on the very definition of literacy and literates in ancient 
societies
142
, but it appears anyhow reasonable to assume that most of the members of the 
community (including several women) had some knowledge of the written language.
143
 Even 
if this issue is largely understudied, the degree of literacy is likely to have been rather varied 
depending on the domain of specialization of the members of the community. It was probably 
rather low for the less qualified of the workmen,
144
 but - given the diversity of the genres 
attested in funerary contexts
145
 and the kinds of texts used for teaching - a good mastery of all 
the written registers (including the more formal ones
146
) is definitely to be assumed for the 
scribes (and presumably for the chief draughtsmen as well). Moreover, the degree of literacy 
within the community is likely to have been subject to important diachronic change (see 
n. 141) as reflected in the documentation by the evolution of scribal activity.
147
 In this respect, 
the label “contingent literacy” coined by Loprieno
148
 is definitely efficient in the Deir el-
Medina situation. The impact of these observations on the linguistic variation found in the 
                                                          
139
 Janssen 1992: 82. 
140
 See e.g. the case of MAA-nxtw=f presented in Dorn 2006. 
141
 Regarding the honorary title sS, indicating merely that its bearer was skilled in writing, see Janssen (1982: 
149). 
142
 See the chart of potential literacy levels in Der Manuelian (1999: 286) who studied some erasures from the 
Amarna Period in this perspective, elaborating inter alia on the different possible audiences for dicrete sections 
of a scene or image in Egyptian art, as highlighted by Bryan 1996. One should pay attention not to overestimate 
anachronistically the importance of written practices and take care not to project it directly onto ancient societies 
in general and onto the Deir el-Medina community’s daily life in particular. Between the 18
th
 and the 20
th
 
dynasties, the situation most likely underwent important changes in the direction of an increase of the use of 
written records (see esp. Haring 2006: 107; this presumably reflects an increase in the degree of literacy in the 
community and, probably, an evolution of the social status of its members [presence of locally based necropolis 
scribes, etc.]). Based on “mistakes” in administrative documents and refusing to accept “sheer incompetence” as 
a satisfactory answer, Janssen (2005: 157) argued that “while the community of Deir el-Medîna as a whole may 
have had a higher level of literacy than others, it was not yet far removed from the oral tradition of recording. [… 
T]he whole administration rested still on a predominantly oral practice.” On this question, see already Haring 
(2003a and 2003b) who speaks of “oral village culture” and describes accurately (2006) the intensification of the 
use of writing in Deir el-Medina during the Ramesside period. 
143
 For McDowell (1999: 4) and Haring (2006: 110), “literacy, full or partial, reached a rate of 40% in the 
Twentieth Dynasty.” 
144
 See Davies’s comment concerning the innumerable graffiti throughout the Theban necropolis (1999: XIX). 
Different strategies were developed in order to allow semi-literates or illiterates to take part in administrative 
matters. In the context of Deir el-Medina, the use of the so-called “workmen’s marks” deserves a special 
mention, see Haring & Kaper (2009) as well as the contributions of Haring, Killen & Weiss (2009) and Fronczak 
& Rzepka (2009). In a broader context, for a discussion of sealing practices as one of these strategies, see 
Pantalacci 1996 & Smith 2001. 
145
 At that time, the inscription of religious texts and expressions of piety in non-royal tombs reflects an 
important change in conventions and decorum (resulting from the social aspirations of the tomb owners). 
146
 On this point, see Baines & Eyre (1983: 88) stating that the “level of literate culture of the scribal elite was 
surprisingly high”. The Chester Beatty collection of papyri is an excellent illustration of this point; on this 
collection and its history, see Pestman 1982; Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 103; Demarée 2008: 47. 
147
 See Haring 2006 and Baines 2007: 169-170. 
148
 Loprieno 2006: 167. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
22 
multiglossic scribal repertoire may be sketched as follows: (a) few people had an active 
knowledge (i.e. with productive proficiency) of the more formal registers
149
 (emulating the 
Egyptian of classic literary texts dating from the Middle Kingdom onwards), which were 
based on a mimetic use and remobilization of the language of the past: if we exclude copies
150
 
of earlier literary texts as well as of the more obviously teaching oriented Kemyt (that is 
written in columns in a distinctive style evoking early Middle Kingdom cursive; the oldest 
manuscript dates back to the end of the twelve dynasty), most of the texts resorting to these 
registers are monumental inscriptions (especially in tombs with the so-called Netherworld 
Books) or funerary texts on papyri (like the Book of the dead or the Opening of the Mouth 
Ritual which use different registers, but display very few variations) and the related norm 
remained indisputably strong during the New Kingdom
152
 (as well as in the later productions 
written in Égyptien de tradition); (b) a slight increase of variation is documented in the 
educational registers of the so-called Miscellanies (which formed part of the nation-wide 
standard bureaucratic curriculum) as well as in the registers of other hymns to gods and royal 
eulogies on papyri and ostraca; the variation within this category is however rather due to the 
fact that various genres (mobilizing several registers) belong to this category than to a 
decrease in conventionalization: basically, as far as one can see, the village seems “to have 
shared an Egypt-wide idea of the educated man”
153
; (c) the less formal registers of the texts 
that the community was producing for daily-life purposes (administrative texts, judicial notes, 
content of letters, etc.) were undoubtedly familiar to a larger part of the community; the 
variation found therein is consequently higher and personal habits may be identified at 
different levels. In the framework of Deir el-Medina, figure 2 suggested earlier may therefore 
be refined in order to account for the different levels of conventionalization according to 
registers: the entire scribal repertoire is not affected the same way by the relatively slight 
increase of variation. 
                                                          
149
 Baines (2002: 17): “who could exploit the stream of tradition were a small subset of the literate group, at Deir 
el-Medina perhaps consisting of the scribes and a couple of others.” The author subsequently argues, based on 
the Late Period Elephantine papyri, among others, that the knowledge of Classical Egyptian was probably more 
widespread in proper administrative centres and temples. Anyhow, as it has been demonstrated inter alii by 
Werning 2011 (based on the Netherworld Books), the “profound philological and linguistic competence of 
certain Egyptian literates” during the New Kingdom is beyond any doubt. 
150
 Trivial as it may be, it seems worth mentioning that, in strong contrast with spoken performance, written 
performance allows scribes to interact with each other over great temporal distance, through the copying of texts. 
Most of the variations that result from the copying of texts are intra-textual: traces of modernizations (including 
re-interpretations) or misunderstandings of the model. This affects mostly the graphemic and lexical levels, but 
the morpho-syntactic variations are far from being infrequent. See also n. 121. 
152
 On the “power” of Classical Egyptian, see Baines (2002: 11). 
153
 McDowell 2000: 231. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
23 
 
Fig. 4. Degree of variation in the scribal repertoire according to registers 
 
This being said, even in the less formal registers, one should not overestimate nor 
overemphasize the actuality of variation
154
, for the textual material shows that it remained 
actually quite limited. In this respect, two mutually reinforcing factors deserve to be 
mentioned. As we just saw, the evidence proves that education in Deir el-Medina was local,
155
 
even though the very existence of a “school” in the modern sense of the term may be 
legitimately doubted, with a master to apprentice teaching relationship being probably more 
accurate.
156
 But, the norm that the students had to learn was probably identical throughout 
Egypt and indexical to the prestige of the Egyptian socio-cultural universe as a whole (see 
above §2.2.2). As a social location, the community of Deir el-Medina may not only be 
envisioned as a microcosm of the wider Egyptian society; the inhabitants probably 
reinterpreted the national idealization of the registers through “locally constructed language 
ideologies”
157
. In order to describe this phenomenon succinctly, the heuristic sociological 
concept of “social network analysis” may be applied
158
 here in order to refine somewhat the 
description of the Deir el-Medina “scribal network”. 
Thanks to the metadata at our disposal in the written documentation, the village of the 
tombs builders may be described as a social network
159
 in terms of both structural and 
interactional components. These two components, i.e. respectively the quantity and the quality 
of the links between individuals, play a crucial role “in accounting for the attitudes and 
                                                          
154
 However, some variations in the administrative habits of the scribes (how they use drafts, etc.) appear to be 
quite regular and identifiable, see Donker van Heel 2003. 
155
 Inter alii, see Baines & Eyre (1983: 88): “[t]he large number of writing and drawing exercises found at Deir 
el-Medina shows that draughtsmanship and literacy were taught locally.” 
156
 McDowell (2000: 230): “[…] skilled members of the gang were entitled to an assistant to whom they could 
then offer a proper scribal education.” 
157
 Milroy 2004. 
158
 For a comprehensive presentation of the ideas, principles and methods underlying and constituting social 
network analysis in relation to language variation and language change, see Bergs 2005: 22-58. 
159
 To the best of my knowledge, this concept was introduced into the Egyptological literature in Reiche 2004. 
Greater variation 
Greater standardization 
Greater 
formality 
Greater 
vernacularity 
Scribal 
repertoire 
R
eg
is
te
r 
1
 
R
eg
is
te
r 
2
 
3
 
4
 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
24 
behaviour of a given network participant”
160
 and in defining the global standpoint of the 
community towards linguistic conventions. 
 
Structural components:
161
 
 The density of the network, i.e. the number of actual links divided by the number of 
potential links, is high if not maximal. Indeed, we are dealing with a territory-based 
cluster and the number of inhabitants varied with time between ca. 100 and 400 (and 
probably never exceeded 630 if one includes the servants
162
), which makes it plausible 
that any member of the community had some interaction with all the other members of 
the community at some point. This is obviously even truer if we consider only the sub-
group of literates actually producing written material. 
 The issues related to the centrality of given individuals and to clusters or cliques (defined 
as cohesive sub-groups within the network) have been left almost entirely untouched and 
remain open to promising further investigation. 
 
Interactional components: 
 The transactional content is massive and regular, both in professional and personal 
matters. 
 The multiplexity of relationships, i.e. the diversity of social functions that any two 
participants fulfil in their relationship, is generalized. The village of Deir el-Medina was a 
place for working and living, which inevitably led to: 
o Hierarchical relationships in official business. 
o Ties of kinship and friendship163 (occasionally of enmity) in the immediate 
neighbourhood. 
o Acquaintances and voluntary associations in the “informal workshop”, i.e. when 
manufacturing artifacts together for the outside world.
164
 
o Relationships with the outside world.165 
 The types of reciprocity in relationships and related linguistic behaviours are 
consequently susceptible to extreme diversity. 
 
If we use the abovementioned criteria in order to situate Deir el-Medina on a network strength 
scale,
166
 the community as a whole may be considered as a close-knit multiplex network. 
Such a close-knit network certainly impacted on the writings of the scribal network (as well as 
the related language ideology) in generating uniform network norms.
167
 In principle, uniform 
network norms (that vary according to registers) are not to be mistaken with a “standard 
                                                          
160
 Bergs 2005: 27. 
161
 The quick overview suggested here does not take into account external links with the administrative and 
religious centres of the Theban area and with other parts of the country (e.g. the travels of members in places 
ranging from Memphis to Lower Nubia) that are attested in the documents. 
162
 See e.g. Toivari-Viitala (2001: 4-5) with earlier literature. 
163
 See the case-study in Sweeney 1998. 
164
 See especially Cooney 2006. 
165
 See especially McDowell 1994. 
166
 On this concept, see Milroy 1987: 142. 
167
 See already Milroy & Milroy 1985. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
25 
variety”: in the case of Deir el-Medina, this might have led to a proper sociolect,
168
 a language 
constituted of levelled registers whose written conventions differ in several ways (i.e. at the 
graphic, lexical and morpho-syntactic levels) from other varieties of the same language. 
However such a sociolect is hardly identifiable in the documentation originating from 
Deir el-Medina for at least two reasons. First, we do not have any proper tertium 
comparationis: the geographic distribution of the Late Egyptian corpus (and especially of the 
registers belonging to the lower part of the formality scale) is highly uneven and our 
knowledge of non-literary Late Egyptian is predominantly based on the documents emanating 
from this very community (more than 90% of the extant texts). In these conditions, evaluating 
the differences between a possible Deir el-Medina sociolect and other varieties during the 
New Kingdom often turns out to be a perilous task, for it usually requires using argumenta e 
silentio in the analysis. Second, the shared conception of language registers at the level of the 
country (that has been evoked earlier with respect to education) makes variation between the 
linguistic material produced within the community and those coming from other places 
elusive: the local scribal network rather seems to have sustained (or reinforced) the common 
norm of the state than to have developed self-defined and accepted conventions for its written 
productions. After all, the social role and importance of the Deir el-Medina community in 
attending to the post-mortem destiny of the Kings definitely points in the same direction. In 
conclusion, the most promising, and for the present easiest, field of study is the examination 
of diaphasic variation between the registers of the scribal repertoire used by the members of 
the Deir el-Medina community themselves. 
 
§4. Amennakhte son of Ipuy: Variations in the writings of a scribe of the 20
th
 Dynasty 
This section, more empirically oriented, aims precisely at observing how an individual scribe, 
Amennakhte son of Ipuy, was able to use and play with the registers available in his linguistic 
community while producing texts that pertain to different genres. It is intended as an 
illustration of the methodological principles advocated in the previous sections rather than as 
a full discussion of Amennakhte’s written production which would, by itself, deserve a book-
length study. 
Amennakhte is an illustrious figure of the Deir el-Medina community.
169
 He is known to 
have been a draftsman
170
 before he was promoted to the office of senior scribe of the Tomb 
(sS n pA xr) in year 16 of Ramesses III, third month of the inundation season, by the vizier 
                                                          
168
 On this point, see Sweeney (1994: 317 n. 533) about the corpus of the Late Ramesside Letters.  
169
 See already Černý 1936 and the appendix D devoted to his family in Černý 2004: 339-383; further literature 
in Eyre 1979: 84; Frandsen 1990: 195 n. 98; Bickel & Mathieu 1993; Vernus 1993: 172 n. 21; Nelson & 
Hassanein 1995; Davies 1999: 105-118; Klotz 2006: 271 n. 14; Dorn 2006: 78. Andreas Dorn recently launched 
a project that focuses on the different aspects of this individual: using all the extant records, he aims not only to 
account for Amennakhte’s carrier, biography and written production, but also at providing, through this central 
figure, a clearer picture of the whole socio-cultural milieu of Deir el-Medina in the 20
th
 dynasty. I thank him 
warmly for the vast amount of data he shared with me on the topic. 
170
 Numerous graffiti in the Theban Mountain document this title, see Černý 2004: 240 n. 2. He probably 
occupied this tenure as early as the reign of Sethi II (see graffito 621 in Spiegelberg 1921 and Davies 1999: 105). 
In year 10 of Ramesses III, he is most certainly referred to as sS-[kd] in O.Michaelides 1, 5-6 (= KRI V, 452, 4-
5); due to the mention of the foreman Khonsu, Černý (2004: 212) suggested emending the date to a “year 16”, 
but this emendation requires further evidence. On the graffiti related to the scribe Amennakhte in general, see 
Peden 2001: 182-188. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
26 
To.
171
 He held this tenure for more than thirty years, until he eventually passed away in a year 
6 or 7, most probably of Ramesses VI.
172
 He was the founder of a six generations lineage of 
scribes who occupied the function within the village
173
 down to the 21
st
 dynasty. Additionally, 
he was a prominent intellectual figure
174
 of the community during the first part of the 20
th
 
dynasty (c. 1170-1140 BCE). Indeed, not only was he in charge of the administration of the 
Tomb (and wrote down an impressive amount of documents regarding administrative and 
judicial matters), he also had a deep interest in belles-lettres and produced several literary 
texts
175
 such as a teaching and poems as well as hymns to kings and Gods (see below for a 
detailed list). 
In the pre-Demotic Egyptian documentation, it is quite exceptional to have access to such 
a variety of registers for a single scribe.
176
 This is partly due to the fact that, down to the 
twentieth dynasty, the historical authors of literary pieces are almost completely elusive in the 
extant written records.
177
 To put it briefly, in the cultural environment of Ancient Egypt, the 
conception of authorship differs essentially from our modern understanding of the concept – 
partly inherited from classical philology - and one should consequently avoid projecting it 
back onto the ancient Egyptian material.
178
 A simplified (but quite accurate) way of 
describing how the Egyptians conceived of the notion of authorship before the Ramesside era 
                                                          
171
 See Spiegelberg 1921 : n
o
 1111 & 1143. The beginning of the draft of one letter written by Amennakhte to the 
vizier To is preserved on O.Louvre N 696, r
o
 (on this text, see below Text C). He was admittedly so grateful to 
the vizier that he named one of his sons after him, see e.g. Davies 1999. 
172
 See Janssen 1979 & 1994; Davies 1999: 283; Müller 2004: 165. 
173
 See especially the graffito (n
o
 1109) left by the scribe Dhutmose: Hsb.t 18 Abd 1 pr.t sww 28, sS-nsw DHwty-ms 
n Xnw sA sS-nsw xa-m-HD.t sA nsw sS Hri-Sri sA sS-nsw imn-nxt n Xnw “Year 18, first month of the winter season, 
day 28, the king’s scribe of the interior, Dhutmose, son of the king’s scribe Khaemhedjet, son of the king’s 
scribe Harshire, son of the king’s scribe of the interior Amennakhte.” On this family of scribes, see already 
Černý 1936; Christophe 1957. Updated list of bibliographical references and analysis of the last three 
generations are in Bouvier 2006: 23. On the evolution of the status and function of the Deir el-Medina scribes 
during the 20
th
 dynasty, see Demarée 2008: 51. 
174
 See Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 48) who quote the famous passage of the Late Ramesside Letters (P. BM EA 
10326, rt 20-22) dealing with wet papyri that were put in Amennakhte’s Tomb and hypothesize, following 
Koenig 1981 (but against Pestman 1982), that he was at some point the owner of the Chester Beatty collection of 
papyri. On this collection see above n. 145. The title sS n pr anx “scribe of the House of life” found after 
Amennakhte’s name in one of the copies of his teaching (O.Cairo s.n.) could be taken as a mere indication of this 
prominent social and intellectual status (see Vernus 2009: 139; 
2
2010: 56 & 369 who stresses the obvious 
admission of Amennakhte in “le royaume des belles-lettres” as shown by the fact that the title of his teaching is 
directly followed by the Teaching of Amenemhat on O.Cairo s.n.); however, the occurrences of this title in a 
graffito of the Theban Mountain (n
o
 2173) as well as the advice iry=k sS pXr=k pr-anx “may you be a scribe and 
frequent the House of Life” in Amennakhte’s Teaching might both be an indication that the title has to be taken 
at face value (see e.g. Posener 1955: 69 and Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 36 n. 31). 
175
 This dimension of Amennakhte’s life received detailed attention in Bickel & Mathieu 1993. 
176
 Another case that deserves to be mentioned here is the variety of registers attested in Nebre’s writings during 
the 19
th
 dynasty, see KRI III, 653-659 for the texts with Goldwasser’s comments (1999: 313-314 n. 11). 
177
 On the play on authorship as a literary device, see e.g. Quirke (2004: 31). 
178
 On the notion of authorship in Ancient Egypt, see especially Derchain 1996 who stresses its importance and 
rightly argue that “[l]’auteur, individu-origine du texte, dans la perspective scientifique, est une nécessité 
épistémologique” (p. 84 & 92); same opinion in Luiselli (2003: 343) “[t]he literature […] was anonymous, and 
treated more as the fruit and reflections of a common ‘cultural memory’ rather than as the work of individuals. 
Without the figure of the ‘author’, however, or of a copyist […] this ‘cultural memory’ would never have 
acquired a written form”. This notion of author and its usefulness has been a matter of intense debates in literary 
theory; see the chapter devoted to this topic in Compagnon 1998: 51-110. In the Egyptological literature, see 
especially Parkinson 2002: 24-25; Quirke 2006: 29-36 and the references quoted by Moers 2009: 320 n. 8. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
27 
is the following
179
: authors of literary texts are to be identified with the figures who are 
fictively presented as having the auctoritas on their content
180
 and not with the historical 
scribe who actually composed the text - this offers a side-explanation for the mention of 
authors only in the case of teachings and discourses
181
 that offer an authoritative vision and a 
qualified reflection on the world. Accordingly, viziers or other famous characters of the past 
regularly act as guarantor for wisdom texts
182
; the “author” may also simply be a generic 
figure, like in the Instruction of a man for his son, which emphasizes not only the “wisdom’s 
universality”
183
, but also the moral authority of the father figure. This explains why, in the 
didactic literature of the New Kingdom, the paternity of texts is usually attributed to the 
teachers themselves who keep up metaphoric father to son relations with their pupils
184
; these 
relations are often reflected by actual acts of filial piety
185
 and they obviously involve the 
aforementioned auctoritas. 
It is only during the Ramesside period that external meta-references to literary texts and 
figures appear in the documentation.
186
 In the context of this paper, it might be worth 
mentioning that the verso of the P.Chester Beatty IV, which contains the famous “Eulogy of 
Dead writers”
187
 (v
o
 2,5-3,11), has been tentatively attributed to Amennakhte himself
188
 , even 
if this remains a highly hypothetical proposal (see however infra §4.2end). Strikingly, this 
coincides with the times when we are first able to match individual scribes (known by other 
records) with authors of literary compositions, i.e. to contextualize historically non-fictive 
authorships. For the present, this kind of matching has only been possible in the context of 
Deir el-Medina during the first part
189
 of the 20
th
 dynasty
190
 when the level of literacy was 
substantially higher than in other places and times
191
 (see n. 141), when the textuality became 
                                                          
179
 I am gratefull to Todd Gillen for sharing with me his ideas on the topic. 
180
 Regarding the form of the literary texts, one observes a sort of chiasm between the proclaimed respect of the 
original in the colophons (see Luiselli 2003: 345, with earlier literature) and the fluctuating and evolving literary 
tradition as documented by the witnesses of these texts; see Moers (2009: 321) who rightly states that we are 
studying productive tradition and argue against the excess and aporias of a “Fehlerphilologie”. 
181
 Coulon (1999: 132): “[l]a plupart des œuvres du Moyen Empire révèlent une affinité profonde entre l’auteur 
et l’orateur qu’il met en scène, au point d’ailleurs que la postérité retienne l’un pour l’autre.” 
182
 See the excellent pages about “authors and authorship” in Parkinson (2002: 75-78). 
183
 As expressed by Parkinson 2002: 76. 
184
 See Bierbrier 1980: 102. In the framework of this study, one has to mention in the Teaching of Amennakhte 
the variant ir.n sS imn-nxt n sA[=f] “made by the scribe Amennakhte for his son” in O.DeM 1248 + O.Brux. E. 
6444, rt 2. 
185
 In this respect, the relationship between Ramose and Qenhirkhopshef immediately springs to mind (see Černý 
3
2004: 325-326 and Vernus 2002: 58). 
186
 See Parkinson 2002: 30-32. 
187
 See Moers 2008 & 2009: 319-322, Dorn 2009 and Vernus 2010: 365-367; with previous literature. 
188
 See Posener 1955: 71 & 1980b: 55. 
189
 Some marginal cases excepted, like Butehamon’s letter to her departed wife already mentioned (= O.Louvre 
698; beginning of the 21
st
 dynasty), see n. 133. 
190
 On the earlier texts attributed by the tradition to the scribe Khety and the question of its actual existence, see 
Quirke 2004: 31-33. The wisdom text attributed to Aametchu which is inscribed in the Tomb of Useramun (see 
Dziobek 1998: 23-54; 18
th
 dynasty [Thutmosis III]) might well belong to the topos of a fictive father to son 
teaching (Ptahhotep and after) rather than being and actual composition of Aametchu (this viewpoint has also 
been put forward by Vernus 2010: 55). 
191
 It is worth noticing, after Dorn (2006), that the literary documentation coming from Deir el-Medina after this 
period (i.e. from second half of the 20
th
 dynasty onwards) is, to say the least, limited. We certainly witness “at 
first a reorganization and then a reduction of the literary activity that seems to exclude Thebes from what is 
going on in other regions of the country” (Loprieno 2006: 166). Accordingly, it looks very much as if the times 
of Amennakhte constituted a kind of acme in the literary life of the community. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
28 
central in the community,
192
 and when it was possible to embed literary production in real 
life,
193
 with concrete functional settings, in other words when “thematizing life experience” 
became a feature of Egyptian literature.
194
 Moreover, these literary pieces are not documented 
to have been circulated outside the community of Deir el-Medina
195
 (i.e. the places where the 
workmen’s activity was taking place: the village itself, but also the Valleys of the Kings and 
Queens). Besides Amennakhte’s compositions (and the didactic literature), the three other 
cases
196
 in point are [1] Menna’s literary letter-lament to his son Mery-Sekhmet, nicknamed 
Payiri
197
, [2] Hori’s teaching (which was probably addressed to one of Amennakhte’s sons 
after the death of his father
198
), and [3] Hay’s hymn to Amen-Ra-Horakhty
199
. 
Consequently, Amennakhte’s writings are undoubtedly the most promising locus for 
investigating variation according to registers at the level of the individual scribe. Indeed, we 
have access to: 
 
1. independent social data (almost fully available for this individual); 
2. rich, even if limited in terms of token frequency, linguistic material, for the texts he wrote 
pertain to genre that lead to the selection of a great variety of different registers; 
3. (a huge amount of) other texts written within the same community, which allow us to 
interpret the linguistic assemblage found in each of Amennakhte’s scribal productions in the 
light of other texts (tertium comparationis). 
 
In the framework of this paper, the focus will be on Amennakhte’s writings themselves 
(i.e. point 2) and the analysis will be restricted to an “internal” approach to the selections 
operated by this individual in the scribal repertoire of his time. Thereby, I intend to describe 
the diaphasic variation found within the texts he produced (including issues of 
                                                          
192
 As a working hypothesis, it could be suggested that Amennakhte was an pioneer of the practice of 
“signature”; indeed, the other “signatures” of scribes are either contemporaneous or posterior, see in particular 
his son Amenhotep (Keller 2003) who frequently signed the figured ostraca he produced. 
193
 Mathieu (2003: 136-137 & tab. 3) and Dorn (2009; see especially the figures on p. 76-77 and the comments 
on p. 77-82) have shown how the authors emerge in our documentation under Ramesses III; it is worth noticing 
that the selection in the written repertoire made by the scribes in these texts is not strictly emulating the Earlier 
Egyptian language anymore, but corresponds to high registers of Late Egyptian tinted with older constructions, 
lexemes and spellings (that are indexical of their literary value) and expressly filtering some features more 
recently introduced in the written repertoire. This opening of the literary sphere to new registers is already 
documented during the 19
th
 dynasty, see e.g. P.Anastasi I. Strikingly, this phenomenon is reflected by the types 
of texts copied as school exercises, as it has been brilliantly demonstrated in Dorn 2009. 
194
 Loprieno 2006: 167. 
195
 See Loprieno 1996a: 56-58; Baines 1996: 167; Parkinson 2002: 76. 
196
 Seven other texts might be included here, following the hypotheses put forward in Mathieu (2003: 136-137, 
tab. 3), Lenzo Marchese (2004: 365) and Dorn (2009: 77): O.Cairo CG 25225 (?Hymn?; A[men]nakhte), O.DeM 
1593+O.Michaelides 82 (Hymn to Amun-Ra; Amenmes), O.DeM 1693 (Model letter; Paneferemdjed son of 
Amennakhte), O.Gardiner 319 (Hymn to Ra; scribe Hormin son of Hori [bare name and filiation at the end of the 
text]), O.Leipzig 8 (Imprecation; Amenemhat), O.Turin 57003 (Hymn to the Sun; ?Panefer?), O.Turin 
57319+O.DeM 1635 (Love song; a scribe in the Place of Thruth, if the “signature” of the v
o
 is related to the text 
on the r
o
). Possible additional candidates are mentioned in passing when analyzing the formula ir.n sS PN “made 
by the scribe PN”, see n. 210. 
197
 On the O.OIC 12074, see e.g. Fischer-Elfert 2006 and the abundant literature quoted in Vernus 2010: 469-
475. 
198
 This short sbAy.t mtr.t is preserved on a single ostracon, O. Gardiner 2, ro; see Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 49-51. 
199
 See Dorn 2009: 77 & 2011: 190-191, with two new parallels from the Valley of Kings (see p. 457-458, n
o
 745 
& 746; pl. 648-656) showing that, much like Amennakhte’s teaching, this text was used as school exercise. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
29 
standardization, of written formality and idiosyncrasies) and I will try to show that the 
variation - far from being “free” in any respect - is to be conceived of in relation to a full 
mastery of all the registers available to a scribe in the beginning of the 20
th
 dynasty,
200
 for 
Amennakhte was consciously using and playing with them, depending on the conditions of 
production and on the norms attached to each genre. Admittedly, this study paves the way for 
further investigations in the field (e.g. influence of and on the scribal network analysis, 
diachronic variation in the writings of a single individual [i.e. real time linguistic 
developments], etc.) and has to be merely considered as a first tentative step towards a 
variationist approach of Ancient Egyptian. 
 
§4.1. The corpus of Amennakhte’s writings 
The corpus used for the subsequent linguistic analysis is restricted to a body of texts whose 
attribution to Amennakhte son of Ipuy suffers little doubt and is agreed upon by most 
scholars. This option has been favoured in order to avoid uncontrolled discrepancies in the 
results and to give a description of the types of variation found in his writings that might be 
used later on as a test corpus (i.e. what graphemic and linguistic features may be used as 
criteria when it comes to corroborate or invalidate the attribution of a text to Amennakhte?). 
Accordingly, among the literary texts, only those that bear the formula (ir.n) sS imn-nxt 
“(made by) the scribe Amennakhte” (or some variant of it) have been included in the present 
corpus: 
 
Text 1 (T1): Instruction of Amennakhte.  
Ed.: Synoptic edition in Dorn (2004: 40-42)
201
 with new parallels on unpublished ostraca in 
Ritter 2008: 83-84. Authorship: Consensus of the scholars, based on O.BM EA 41541 (r
o
 2: 
ir.n sS imn-nxt – Xry-a.f Hr-min “made by the scribe Amennakhte – his assistant Hormin”; see 
also O.KV 18/3.614 + 227, r
o
 1; O. Grds., rt 1-2; O. München ÄS 396, vs 3; O. DeM 1248 + 
Brux. E 6444, r
o
 1-2; O.Cairo s.n., r
o
 2-3), with additional prosopographical arguments 
(Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 37).
202
 
                                                          
200
 On this point, see already the comments made by Bickel & Mathieu (1993 : 48): “les écrivains accomplis 
devaient être capables de traiter tous les genres, comme le souligne l’Enseignement : Il est si agréable de trouver 
un homme compétent dans tous les domaines” of activity (Eg. nDm zp-2 gm z ip m kA.t nb.t). 
201
 Abbreviations used here: (α) O.KV18/3.614 + 627 [Dorn 2004 : 40-42 & pl. II-VII]; (β) O.BM EA 41541 
[Posener 1955 : 62-63 & pl. 4, Demarée 2002: pl. 93 & Mathieu 2002: 221; trace of a date written in red under 
the final line]; (γ) O.München ÄS 396, vs. [von Beckerath 1983: 68-69]; (δ) O.Cairo s.n. [Posener 1951a: 42-43; 
1952:119]; (ε) O.DeM 1248 + O. Brux. E 6444 [Posener 1972: pl. 62-62a]; (ζ) O.DeM 1036 [Posener 1938 : 
pl. 20-20a]; (η) O.DeM 1249 [Posener 1972: pl. 62-62a]; (θ) O.DeM 1254 [Posener 1972: pl. 66-66a]; (ι) 
O.DeM 1256 [Posener 1972: pl. 66-66a; with date at the end: ibd 2 Ax.t sw 23 iw.i Hr xt[?m n pA xr?],  must 
be added to the transcription given by Dorn 2004: 41]; (κ) O.DeM 1596 [Posener 1978: pl. 47-47a]; (λ) 
O.Grdseloff [Bickel & Mathieu 1993: pl. I-VII; with date at the end: ibd 1 Smw sw 5]; (μ) O.Lacau [Černý & 
Gardiner 1957: III,3]; (ν) O.Turin N. 57436 [López 1982: pl. 143-143a]; (ξ) O.DeM 1599 [Posener 1978: pl. 49-
49a]; (ο) O.DeM 1255 [Posener 1972: pl. 66-66a]; (π) O.Cairo CG 25770 [Černý 1935: 96* & pl. 100]. O.Turin 
CG 57134 might preserve the very beginning of the text, [sb]Ay.t mtr[.t]. 
202
 Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 32-33): “Les sept ostraca [i.e. the ones known to belong to this teaching in 1993] 
qui contiennent cet Enseignement sont très proches, aussi bien pour ce qui est du texte lui-même, qui ne présente 
que peu de variantes, qu’au regard des écritures. Ces similitudes plaident en faveur d’une diffusion de l’œuvre 
dans l’entourage immédiat de son auteur.” On this point, see Baines (1996: 167) who describes the Instruction of 
Amennakhte as a “local text” (and compares it with Menna’s literary letter-lament to his son [O. Chicago OI 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
30 
 
Text 2 (T2): Lyrical poem that expresses longing for Thebes (O.Asmolean Museum 25, r
o
 
= O.Gardiner 25, r
o
). 
Ed.: Černý & Gardiner 1957: XXXVIII, 1 r
o
 (= KRI V, 646). Bib.: Černý (2004: 348); Bickel & 
Mathieu (1993: 38); Parkinson (1999: 157); Ragazzoli (2008: 31-33) ; Quack (2010: www). 
Authorship: Consensus of the scholars, based on the formula of r
o
 10-11: ø sS inm-nxt [n pA 
x]r ° pA sA i[pwy] “the scribe Amennakhte of the Tomb, the son of Ipuy”. 
 
Text 3 (T3): Satirical poem that makes fun of a pretentious person (O.Asmolean Museum 25, 
v
o
 = O. Gardiner 25, v
o
). 
Ed.: Černý & Gardiner 1957: XXXVIII, 1 v
o
 (= KRI V, 646-647). Bib.: Posener (1964); 
Guglielmi (1985). Authorship: Consensus of the scholars, based on the formula of v
o
 8-9: ø 
sS inm-nxt n pA xr ° pA sA ipwy “the scribe Amennakhte of the Tomb, the son of Ipuy”. 
 
Text 4 (T4): Encomium of Ramesses IV or V
203
 (O. Ermitage 1125, r
o
). 
Ed.: Matthiew (1930). Bib.: Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 44-45). Authorship: Consensus of the 
scholars, based on the formula of r
o
 9: ir.n sS imn-nxt sA ipwy “made by the scribe 
Amennakhte, son of Ipuy”. 
 
Text 5 (T5): Encomium of Ramesses IV (O.Turin CG 57001, r
o
 = cat. 2161). 
Ed.: López (1978: pl. 1a-1). Bib.: Bickel & Mathieu (1993). Authorship: Consensus of the 
scholars, based on the formula of r
o
 9: ir.n sS imn-nxt n pA xr m Hsb.t 4 Abd 1 Ax.t sw 14 “made 
by the scribe Amennakhte in year 4, 1
st
 month of Akhet, 14
th
 day”. 
 
Text 6 (T6): ?Hymn to Ptah?
204
 (O.Turin CG 57002 = cat. 2162 + 2164). 
Ed.: López (1978: pl. 3-4a). Bib.: Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 45-47). Authorship: Consensus 
of the scholars, based on the formula of r
o
 9-11: ø sS inm-nxt sA ipwy n pA xr, Hsb.t 2 Abd 4 pr.t 
sw 27 n nsw.t-bity R5 “the scribe Amennakhte of the Tomb, son of Ipuy; year 2, 4th month of 
Peret, 27
th
 day of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt Ramesses R5”. 
 
Text 7 (T7): ?A Laus Urbis (r
o
; 7 lines, the lower part being slightly erased) and an Hymn to 
Osiris (v
o
; 8 lines) or a single hymn on r
o
 and v
o
? (O.IFAO OL inv. 117). 
                                                          
12074, cf. supra]), somehow dismissing the hardly disputable literary qualities of the composition. In the same 
vain, see McDowell (2000: 233). 
203
 If we consider with due respect the classifier applied to the word sfy (child, l. 2), this text could hardly be 
something else than a royal eulogy, although it borrows many ‘topoi’ from the Love Songs corpus; see Bickel & 
Mathieu (1993: 44) according to whom this text might have been addressed to Ramesses IV or V. Based on the 
“écriture plus dense et plus rapide”, Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 38) have misgivings about Amennakhte’s being 
the copyist of this text. I would tend to agree with them on this point, for it is the only literary texts that contains 
several “mistakes” (e.g. supererogatory Hr at the end of ro 2; unexpected spellings, like pr.w [ro 4], nSn [rt 7], 
etc.), some apparently incomplete sentences (e.g. r
o
 6), and supra lineam additions (r
o
 7 & 8 [twice]). However, 
none of these arguments is decisive, for it could simply result from a hastier copy with self-correction (a well-
known practice, see e.g. Quirke 1996: 383). 
204
 So far, this text has received little attention. Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 45) suggest that it could be a hymn to 
Ptah (two occurrences of the name PtH [ro 3 & 5] and phraseological similarities with other hymns to this 
divinity [esp. P.Berlin P 3048 and P.Harris I, 44,3-7]). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
31 
Ed.: Dorn & Polis (2012). Authorship: Based on the formula of v
o
 8: ir.n sS imn-nxt n pA xr 
“made by the scribe Amennakhte of the Tomb”. 
 
An eighth literary text,
205
 O.Berlin P 14262 r
o
,
206
 is certainly to be added to Amennakhte’s 
literary production (sS imn-nxt n pA xr […] on line 6, i.e. the last line, of the ostracon), but 
will not be included in the present corpus for it still awaits publication.
207
 
Following other scholars, I assume that the formula (ir.n) sS imn-nxt “(made by) the 
scribe Amennakhte” that occurs at the end of the literary texts introduces, in the present case, 
the name of the author
208
 (but not necessarily the name of the copyist or scribe; some of them 
could be autographs, but this remains to be demonstrated). This position, explicitly endorsed 
by Bickel & Mathieu,
209
 is not unproblematic. Indeed, if the use of the ir.n PN formula is 
documented in cases when it can solely refer to the author (i.e. to the exclusion of the scribe 
who actually copied the text),
210
 the full formula (ir.n PN) or the bare name of an individual 
(PN) may also occur at the end of a text in reference to the scribe who actually wrote it down 
(the case is especially well attested for students copying texts as a school exercises).
211
 
                                                          
205
 A hymn to Amun-Re of Karnak on an uncarved stela (MMA 21.2.6) has also been attributed to Amennakhte 
(see Klotz 2006: 272 and the previous mentions in Černý 2004: 350 n. 8; Davies 1999: 105 n. 289 & 109 n. 348). 
However, as far as I can see, the authorship relies solely on the appearance of Amennakhte (sS-nsw.t n s.t mAa.t 
Imn-nxt “Royal scribe of the Place of Truth, Amennakhte”) in the lower register (followed by his son, the scribe 
Pentaweret and his brother, the chief craftsman Amenemope). Consequently, the attribution of this text to 
Amennakhte is plausible, but disputable: the two other individuals depicted on the stela could well be the artists 
who drew it (and we should not exclude the possibility of other literates of the community at the time). This 
question deserves special interest: if this text were to be included among Amennakhte’s literary works and if he 
actually drew the stela himself (this question might be addressed by taking into consideration the ex voto 
ostracon to Ptah made by Amennakhte [Valley of the Queens, see Nelson & Hassanein 1995: 231] and the ex 
voto ostracon to Meretseger recently found in the Valley of the Kings [to be published by Dorn in his monograph 
that will appear in the Aegyptiaca Helvetica series]), then a tenth text is also to be taken into consideration: the 
hymn addressed to the great cat (as sun god) on a stela of the Ashmolean Museum (picture and description in 
Winter 1963: 201-202 & fig. 18; translation in Assmann 1975: 368 & 604). Indeed, I do agree with Klotz (2006: 
270; with further bibliography on the stela in n. 4), that this piece is likely to be the work of the same artisan. 
Unfortunately the names of the man and woman of the lower register have never been drawn. Furthermore, 
Andreas Dorn drew my attention to two other traces of personal piety which might have been produced by 
Amennakhte (Stela BM EA 374, see Parkinson 1999 & KRI V, 645,14-16 and KRI V, 644,12-14), but this 
remains difficult to ascertain given the lack of filiation. 
206
 See Burkard 2006. 
207
 A picture of the r
o
 of this ostraca is available online on the praiseworthy website Deir el Medine Online 
(http://dem-online.gwi.uni-muenchen.de/fragment.php?id=243). 
208
 In this respect, see especially the “signatures” of the sS-qd.w “draughtsmen” studied by Keller (1984; 2003: 
86) who argues that “la formule votive ir(.t).n signifie non seulement que le dessinateur en question était le 
dédicant de la pièce mais aussi qu’il en était le créateur” and quotes other cases in which the subject of the 
ir(.t).n formula can’t be the orant, but only the author. See also n. 208 & 209. 
209
 Bickel & Mathieu (1993: 38) state that “la paternité unique [de ces textes] est indubitable” and consider that, 
maybe with the exception of T5, “[t]outes ces compositions […] semblent nous être parvenues sur des 
documents écrits de la main même d’Amennakht”. 
210
 Among the well-known incipits of earlier texts, see e.g. the post Middle Kingdom versions of Ptahhotep, 
cf. Moers (2009: 323-324) who produces a penetrating analysis of the appearance of ir.t.n “verfertigen” (vs the 
earlier Dd “vortragen”). 
211
 Same opinion in McDowell (2000: 227-228) and Lenzo Marchese (2004: 364-36) where several examples 
have been quoted. The following list of examples has to be considered: O.DeM 1022 & 1042 [copy of the Satire 
of the Trades with bare name of the copyist at the end, It-nfr], O.DeM 1560 [copy of the Satire of the Trades on 
the v
o
 with the formula ir.t.n sS PN sA PN “made by the scribe PN son of PN” on ro 1-2]; this formula is 
sometimes further developed with the mention of a dedicatee as in O.DeM 1027 [copy of the Hymn to the 
Inundation with the formula ir.n sS It-nfr n @ri at the end on vo 3-4 “made by the scribe Itnefer for Hori”). The 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
32 
Therefore, the occurrence of the formula “(made by) the scribe Amennakhte” after literary 
texts is not alone sufficient if one wishes to ascertain Amennakhte’s authorship, for it might 
be used to indicate a copy that he made. In order to corroborate Amennakhte’s paternity for 
the above-mentioned texts, a range of correlated facts have to be taken into account: [1] he is 
the author of T1; [2] T4, T5 and T6 were composed quite late with respect to Amennakhte’s 
life (under Ramesses IV and V), i.e. at a time when Amennakhte was a skilled professional in 
writings and had few (if any) reasons to copy such literary texts on ostraca; [3] given both 
points 1 and 2, it is tempting to attribute T2, T3 and T7 to the same author (especially based 
on the fact that we have to deal with trained literary hand(s) which seems to exclude “signed” 
school exercises). Hence, the probability that Amennakhte actually composed these texts is 
high, but this has not been definitely proven yet. 
It should be noticed that the attribution of these literary texts to Amennakhte does not rely 
on the identification of his handwriting.
212
 Indeed, as it has been pointed out several times, the 
use of palaeographical arguments for dating in general
213
 and the identification of individual 
handwritings in particular still remains a risky and perilous business,
214
 not least because of 
the similarities between hands in the Deir el-Medina community of the period.
215
 
This principle also applies to the selection of the documentary texts that have been 
included in the present corpus: the palaeography has been used as a secondary criterion and it 
                                                          
formula ir.n sS PN is also attested in relation with exercises on specific signs (see e.g. O.DeM 1784 with the 
formula ir.n sS Any “made by the scribe Ani” framed in an inked box in the middle of bull signs; exercise on a 
royal epithet) or on colophons (see P.Sallier IV, v
o
 16,2: ir.n sS Imn-xaw “made by the scribe Amenkhau”), after 
model letters (see e.g. O.DeM 1693, r
o
 x+6; signed by one of Amennakhte’s son, Paneferemdjed), after love 
songs (see e.g. O.Turin 57319+O.DeM 1635, if the “signature” on the v
o
 is related to the text on the r
o
), after a 
dreambook (P.Chester Beatty III, 10,20; ir.n sS Imn-nxt sA ¢a-m-nwn “made by the scribe Amennakhte son of 
Khaemnun”), and after copies of literary texts (in this case, it follows the iw=s pw nfr m Htp formula: P.Sallier 
III, 11,9-11 [Pentaweret – Qadesh], P.d’Orbiney 19,9 [Ennene – Two Brothers], ?O.Turin 57431? [? – Teaching 
of Amenemhat]; bare name of the scribe without the ir.n formula e.g. on P.Sallier II, 3,8 [Ennene – Teaching of 
Amenemhat], O.DeM 1014, 2,7 [Neferhotep – Satire of the Trades]. It should also be mentioned that, after royal 
encomia, hymns and prayers, besides the formula ir.n PN (see e.g. the hymn to the sun on O.Turin CG 57003, vo 
10; O.Turin CG 57396, r
o
 6; O.Leipzig 23, v
o
 7; name only in the Hymn to Ra of O.Gardiner 319, r
o
 5), the 
passive construction irw in PN is also attested for what is usually more likely to be an author (on this question, 
see also Mathieu 2003: 136-137, tab. 3 & Lenzo Marchese 2004: 365) rather than an orant signature (much like 
in TA, r
o
 5,8; see e.g. the Hymn to Amun-Ra of the O.Michaelides 82 + O.DeM 1593, l. 5: irw in sS imn-ms 
“made by the scribe Amenmes”, O.Petrie 6, r
o
 4-5; in the dwAw-hymns, the mere agentive particle in may be 
used directly after the introduction of the prayer like in O.DeM 1197, r
o
 1: dwA ra Htp=f m anx in sS qd Hri-mnw 
“worshiping Ra when he goes down in life by the draughtsman Hormin”; see also O.DeM 1706, 1748); the status 
of the scribe of O.BM EA 29549 is difficult to ascertain: do we have to deal with a mere copist or with an author 
introduced after a long colophon by ir(w) in Xry-a=f “made by his assistant” (vo 2)? Finally, one sometimes finds 
the formula sS pw PN “it is the scribe PN” at the end of literary text, like O.Leipzig 8, ro 5. 
212
 Such an enterprise (with a special attention to the ductus) is part of Andreas Dorn’s project, cf. n. 167. 
213
 See e.g. Eyre 1979, 86-87; Janssen 1984: 305-306 & 1987. 
214
 See Janssen (1994: 96). For the Will of Naunakhte, see Eyre (1979: 87): “[e]ven within the Will of Naunakhte 
[calligraphic writing], the degree of deliberateness in sign formation varies quite considerably, the forms tending 
most to cursiveness and ligature appearing in the list of witness at the end of the first column.” 
215
 We have to keep in mind that Amennakhte was a ‘teacher’ and that we are thus dealing “with a ‘school’ of 
hands closely associated with his” (Eyre 1979: 87); further comments on the similarities between the hands who 
wrote the numerous ostraca of the teaching of Amennakhte in Dorn (2004: 49). On this point, see also Parkinson 
(1999: 158) who states, about O.BM EA 41541 (T1β), “[t]his copy is well written on a carefully chosen ostraca 
and the scribe’s handwriting seems to be modelled on Amennakht’s own.” Given r
o
 2 and comparing it with T1ε 
(n sA [LAC.] “for the son [LAC.]”), one may wonder whether Hormin is actually the dedicatee (Bickel & Mathieu 
1993) or rather the copyist of T1 (Dorn 2009: 77). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
33 
is only the documents for which strong internal evidence speaks in favour of Amennakhte’s 
authorship that have been kept in the main corpus
216
: 
 
Text A (TA): The testamentary deposition of Naunakhte (also known as The Last Will of 
Naunakhte [Doc. I] = P.Ashmolean 1945.97 = P.Gardiner 1 [col. 1-5,8
217
]). 
Ed.: Černý 1945: VIIIa-IX (= KRI VI, 236-240). Year 3 Ramesses V or VI. Authorship: 
Amennakhte is mentioned as the scribe: irw in sS imn nxt n pA xr xni (col. 5,8). 
 
Text B (TB): The Turin Strike Papyrus
218
 (= P.Turin Cat. 1880). 
Ed. RAD XIV-XVII & 45-58 (= n
o
 XVIII). Year 29-30 Ramesses III. Bib.: Pleyte & Rossi (1869-
1876: pl. XXXV-XLVIII [fac-simile]); Edgerton (1951); Frandsen (1990); Häggman (2002: 20-
22); Müller (2004). Authorship: Based on internal evidence,
219
 see e.g. Edgerton (1951: 144-
145); Frandsen (1990); Donker van Heel & Haring (2003: 40 n. 3).
220
 
 
Text C (TC): Draft of a letter by the scribe Amennakhte (r
o
) and 2 accounts (v
o
; Doc. A 
records the amount of fresh vegetables to be delivered by the doorkeeper an-Xr-tr and Doc. B 
records the amounts of firewood to be delivered by the same doorkeeper = O.Louvre N. 696). 
Ed.: Koenig 1991: 98-101 & 103 (= KRI VII, 321). Ramesses III
end
. Authorship: Amennakhte 
is the sender of this draft of a letter to the vizir tA (ro 1-2: TAy-xwy Hr wnmy-nsw.t mr niw.t TAty 
tA – sS imn-nxt) and his name appears three times on the vo (see esp. Doc. B, l. 7-8: sS imn-nxt 
n pA xr r-xt mr-niw.t tA). 
 
                                                          
216
 Usually, arguments of two kinds are invoked in arguing for the authorship of Late Egyptian documentary 
texts: [1] the palaeographical comparison (this method has been used by Eyre 1979: 86-87 & n. 57 in 
combination with the onomastic point of view; it results in a list of no less than 20 documents attributed to 
Amennakhte’s, cf. infra); [2] the occurrence of the name of the scribe in the document (especially [a] when he is 
the only person qualified as a scribe among the people mentioned in the text and [b] when his position in the list 
of witnesses is prominent or unexpected; both arguments are used by Zonhoven 1979: 89 & 97 regarding the 
attribution of O.Wien Aeg 1 to Amennakhte). 
217
 The end of the 5
th
 column has most probably been written by Horisheri, son and pupil of Amennakhte. See 
already Černý (1945: 31). This suggestion received general approval, see e.g. Eyre (1979: 86): “[t]hat he is 
indeed correct, as also in his presumption that the later hand is that of Horisheri, is unchallengeable.” Eyre 
argues as well from the appearance of Horisheri among the witnesses to the codicil in his earliest attestation as 
‘Scribe of the Tomb’. 
218
 This papyrus is basically a series of notes related to the strike that occurred in Deir el-Medina at this time (see 
e.g. Valbelle 1985: 35; Polis 2011: 387), even if, it as has been noticed (see Eyre 1979: 90 n. 36), the word sxA 
(litt. “memorandum”) only occurs after a later addition (RAD 58,14-16). One finds this term in connection with 
Amennakhte on O.DeM 761: [DATE] sxA n sS imn-nxt 
end
 (see Grandet 2000: 162). On the notion of “draft” in 
relation to this document, see Donker van Heel & Haring (2003: 1-2). 
219
 The decisive argument in attributing this document to Amennakhte is maybe not so much the preponderant 
and positive part he plays in it, but the switch from the 3
rd
 to the 1
st
 pers. pronoun that occurs in P.Turin 
Cat. 1880, r
o
 3,12-13 when the narrative resumes after a direct speech: iw.i Hr in.t.w r-Hry an “and I brought them 
back to the upper place” (see also the switch from the 1
st
 to the 3
rd
 pers. in v
o
 7,3-4). This phenomenon is also 
attested in other documents, see e.g. the second text on the verso of P.Turin 1879 (vs 2,7-2,22 = KRI VI, 338,3-
339,5) [cf. infra n. 219] with Janssen (1994: 92): “the scribe suddenly introduces himself and his companions, 
here probably the captains of the necropolis. Structure = [DATE] hrw pn, iTA sS Hri n pA xr m-bAH pA Hm-nTr tpy n 
imn […], iw.f di.t sS.n nA Hmty nA xnr n pA xr].” 
220
 Gardiner, in his publication of the text (RAD XVI), already noticed that “the handwriting [...] may have been 
due to the same scribe throughout, though the size of the writing varies in different places [...]. The scribe was a 
skilled professional”. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
34 
To the best of my knowledge, apart from these three documentary texts, the name of 
Amennakhte (son of Ipuy) occurs in more than 120 documents (with many variants in his 
title: ø, sS, sS qdw, sS n pA xr [xny], etc.), among which at least twenty ostraca and one 
papyrus
221
 have been explicitly attributed to him by scholars (notably by Eyre
222
 who 
combined two criteria of two types: palaeography and appearance of the name of Amennakhte 
in prominence): 
 
1: O.Ashmolean Museum 4 [= O.Gardiner 4]. 
Ed.: HO XXVII,3 (= KRI VI, 142). Year 5 Ramesses IV. Bib.: McDowell (1999: 181-182); 
Helck (2002: 394). 
 
2: O.Ashmolean Museum 68 [= O.Gardiner 68].  
Ed.: HO LXVII, 3 (= KRI V, 555-556). Year 31 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam (1973: 166-167); 
Helck (2002: 330). 
 
3: O.Ashmolean Museum 104 [= O.Gardiner 104].  
Ed.: HO XLVII,3 (= KRI V, 555). Year 31 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam (1973: 171-172); Helck 
(2002: 329); Janssen (2005: 24). 
 
4: O.Berlin P 10633.  
Ed.: DeM-online (= KRI V, 529-530). Year 29 Ramesses III. 
 
5: O.Berlin P 10645+10646.  
Ed.: HOPR pl. 6-7 & DeM-online (= KRI V, 527-528). Year 28 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam 
(1973: 30); Wimmer (1995: 29-30) [hand similar to T7]. 
 
6: O.Berlin P 10655.  
Ed.: DeM-online (= KRI V, 573-574). ?Year 29 Ramesses III?. Bib.: Allam (1973: 30-32); 
Helck (2002: 302). 
 
7: O.Berlin P 12630.  
Ed.: HOPR pl. 10-11 & DeM-online (= KRI V, 594-595). Ramesses III (?or IV?). Bib.: Wente 
(1990: 162). 
                                                          
221
 One should probably add two rather exceptional papyri to this list. [1] P.Turin Cat. 1879+1969+1899, i.e. the 
famous map of the mines located in the Wadi Hammamat. Romer (1984: 129-130) was the first to acknowledge 
the fact that this map could have been drawn by a scribe from Deir el-Medina. Then, Harrel & Brown (1989; 
1992: 86) suggested that this scribe could be Amennakhte son of Ipuy (see the development on p. 100-103). The 
attribution of the texts written on the verso is, to say the least, problematic: the first text [v
o
 1,1-3 = KRI VI, 
377,12-14] seems to record an oath sworn by the scribe Amennakhte in his house, certainly in the presence of his 
wife (Hsb.t [LAC.] arq [LAC. hrw] pn in sS imn-nxt ( ) m tAy=f a.t Hr [t]r-n-dwA.t m-bAH anx-n-niw.t [tA-
wr.t-]m-Hb anx n nb a.w.s Dd.n=f [LAC.] “year [LAC.] last day [LAC.] this [day] by the scribe Amennakhte in his 
place at sunset in front of the citizen [LAC.] oath by the lord l.p.h. that he said [LAC.]), the second (v
o
 1,3-2,6 = KRI 
VI, 335,5-337,15; see Hovestreydt 1997) and third texts (v
o
 2,7-2,22 = KRI VI, 338,3-339,5) are by another hand 
(possibly the one of the scribe of the necropolis Hori, see Janssen 1994 : 92-96). [2] P.Turin 1885 (see Carter & 
Gardiner 1917; von Beckerath 2000), i.e. the well-known plan of the tomb of Ramesses IV. 
222
 Eyre 1979: 91 n. 57. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
35 
 
8: O.Berlin P 12654.  
Ed.: HOPR pl. 12-15 & DeM-online (= KRI VI, 344-345). Year 2 Ramesses IV (or V). Bib.: 
Janssen (1982: 133-147). Eyre (1979: 91 n. 57) is hesitant about this attribution. 
 
9: O.BM EA 65938 [= O.Nash 5].  
Ed.: HO LIII, 2 (= KRI V, 471-472 & Demarée 2002: pl. 187-188). Year 20 Ramesses III. 
Bib.: Allam (1973: 221-222); McDowell (1999: 34); Helck (2002: 239-240). Eyre (1979: 91 
n. 57) is hesitant about this attribution. 
 
10: O.Bodleian Library Eg. Inscr. 253.  
Ed.: HO LXIV, 2 (= KRI V, 485). Year 23 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam (1973: 40-42); McDowell 
(1999: 33); Helck (2002: 250). 
 
11: O.DeM 59.  
Ed.: Černý 1935: pl. 46-46A. XX
th
 dynasty. Bib.: Allam (1973 : 84-85). 
 
12: O.DeM 73.  
Ed.: Černý 1935: pl. 50-50A (= KRI V, 472-473). Year 20 Ramesses III. Bib. Allam (1973: 
88-89); Helck (2002: 240-241); Janssen (2005: 36). 
 
13: O.DeM 553.  
Ed.: Sauneron 1959: pl. 2-2A (= KRI V, 658-659). Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam (1973: 127-128). 
 
14: O.DeM 828 + O.Vienna H. 1.  
Ed.: Zonhoven (1979: fig. 1) & Grandet (2000: 212).
223
 Year 25 Ramesses III. 
Bib.: McDowell (1999: 69-72). 
 
15: O.Florence 2620.  
Ed. HOPR pl. 34-35 (= KRI V, 467). Year 17 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam (1973: 147); Helck 
(2002: 235). 
 
16: O.Florence 2621.  
Ed. HOPR pl. 36-39 (= KRI V, 478-480). Year 21 Ramesses III. 
 
17: O.Florence 2625. 
Ed.: HOPR pl. 34-35 (= KRI V, 501). Year 25 Ramesses III. Bib.: Wimmer (1995: 94); Helck 
(2002: 266). 
 
18: O.Michaelides 1 [= O.Grdseloff 1].  
Ed.: Goedicke & Wente 1962: pl. LI (= KRI V, 451-452). Year 10 Ramesses III. Bib.: Allam 
(1973: 204-205); Helck (2002 : 227); Janssen (2005 : 28). 
                                                          
223
 Publication of the missing part of the O.Vienna H. 1 (= Černý, Notebook 114, 47-48). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
36 
 
19: O.Nicholson Museum R. 97.  
Ed.: Eyre 1979: 88-89 (= KRI VI, 151-152). Ramesses III
end
-Ramesses IV.
224
 
 
20: O.Turin N. 57381 [= O.Turin suppl. 9611].  
Ed.: HOPR pl. 68-69; López 1978: pl. 119-119a (= KRI VII, 286-287). Year 18 Ramesses III. 
Bib.: W. Helck (2002 : 238). 
 
21: P.Berlin P 10496.  
Ed.: HOPR pl. 80-84 (= KRI V, 476-478). Year 21 & 24 Ramesses III. Bib.: Blackman (1926: 
177-181). 
 
This list - with select bibliography
225
 - is intended merely as the “state of the art” in the 
Egyptological literature concerning the documentary texts that have been tentatively 
attributed to Amennakhte. However, as it was already pointed out by Eyre,
226
 the high degree 
of variation for a given sign within a single document (and all the more between different 
documents) makes it difficult to argue authorship on the basis of sign comparison alone.
227
 As 
a result, the methodological stand adopted here is the following: these documents will serve as 
a “test-corpus” in order to investigate whether the kinds of variation found within these 
documents correlate with the kinds of graphemic and linguistic variations found in the main 
corpus. 
 
§4.2. Graphemic variation: regularity and motivated variations in hieratic spellings 
The examination of this dimension of variation
228
 might, at first glance, appear to be 
somewhat inadequate. Indeed, the three documentary texts in the corpus must have been 
written by Amennakhte himself, but, setting aside any kind of palaeographical consideration, 
the literary texts might well be copies of Amennakhte’s compositions made by other scribes. 
However, the variations between the witnesses of T1 at the graphemic level are so limited 
(both in quantity and quality) that we may safely infer that the scribes who copied such texts 
paid a great deal of attention to the formal side of their undertaking.
229
 Inductively, it would 
be surprising if this were not to apply to other literary texts produced by Amennakhte. Hence, 
I consider all the spellings of the literary corpus to be representative of Amenakhte’s own. 
In this section, one will observe [1] the high degree of regularity of the spellings in 
Amennakhte’s writings, [2] the importance of the iconic potential of the hieratic script 
through the analysis of some motivated variations of classifiers, [3] variations in the spellings 
                                                          
224
 The reason why Helck (2002: 514) suggests dating this document to year 16? of Ramesses IX escapes me. 
225
 Full bibliographical information may be found in the Deir el-Medîna Database (http://www.leidenuniv.nl/ 
nino/dmd/dmd.html). 
226
 Eyre (1979: 86-87). 
227
 See, however, the interesting methodological suggestions made in van den Berg & Donker van Heel 2000 
regarding hieratic palaeography, especially with respect to the identification of the hand of the scribe Wennefer. 
228
 The research concerning this part of the paper has been hugely facilitated by the use of the Ramses database 
developed in Liège which allows encoding of the hieroglyphic spellings; see Rosmorduc, Polis & Winand 2009; 
Winand, Polis & Rosmorduc 2011. 
229
 Burkard (1977: 68-71 & 142-145) showed that the texts were not written to dictation but copied, see also 
McDowell 1996: 607 and the comment made by Parkinson 1999: 158. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
37 
that are characteristic of given genres and the result of Amennakhte’s deliberate choice. In 
general, one finds very few cases of free variations in the spellings of the corpus. As a first 
illustration, one may examine the variation found within substantives.
230
  
If we exclude some marginal cases, like e.g. the variation between  (TA, 3,11) vs 
/  (sg/pl systematic; passim), there is only one example of apparently unmotivated 
variation in the literary texts (143 lexemes; 33 occur in two texts or more [23%]) and one 
example in the documentary texts (172 lexemes; 32 occur in two texts or more [18,6%]): 
 
- imw “boat”  (T1μ, 2; similar in other witnesses of T1) vs  (T3, 5); 
- Sgr “wooden ?box?”  (TB, vo 5,15) vs  (TB, vo 5,11), 
certainly due to a lexical borrowing.
231
 
 
Except for these two cases, the spellings of the substantives are overwhelmingly regular; this 
phenomenon may be illustrated with three types of motivated variation at the graphemic level. 
 
1. Number 
The singular vs plural number is spelled consistently (even when quite infrequent 
“orthographies” are used for the plural). For example, s.t “place” is written  (both in 
literary and documentary texts) and the two occurrences of the plural are written the same 
way:  (TA, r
o
 4,10 & TB, r
o
 4,4; another occurrence of this spelling is P.Anastasi IV, 
4,9 [= LEM 39,5]). 
 
2. Feminine writings 
The absolute vs suffixal states of the feminine substantives have different, but coherent 
spellings. For example: sbAy.t “teaching”  (T1α, 1) vs sbAy.t=k “your teaching” 
                                                          
230
 The proper names have systematically been excluded here. 
231
 See Janssen 1975: 200; 2009: 84 (who does not acknowledge the spelling with ). The alternation between 
 al (Wb. I, 208,11) and  inr (Wb. I, 97-98) is maybe not to be considered as a case of 
graphemic variation within TB between a syllabic and an older spelling. Indeed, both lexemes are attested in 
Coptic, respectively al “pebble, stone” and vne “stone” (see Černý 1976: 4 & 218). The difference in meaning 
of both words, however, is far from being self-evident in TB. In the same context, compare: xr ptr, kfA PN1 Hna 
PN2 al ( ) Hr Tbn n pA is n Wsir PN3 “but look, PN1 and PN2
 
removed a stone on the top of the 
tomb of the Osiris PN3” (r
o
 4,4-6); xr ptr=tn tA s.t-aHa ( ) n TAty PN Hr tA s.t-in inr ( ) “but 
you have seen (i.e. you are aware of) the position of the vizir PN regarding the removing of stones” (r
o
 4,10); di 
aA-n-is.t PN, pAy=i it, rmT r in(.t) inr im=s “the chief of the gang PN, my father, appointed someone to remove 
stones therein” (r
o
 4,11). Additionally, the phrase in al (parallel to in inr in TB) appears in another document 
related to the violation of a tomb (ptr n={tw}tn r in al im=f r-bnr “pay attention, youpl, not to remove stones 
therefrom to the outside”, Block Edinburgh Society of Antiquities 912,3 [DZA 21.900.630]) and, judging from 
Crum (CD 3-4), the meaning “hail stone” is still well-attested in Coptic for al. The lemma al appears during the 
New Kingdom but remains poorly attested. In the framework of this study, it is worth noticing that, besides other 
occurrences in the Ramesside period (P.Anastasi I, 23,3; 24,2; P.Mag.Harris, 4,7; O.Cairo CG 25651, v
o
 2,2-2,3; 
O.DeM 1038, v
o
 3 [text probably written by the idnw Hay who was a contemporary of Amennakhte, see Dorn 
2009: 77 & Dorn 2011: 190-191]) sometimes related to Tomb Robberies (P.BM EA 10052, v
o
 14,4-5: mtw=tw 
gm.t=i iw dgs(=i) pAy al m rd=i, iw=f r tp-xt “if one discovers that I trampled this stone with my foot, I will be 
impaled”; Block Edinburgh Society of Antiquities 912,7 [DZA 21.900.640]), it occurs in the letter to Ramses VI 
on the verso of P.Turin 1879 (I, 2,4; see Hovestreydt 1997 and here n. 219) whose recto was possibly written by 
Amennakhte. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
38 
 (T1α, 10; T1μ, 5; etc.), here with the 2
nd
 person singular masculine suffix pronoun 
(2SG.M) 
 
3. The influence of the discursive environment 
The opposition between  (TB passim, TC, b, v
o
 1) and  (TB) is perfectly coherent, one 
always finds the first spelling in the dates and the second when the lexeme is included in the 
main text; see e.g. twn Hqr.(wy)n, iw hrw 18 aq m pA Abd ( ) “we are hungry, the 18th day 
of the month is there (and no ration arrived)” (TB, r
o
 1,2). 
The opposition between  (e.g. T1β, 2; TB passim; TC, b, v
o
 1, v
o
 7; etc.) and  (e.g. 
T1ξ, 5; TB, r
o
 1,3, v
o
 2,9, 3,26, 3,29, 4,15; etc.) or  (TC, r
o
 2, b, v
o
 8) and  (TB 
passim) follows the strict repartition <title in headings and “signatures”> (sS PN; when it is 
written, the classifier A1 appears after the PN) vs <title or function in the main text> (e.g. pA 
sS n pA xr “the scribe of the Tomb”, iry=k sS “may you be a scribe”, etc.). 
In TB, the word is.t “gang” (  or ) appears without the quad ( ) in the title aA-n-is.t 
“chief of the gang” solely;  or  are spellings found in the phrase pA aA n is.t 2, see vo 2,9, 
3,25, 3,28, 4,14;  also occurs in aA n is.t PN, see v
o
 6,6; rt 3,7; 4,2. When Amennakhte 
refers to the whole gang as such, in the noun phrase tA is.t, the classifiers of the seated man 
and the plural strokes are always present.
232
 
 
Furthermore, it should be stressed that the writings of the substantives are consistent across 
genres (310 lexemes; 40 occur both in literary and documentary texts [13%]) so that there is 
no significant variation of spellings between literary and documentary texts; this means that 
the degree of carefulness of the handwriting does not directly affect the spellings. Within the 
documentary texts, however, one observes an influence of the cursive handwriting (e.g. hrw 
“day”  [TA, r
o
 1,3; also in T5, r
o
 1]) →  [e.g. TB, r
o
 1,1] →  [e.g. TB, v
o
 6,6] 
→  [e.g. TB, v
o
 8,7]) and processes of abbreviation (Hmty “copper”  [TA, r
o
 5,7; TB, v
o
 
5,18] →  [TB, v
o
 5,4]; Hry  [TB, ro 4,16] →  [e.g. TB, vo 3,5]; smn “price”  
[TB, v
o
 5,3] →  [e.g. TB, v
o
 5,2]; smw “vegetable”  [e.g. TB, vo 1,8] →  [e.g. TB, 
v
o
 4,14]) that are virtually absent from the literary texts. Consequently, it clearly appears that 
the strong coherence and the high consistency of the spellings (pointing to the existence of — 
at least “idiolectal” — writing conventions) would make the graphemic level a worthwhile 
criterion to investigate when arguing in favour for authorship. 
The above-mentioned cases of variation already show that Amennakhte is likely to have 
had strong scribal habits when producing hieratic texts. It can be further demonstrated 
(through motivated variations in his use of classifiers) that he also resorted to the iconic 
dimension of the hieratic script, thereby illustrating the fact that — much like the hieroglyphic 
script
233
 — hieratic is not simply a way to write down a string of spoken language,
234
 but a 
                                                          
232
 The only exception is to be found in a list of v
o
 4,16 (  tA is.t) dealing with the quantity of vegetables 
that a gardener has to deliver. It should also be noticed that  is the only spelling attested in TA. 
233
 See especially Loprieno 2001. 
234
 Another cogent example for the period is the discrimination in writing between two individuals called MAA-
nxtw=f (see Dorn 2006), that has been thematized by Loprieno (2006: 167). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
39 
complex semiotic system in its own right
235
. The iconic potential of the hieratic writing 
system broached thereafter is nothing but an illustration of the importance of writing “beyond 
its function as vehicle of linguistic sequences”
236
. 
Variations in classifiers are found in literary and documentary texts alike in order to 
specify the referent in context:  (e.g. T1π, 3) vs  (T5, 8);  (T4, r
o
 8) vs  (TC, 
3) vs  (e.g. T5, r
o
 1; TB, r
o
 2,4);  (e.g. TB, r
o
 4,15; TC, 6) vs (TA, r
o
 2,1; TB, 
1,x+16). The influence of the referent on the classifier is obvious in the alternation between 
 (Xrd.w aHAwty.w “the male children”, TA, rt 3,10) vs  (bn i.in.tw tAy.i 3 
Xrd.w Hr.i “my three (female) children will not be allowed to go in court against me”, TB, vo 
6,4-5) vs  (when the two genders are concerned; e.g. TA, r
o
 4,7; TB, r
o
 4,18); this 
observation remains true whatever the genre under consideration. The specification of the 
referent through the use of a classifier may also reflect the selection of a particular meaning 
with polysemic lexemes; see e.g. a.wy “hands”  or  (T4, 6; T6, r
o
 3) vs a “authority” 
 (T6); sbAy.t “teaching”  or  (e.g. T1α, 1 or T1λ, 1) vs sbAy.t 
“punishment”  (i.ir=tw n=f sbAy.t m pA arq=f rn n pr-aA a.w.s im “it is because of my 
(lit. his) swearing here by the name of Pharaoh l.p.h. that I (lit. he) will receive a punishment; 
TB, r
o
 2,10). 
With very few exceptions (see the two cases above), we do not encounter cases of free 
variation at the graphemic level when studying the spellings of the substantives in 
Amennakhte’s corpus; it appears that we mostly have to deal with conventionalized spellings 
or motivated variations. 
As it has been underlined, the genres do have a minimal influence on the spellings of the 
substantives: as far as this distinction is concerned, no conclusion can apparently be drawn 
from the graphemic level of variation. However, Amennakhte’s habit in writing the 2SG.M 
suffix pronoun is worth investigating further in this respect. Indeed, the alternation between 
the spellings ,  and  (or the like) of this pronoun appears to be overwhelmingly 
regular and might be symptomatic [a] of literary registers and [b] of an “idiolectal” 
conception of the syntagmatic environments where each of these spellings is to occur. 
The spelling  is the usual spelling of the 2SG.M suffix pronoun
237
 but, in a proportion of 
ca. 3 to 1 (which is statistically relevant), two other types of spellings occur: 
 
1.  ky 
The first one,  ky, is consistently used after dual inflexions:  ir.ty=ky “your eyes” (T1α, 
4 [= T1β, 7 = T1κ, 1 = T1λ, 5-6]; T3, 7; T4, 5);  wy=ky “your arms” (T4, 6). 
Interestingly enough, this infrequent spelling of the suffix pronoun, which occurs most of the 
time in monumental contexts (in phrases like Xr Tb.ty=ky “under your feet”, e.g. in Urk. IV, 
1661,5, 1754,7; KRI I, 96,13, etc. or Xr rd.wy=ky “under your legs”, e.g. in KRI, 249,12), also 
occurs once in a parallel version to P.Anastasi I, 19,4-5 (O.DeM 1005+1662, 7: a.wy=ky) as 
                                                          
235
 See already the comments in Broze (1996: 129-156, with previous literature on the topic) regarding the 
“manipulations graphiques” and their consistency in the tale of Horus and Seth, which undoubtedly point to a 
very high degree of elaboration of the written performance. 
236
 Loprieno 2006: 167. 
237
 Unfortunately, the 2SG.M suffix pronoun occurs only once in the non-literary corpus, i.e. in TB, r
o
 2,14. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
40 
well as in a parallel version to P.Anastasi IV, 3,4 (O.Gardiner 28, vs 1: ir.ty=ky), and, 
strikingly, three times in the P.Chester Beatty IV (vs 4,9: rd.wy=ky; vs 4,12 & 5,2: a.wy=ky ). 
 
2.  
The second one,  (with its variants  and ), is a hieratic spelling usually 
considered
238
 to have been influenced by the 1
st
 person singular ending of the pseudo-
participle inflexion in Late Egyptian.
239
 This “long” spelling is characteristic of the literarily 
elaborated registers that one finds in the wisdom literature sensu lato,
240
 in the Love Songs 
and in the Laudes Urbis as well as in the closely related registers of the didactic literature
241
 
during the Ramesside period. If we add to this corpus some 10 examples coming from other 
literary compositions (like P.Raifé-Sallier III, Two Brothers [1 ex.: 14,6], Horus and Seth [2 
exx.: 7,7 & 15,2]), the number of occurrences of the long spelling of the suffix pronoun is of 
147 vs 20 (88%) in favour of the “literary” registers. The main syntactic environments in 
which these spellings appears in the whole Late Egyptian corpus are: 
 After plurisyllabic prepositions (like r-HA.t, r-Hr, m-bAH, m-xmt, m-di, Hna). 
 After some substantives (especially with dual inflexions242). 
 After sDm=f forms (mainly as subject of the perfective and the subjunctive243). 
When occurring in documentary texts,
244
 spellings like  are mostly found in the 
introductory formulae of letters (see below) and in letters to superiors (probably to be 
understood in relation to diastratic variation) down to the reign of Ramesses III.
245
 
Consequently, even if some phonological motivations may originally lie behind the use of this 
spelling,
246
 it is safe to assume that the  spelling of the 2SG.M suffix pronoun became 
somehow indexical of the more formal registers. It is therefore not surprising to find it in 
literary texts by Amennakhte. 
Moreover, the syntactic environments in which the long spelling occurs in Amennakhte’s 
corpus display some interesting regularities. Unlike in the other texts of the Late Egyptian 
corpus, it does not occur after prepositions, but: 
                                                          
238
 After Erman 1933: §65-67 who has given the fullest description of the phenomenon to date. 
239
 It should be noticed that, in the texts where the long spelling of the 2SG.M suffix pronoun occurs, the full 
spelling of the 1
st
 person pseudo-participle ending, i.e. (or the like), represent less than 50% of the attestations. 
240
 See e.g. P.Anastasi I (20 occurrences), Teaching of Ani (9 occurrences in P.Boulaq 4), P.Chester Beatty IV, 
Menna’s laments, Prohibitions. 
241
 See e.g. P.Lansing (with O.DeM 1044 and O.Florence 2619); P.Anastasi II; P.Anastasi IV (with O.Gardiner 
28); P.Anastasi V; P.Koller; P.Leyden 348; P.Turin A, B & D; T.Brussels E. 580. 
242
 See e.g. a.wy=k: P.Anastasi I, 19,4; anx.wy=k: O.DeM 1253, 2,3; Ax.ty=k: O.Turin 6618, 6; ir.ty=k: O.DeM 
1616, 3,8; rd.wy=k P.Harris 500, ro 6-7,12. 
243
 Less often as object of the infinitive (15 occurrences), see the examples already quoted in Erman 1933: §65. 
244
 Sometimes also in older constructions like the negative perfective bw sDm=f in O. DeM 554, 4. 
245
 See e.g. P.Northumberland I, r
o
 4 & v
o
 2; O.DeM 581, 3-4; P.Cairo CG 58059, 2; P.Brooklyn 37.903 L, 5. 
Later occurrences of the long spelling of the 2SG.M suffix pronoun are very infrequent. Note that, among the 
clear cases of long writings in non-literary texts after Ramesses III (see P.Mallet, 6,11 & P.Mayer A, v
o
 9,19), 
three occurrences come from Dhutmose’s letters (P.BM EA 10326, r
o
 15 & v
o
 17; P.BN 196 II, v
o
 3). 
246
 See Erman 1933: §67. The long spelling is never used with monosyllabic prepositions like n (maybe with the 
exception of P.Harris 500, r
o
 6-7,3), m, r or with iw (in Amennakhte literary’s corpus, see the short spelling in 
T5, 5: iw=k r nHH “you will last forever”) and mtw. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
41 
 as the possessive pronoun after three substantives: HAty.k “your heart”  (T1β, 
10,
247
 T3, 2)
248
; sxr.w.k “your course of action”  (T1μ, 3); rn.k “your name” 
 (T3, 3); 
 as the subject of the (mostly dependent) subjunctive (am.k  [T1α, 5 = T1β, 8 
= T1λ, 6, similar spelling in P.BM EA 10326, v
o
 17: r di.t am=k “in order that you know” 
; mdw.k  [T1α, 6 = T1β, 11; similar spelling in O.DeM 1108, 4: 
xft mdw=k “when you speak” ], pXr.k  [T1β, 12], rwi.k  
[T1μ, 11], sHD=k  [T6, ro 6]) and of rx249 in the negative construction bw rx.k 
 in a circumstantial clause (T1α, 15; same construction and spelling in P.Turin D, 
2,4 = LEM 131,7). 
 
In conclusion, it might be argued that, given the observed regularities, the spelling of the 
2SG.M suffix pronoun could be used as an interesting criterion in order to corroborate the 
attribution of a literary text to Amennakhte or, more broadly, to Amennakhte’s ‘school.’ 
Indeed, if the explanation of the affinity of the long spelling with specific lexemes and 
restricted syntactic environments remains open to further investigation, the combination in a 
text of the spelling  after dual inflexions and of the spelling  (or ) after the 
subjunctive (or some substantives) could be taken as a worthwhile criterion. Quite 
interestingly, this happens at least in two didactic compositions: O.Gardiner 28 (= HO CXIII, 
1; a copy of P.Anastasi IV, 3,4-4,7) and, strikingly, P.Chester Beatty IV, v
o
 which, as 
mentioned earlier (see above §4), has been tentatively attributed to Amennakhte himself by 
Posener based on internal thematic criteria as well as geographic and diachronic compatibility 
between the manuscripts. Of course, this criterion is not sufficient in itself, but is rather to be 
taken as a mere indication that this possibility actually still holds.
250
 
 
§4.3. Diaphasic variation: A multidimensional approach to register analysis 
In order to examine the variation between the registers used by Amennakhte when composing 
texts belonging to different genres and to show thereby - through the various selections he 
deliberately made from the scribal repertoire of his time - his full mastery of the writing 
conventions, I will first focus on the types and distributions (“register features”) of the main 
predicative constructions in each text
251
 of the corpus. In a second step, other distinctive 
linguistic features (“register markers”) will be acknowledged so as to suggest a more fine-
grained picture of variation between registers during the first part of the 20
th
 dynasty, i.e. a 
multidimensional approach to register variation. 
                                                          
247
 But  in α. 
248
 For this spelling, see also P.BM EA 10326, 15 (= LRL 18,7): m dy HAty=k m-sA=i m md.t nb “do not worry 
about me regarding anything” and P.BN 196 II, v
o
 3 (= LRL 22,2). 
249 This spelling is to be related to the rather frequent long spellings of the 2.SG.M suffix pronoun when it is the 
subject of the dependent subjunctive of rx in the construction rdi.t rx, see e.g. O.DeM 289, 1: di=i rx=k pA ktx 
iTAy <m> pr Ipwy; O.Petrie 92, ro 5 (= HO 42,1); P.Koller, 5,7 (= LEM 120, 14); O.Gardiner 86, 2; P.Leyden 
348, v
o
 10,1 (= LEM 136,10). See also P.Boulaq 4, 17,7: nn rx=k Dd sw “when it is impossible for you to express 
them (properly) [i.e. the words]”. This last example is to be added to the examples dealt with in Polis 2011. 
250
 The text, usually attributed to the early 20
th
 dynasty in Thebes (see e.g. Quirke 1996: 382), should be 
systematically compared with Amennakhte’s production. See also the thematic proximity between P.Chester 
Beatty IV, v
o
 4,8 and T3 noticed in Vernus (2010: 491). 
251
 In the corpus under investigation, I consider that a single register is used in each text. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
42 
Given the relatively small size of the corpus, one needs resort both to qualitative and 
quantitative criteria in the analysis of linguistic features responsible for register variation.
252
 
Accordingly, the predicative constructions will be envisioned [1] in terms of types 
(occurrence vs non-occurrence of a construction) and [2] in terms of distribution (percentage 
of occurrence of each construction). 
As shown in figure 5, the range of predicative constructions
253
 attested in Amennakhte’s 
corpus is relatively wide. One finds predicative constructions (verbal morphology included) 
that are (a) characteristic of Late Egyptian [left of the chart], (b) common to Late Egyptian 
and Égyptien de tradition [center of the chart], and (c) inherited from Earlier Egyptian, but no 
longer productive in Late Egyptian [right of the chart]. Consequently, the texts may be 
arranged according to the types of predicative constructions that occur in their respective 
registers; this undoubtedly corresponds to different part of the scale of written formality: 
 The registers of T1 and T5-6 filter out the more recent constructions that are strongly 
indexical of the lower part of the formality scale (periphrastic constructions with iri, 
Future III, Sequential, and Conjunctive). Additionally, the selections within the repertoire 
in the registers of T1 and T5 are oriented towards the higher part of the formality scale, 
which is illustrated by the occurrences of constructions that are no more productive in the 
documentary corpus of the time. 
 T2 and T3 are literary compositions whose registers are largely open to constructions that 
entered the written repertoire during the New Kingdom; the small size of these two texts, 
however, prevents additional conclusions, but they seem not to be entirely closed to 
constructions belonging to the older, more formal, part of the repertoire. 
 The documentary registers of TA and TB are, as expected, fully open to the latest 
development of the written language of the time and closed to the older constructions and 
verbal morphology typical of Earlier Egyptian. 
The continuum of distinct selections in the available written repertoire is therefore nicely 
illustrated by the analysis of the types of predicative constructions in the corpus. This 
observation alone suffices to explain the inadequacy
254
 of Groll’s approach to the literary 
verbal system in Late Egyptian, for she did not properly recognize that the Late Egyptian 
literary texts never constituted a homogenous linguistic system, but rather a continuum of 
registers on the formality scale.
255
 
 
The analysis in terms of types of predicative constructions could create the impression that, 
roughly speaking, the registers of T1 and T5 are similar, as are the ones of T2, T3, TA & TB. 
In fact, this may be proven to be inaccurate by taking into consideration the statistical 
                                                          
252
 It is worth noticing that the present approach relies on linguistic features only in distinguishing registers. This 
means that one of the more effective criteria for register distinction, namely the lexical similarities between texts 
belonging to the same genre (that results from the influence of common situational features), has been left out in 
the present studies. For this kind of approach, see Martin Leon, Gohy & Polis 2011. 
253
 For the sake of clarity, the participles and relative forms have been excluded from the chart because of the 
important number of different morphological units. Their interest for the identification of registers is however 
beyond any doubt; one might think, for example, of the high frequency of the construction [INF. ir.n NP] in legal 
and administrative documents. 
254
 See inter alii Quack 1994: Introduction. 
255
 Of course, this does not mean that the literary registers do not display a cohesive behaviour with respect to 
other linguistic features. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
43 
distribution of the constructions in terms of type-token frequency. In order to make this point 
clear, I will succinctly examine and limit the analysis to the differences between the registers 
of T1 and T5, but the same obviously holds, even if to different extent, for the other texts).
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i.
ir
.t
=
f 
sD
m
 
F
u
t.
 I
II
 
S
eq
u
en
ti
al
 
C
o
n
ju
n
ct
iv
e 
i.
ir
=
f 
sD
m
 
(e
m
p
h
.)
 
In
fi
n
it
iv
e 
(n
ar
r.
) 
Perfective Imperative Subjunctive Present I 
A
d
j.
 P
re
d
. 
S
u
b
st
. 
P
re
d
. 
E
x
is
t.
 P
re
d
. 
(i
.)
sD
m
=
f 
(e
m
p
h
.)
 
bw
 (
ir
=
f)
 
sD
m
(=
f)
 
2
n
d
 P
re
d
. 
iw
=
f 
r 
N
P
 
m
rr
.f
 
sD
m
=
f 
(i
m
p
er
f.
) 
sD
m
.n
.f
 
+ - + - + - inf. psp. Adv. 
T1       2  9 3 16  4 3 5 4 4 2 1 4 3 2 1  1 
T5       4    2  3 19 6 1  1   1 1  2  
T6         2  12 1  1 4  2 1        
T2     1    1  1  1 1 3 2  1      1  
T3    2 1    1    4  2 1 1         
TA  10 1  1  5 1   2  2 1 1  1         
TB 1 9 15 10 6 29 24 1 7 2 17 7 17 7 14 1 4 8 3       
 
Fig. 5. Predicative constructions (and verbal morphology) in the main texts of Amennakhte’s corpus 
(only the constructions whose analysis suffers no or little doubt have been included in the chart) 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
45 
In T1 (see fig. 6), one observes a sharp dominance of verbal morphology with manipulative 
function: taken together, the imperative and the subjunctive represent approximately 45% of 
the predicative constructions. The high proportion of verbal forms with such function is 
ultimately linked to the situational features of the register under examination, i.e. the one of a 
teaching, the aim of which is to give advices and instructions to a pupil in an elaborated 
literary composition. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Distribution of the predicative constructions in T1 
 
In this respect, the variety of other predicative patterns is assuredly to be mentioned, for it 
reflects both the opening of T1’s register to constructions that belong to strata of the repertoire 
that are common to literary and documentary texts but also strong intertextual relationships 
with the linguistic material of the past in related genres
256
; this explains some of the 
occurrences of linguistics features belonging to the higher part of the formality scale in the 
register of T1. 
The figure 7, on the other hand, shows that, even if the registers of T1 and T5 are quite 
similar with respect to the types of predicative constructions that are selected, the distribution 
of this dimension of variation differs nevertheless substantially between the two registers: (a) 
the range of predicative constructions is lower and crucially (b) the verbal paradigms with 
solely manipulative function are absent. The description of the recently reinstalled peace and 
joy in this encomium of Ramesses IV leads to a statistically striking over-representation of the 
Present I with stative predicates. 
                                                          
256
 See Dorn 2004: 50-55. For tr wnn=k in T1α, 11 (and other witnesses), certainly add Ptahhotep P 7,9-10: Sms 
ib=k tr n wnn=k “follow your heart as long as you live”. 
2 
3% 
12 
19% 
16 
25% 
12 
19% 
4 
6% 
4 
6% 
2 
3% 
1 
1% 
4 
6% 
3 
5% 
2 
3% 
1 
2% 
1 
2% 
Perfective
Imperative
Subjunctive
Present I
Adj. Pred.
Subst. Pred.
Exist. Pred.
Emphatic
bw (ir=f) sDm(=f )
2nd Pred.
iw=f r NP
mrr=f
sDm.n=f
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
46 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Distribution of the predicative constructions in T5 
 
This short case-study - whose aim was mainly methodological - is patently illustrative of the 
fact that the identification of a register depends not only on the occurrence (vs non-
occurrence) of an individual feature, but on the relative frequency of features among the 
various registers. Moreover, the predicative constructions of the registers of T1 and T5 are, to 
be sure, not representative of this dimension of variation in the registers of the teachings and 
encomia in general: only a large scale and computational investigation of these genres would 
allow refinement of the figure. 
Another way to account for the continuum of selections in the scribal written repertoire is 
to analyse the distribution of the 3PL suffix pronoun. As is well-know, the new suffix pronoun 
=w supersedes the suffix pronoun =sn during the Ramesside Period. Winand257 clearly 
showed that the older pronoun =sn is not replaced at the same rhythm in every syntactic 
position by the more recent suffix pronoun =w. The spread of the new suffix pronoun =w was 
apparently quicker after iw and definitely after the infinitive (status pronominalis). In the 
documentary corpus that he investigated, the replacement is almost completed by the 
beginning of the 20
th
 dynasty: under Ramesses III, =sn is limited to two environments 
(namely after prepositions [2 occurrences; 18%] and after iw [2 occurrences; 5%]). 
The distribution of these pronouns in Amennakhte’s corpus is worth looking at in several 
respects and, even if the figures are very low, some tentative observations may be put 
forward. Among the literary registers, the ones of T1 and T5 are the more conservative: all the 
occurrences (2) of the 3PL suffix pronoun in T1 are realized with the older form and T5 
                                                          
257
 Winand 1995: 193-195; with previous literature. 
4 
10% 
2 
5% 
28 
70% 
1 
2% 
1 
2% 
1 
3% 
1 
3% 
2 
5% 
Perfective
Subjunctive
Present I
Adj. Pred.
Exist. Pred.
2nd Pred.
iw=f r NP
Imperf.
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
47 
retains =sn as subject of the sDm=f forms258 as well as in the possessive pronoun nAy=sn. This 
correlates with the abovementioned distribution of the predicative construction: both of these 
registers are manifestly the highest on the formality scale according to this first dimension of 
register variation. 
In the registers of the other literary texts, the set of acceptable syntactic positions for the 
suffix pronoun =w is definitely larger, for we find no occurrence of =sn in these texts. This 
might look puzzling considering the fact that =sn occurs both in TA and TB and calls for two 
comments: [1] as stated earlier, during the 20
th
 dynasty, some literary registers are amply 
opened to the latest evolutions of the written repertoire and this case is nothing but a direct 
illustration of this phenomenon; [2] we might have to deal here with real time diachrony 
through the evolution of the habits of one scribe. Indeed, even if we have no idea about the 
dates of composition of T2 and T7, T6 and TA
259
 were composed and written down several 
years after TB. This explanation is subject to caution, but should be kept in mind as a 
promising working hypothesis. 
 
 Inf. Subst. iw (i.)sDm=f Poss. 
Preposition 
m/r/mi-qd Hr n 
T1 
=sn    1    1 
=w         
T5 
=sn    2 1    
=w  3 1      
T6 
=sn         
=w    1    3 
T2 
=sn         
=w  1 1 1  1  2 
T7 
=sn         
=w    1  1   
TB 
=sn   1 1   1 12 
=w 5 2 7 4 1 1 1  
TA 
=sn        1 
=w 1  7 2 2 3  1 
 
Fig. 8. Distribution of the 3PL suffix pronouns in the corpus 
 
The two dimensions of register variation broached to this point are sufficient to demonstrate 
the necessity of conceptualizing registers as a continuous rather than discrete construct by 
putting the focus of the analysis on the relative distribution of common linguistic features. On 
the other hand, some other linguistic features are - maybe not as strong as “register markers”, 
                                                          
258
 One notices that these two cases of =sn (ro 5 & 6) occur after the old imperfective sDm=f form. Do we have to 
posit a relation between the occurrence of older verbal morphology and the appearance of the older suffix 
pronoun? This hypothesis might be comforted by the fact that the sole occurrence of =sn in TB after a verbal 
form is with the quotative verb i.n=sn “they said” (ro 2,17). 
259
 For the sole occurrence of =sn in TA as a possible trace of formality and written norm, see below under §4.4. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
48 
i.e. distinctive indicators of a register
260
 - definitely characteristic of some registers as 
opposed to other in the investigated corpus. 
As opposed to the other registers and texts, T1 and T6 use the old spelling of the 
negation, i.e. nn  (that is undoubtedly strongly indexical of the higher part of the formality 
scale, see T1α, 6 [= β, 10] & T1α, 14 [= T1μ, 8]; T6, r
o
 5-6), instead of the regular Late 
Egyptian negation bn  (that occurs both in other literary [see T5, 5] as well as documentary 
texts [18 occurrences, never nn]). 
The left-topicalizing particle ir “as for” is avoided in literary registers. In T5, one finds: 
 ø nA xAr.wt, pr.{t}w wn “the widows, their houses are open” (see also 
T5, 6); in T1α, 6 (= β, 10), ø smi aA, nn sw r s.t=f “an arrogant announcement is out of place”. 
In the documentary registers, on the other hand, the topicalizing particle is systematically 
present: ir ink, ink nmH n pA tA n pr-aA “as for me, I am a free woman of the land of Pharaoh” 
(TA, 2,1); ir pA wAH nb Dr.t=f |Hr Dr.t=i| im=w, iw=i r di.t n=f Ax.t=i “whoever among them 
has been a helping hand, I will give him my goods” (TA, 2,6); ir pA nty bwpw=f di.t n=i, bn 
iw=i r di.t n=f m Ax.t=i “as for he who did not give me (anything), I will not give him 
anything of my goods” (TA, 2,7); ir pA[y] 4 Xrd.w ink <bn> iw=w r aq r pSs.t m Ax.t=i nb.t “as 
for these four children of mine, they will not have a part of any of my goods” (4,7; sim. in 3,7, 
4,9, r
o
 5,1 and 5,3), ir pAy.tn Dd (…) “concerning yourPL saying (…)” (TB, ro 3,1-2). This 
opposition between literary and documentary registers does not seem to suffer any exception. 
In the literary registers, the morpheme iw is avoided for introducing circumstantial 
clauses of non-existence
261
 (see e.g. the virtual circumstantial clauses in T1α, 15 [= T1μ, 9]; 
T5, 6-7: bn pA nwH “there is no more hauling”262 and T6, ro 5-6) as well as before the 
adjunctal stative that is left unconverted
263
 in T1α, 3 (nDm zp-2 gm z ip m kA.t nb.t “it is really 
pleasant to find a man able in every work”) as well as in the other witnesses, except for T1λ, 
3-4 that resorts to the converted construction iw=f ip m kA.t nb.t “who is able in every work”. 
Finally, lexical diversity is a dimension of variation that deserves a close attention when 
adopting a multidimensional approach to registers analysis. Indeed, the richness of the lexical 
stock - that is typically captured by the type-token ratio V/N
264
 - is expected to vary both in 
type and in frequency across genres and registers.
265
 A simple example that focuses on the 
adjectival category will be sufficient here in order to illustrate the line of reasoning. 
There are 19 different adjectives attested in the corpus (among which 4 occur both in 
literary and documentary texts: wr, aA, nfr and TAy): 14 of them are used in T1-7 and 8 in TA-
                                                          
260
 See Biber (1995: 28-29). 
261
 In this respect, the occurrences of the negative relative converter iwty in T1 (e.g. μ, 15: iwty ir.t=f “the one 
without discernment” [litt. “who has no eye”]) and T2,4 (iwty Hbs.w=f “the one without clothes) is to be pointed 
out. However, the vitality of the iwty morph in Demotic and Coptic (especially the host-class expansion of the 
iwty-constructions) should warn us against identifying it as a sign of formality (diatopic parameters of variation 
might possibly be relevant in this case). 
262
 On the so-called “predicative bn”, see Vernus 1985 (especially the p. 155-163 dealing with the construction 
bn + definite subject). 
263
 In a similar vein, the definite article pA seems to be expressly filtered out in some specific syntactic 
environments, e.g. before substantival occurrences of the infinitive. See T1α, 3 & 12 (with the other witnesses: 
nDm [zp-2] gm + OBJ. & nDm qnqn) vs T3, 3 (nfr.wi n=k pA |aS| rn=k). 
264
 Where V is the size of the vocabulary of the text and N is the number of tokens of the same text, see 
e.g. Stamatatos, Fakotakis & Kokkinakis 2001: 474-475 & 481-482. 
265
 A first study of this dimension of register variation in Late Egyptian is proposed in Martin Leon, Gohy & 
Polis (2011) where it is used as an effective heuristic device in automatic text categorization. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
49 
C. As is shown in the chart below - even if the shortness of the texts is likely to be responsible 
for uncontrolled statistical variation -, the literary registers are characterized by a higher text 
frequency of the adjectives than the documentary registers (at least in a proportion of 2 to 1, 
but more significantly in most cases). Moreover, there is a clear tendency towards high 
frequency of adjectives in the registers of the compositions that have been characterized as 
more formal according to the previous dimensions of register variation (especially T1 and 
T5), which is probably to be understood as a sign of literary elaboration.
266
 Hence, the interest 
of a multidimensional approach to register variation is again made quite obvious: different 
linguistic features, when considered together, can help gain a more accurate description of the 
registers. 
 
 Word Token Percentage Type 
T1 331 12 3,6% 10 
T3 83 3 3,6% 2 
T5 195 7 3,5% 5 
T6 166 5 3% 4 
T7 76 2 2,6% 2 
T4 61 1 1,6% 1 
T2 81 1 1,2% 1 
TB 2074 15 0,72% 6 
TA 536 2 0,37% 2 
 
Fig. 9. Frequency of occurrence of the adjectival part of speech 
 
The various case-studies that have been presented above deal with a restricted number of 
linguistic features and a proper description of each one of the registers would require taking 
into consideration [1] other parameters of register variation and [2] as many texts as possible 
for each register. However, this has no real impact on the present argument, for the 
methodological point that is to be made is the fundamental interest and efficiency of such a 
multidimensional approach to Ancient Egyptian registers. Indeed, it definitely proves that an 
individual scribe, depending on the circumstances of production, was able to play with 
different parts of the written repertoire that belong to different diachronic strata of the 
Egyptian language. 
 
§4.4. Written conventions and standardized registers 
Up to this point, the important issue of standardization, conventionalization or levelling of the 
written performance has been left almost untouched, even if different types of written 
conventions at the graphemic level have been studied in §4.2. In this section, I would like to 
discuss briefly two other kinds of regularities in Amennakhte’s writings (respectively at the 
morphological [a] and constructional [b] levels) that could point to the existence of a 
                                                          
266
 We would reach similar conclusions studying the type-token ratio of the prepositions in the corpus. One may 
notice, for example, that the two poems of the O.Gardiner 25 (T2 & T3) attest 8 different prepositions, among 
which 6 also occur in the documentary corpus (75%); the Instruction of Amennakhte (T1), on the other hand, has 
13 different prepositions, but only 6 of them also appear in TA-TC (46 %). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
50 
somewhat normative conception that Amennakhte — consciously or not — had of written 
performance, and to suggest that one way of showing the conventionalized nature of some 
registers is to observe the relaxing of the scribe’s attention in the course of his writing a text. 
 
[a] The imperative plural of iwi “to come”267 is systematically written with the grapheme  
or  representing the phoneme /n/ in Amennakhte’s corpus
268
: myn  “comePL” (T6, 
r
o
 2; the referent is likely to be nTr.w nb.w in ro 1; see also myn  in ro 6); myn ( ) r-
Xnw “comePL (back) inside” (TB, ro 1,4). This contrasts neatly with the spellings of the 
imperative singular, where the  is not written, see T1μ, 14 ( ) and T7, v
o
 7: my ( ) 
iry.k Hb “come to celebrate”. The 2PL imperative of iwi do not occur very frequently in the 
Late Egyptian corpus sensu lato but, when it does, it is usually written with the grapheme  
or 
269
: myn ( ) r-Hna=i, di=tn n=i Dr.t “ComePL next to me in order to help me [litt. to 
give me a hand]” (P.Anastasi I, 5,7); mAa.ty nb, myn ( ) mAA=tn (…) “every righteous 
man, come
PL
 so to see (…)” (P.Sallier I, 8,9 [= LEM 86,14-15]); myn ( ), iry=n n=f 
nAy=f Hb.w n.w p.t “comePL, let us celebrate for it its festivals of heaven” (P.Anastasi III, 2,11 
[= LEM 22,12-13]); myn r-Dr=w  “ComePL you all (so that we give praise to him 
together)” (Medinet Habu, Great Inscription of Year 8 [= KRI V, 38,7-8]); myn ( ) r tA 
mry.t “comePL to the riverbank” (O.Cairo CG 25264, 4); myn n=i ( )270 Hm.wt-nswt, 
sA.t-nsw.t, sn.wt-nswt “comePL to me, royal wives, royal princesses and royal sisters” (Piankhy, 
l. 34). Examples of this spelling of the imperative anterior to the reign of Ramesses II are even 
unfrequent (if actually attested; see maybe cases like e.g. my [ ] mAA=tn mnw nfr wab 
“come
PL
 so as to see the beautiful and pure monument” in Urk. IV, 862, 12
271
; however 
cf. n. 266), but they become more and more usual after the New Kingdom
272
 and are beyond 
any doubt to be related to the Coptic amvini (Bohairic), amoini (Fayumic); amh(e)ine 
(Achmimic) (see Crum 1939: 7b). During the Ramesside period, the 2PL imperatives of iwi 
(with n) do apparently – this is still to be explained - occur almost exclusively in the higher 
registers (monumental performance, literary texts and didactic literature) before spreading 
                                                          
267
 For the existence of an isomorphic imperative for iwi “to come”, see the arguments pro and contra 
respectively in Schweitzer 2008 and Quack 2004. 
268
 This case is to be distinguished from the imperatives plural written with the plural strokes [Z2], like in hAb (
) n pr-aA “writePL to Pharaoh!” (TB, rt 2,4). Indeed, it is difficult to ascertain whether this kind of 
spellings refers to a phonological underlying reality (compare Dd [ ] sw m-mAa.t “sayPL it truly” [TB, rt 2,17] 
with m ir sni [ ] r mry.t “doPL not cross in direction of the riverbank” [TB, rt 3,11]) or is merely a 
graphemic device that specifies the plurality of the form. The same kind of interrogation holds for the distinction 
between the masculine  (or the like) and the feminine  (see e.g. LES 48,16: mi n=i mw.t As.t tAy=i 
mw.t “come to me mother Isis, my mother”; P.BM EA 9997, IV,4: mi r-Hna=i “come with me”) of the singular: 
whether such spellings relate to the opposition between amoy (masc.) and amh (fem.) in Coptic remains an open 
question; on this issue, see Erman 
2
1933: §354; Junge 1996: 81. 
269
 See Erman 1933: §354 & 362; Wb. II, 35,15-17 ; Caminos 1954: 79; Černý & Groll 1993: 348. 
270
 See Logan & Westenholz (1972: 112-113). The emendation into mi.<t>n suggested by Grimal (1981: 63 
n. 146) escapes me. 
271
 Similar spelling without the n in P.Leiden I 343, ro 3,12: my n=i zp-2  “come to me, come to me”. 
See also Qadesh §161 (L2, 42). In Ptolemaic, Kurth (2008: 751-753) also mentions, next to a “Form mj.n”, the 
occurrences of a “Form mjw”, with spellings such as , , . 
272
 See Spiegelberg www; Sauneron 1952: 50-51 (with previous literature); Lustman 1999: 86, §14.1.2 (who 
signals also one occurrence of  after the imperative of Sms) [I owe this reference to Prof. J.Fr. Quack]. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
51 
down to the lower part of the formality scale. Interestingly enough (and even if it remains 
difficult to prove given the low density of the documentation), Amennakhte might have acted 
as an actual agent in authorizing and systematizing this spelling in the documentary texts. 
 
[b] Winand notes “[c]omme pour le séquentiel, c’est la disparition progressive de la 
préposition Hr qui constitue le fait le plus marquant dans le paradigme du présent I”273. This 
general observation is unquestionable, but one of the interests of a small scale approach to 
linguistic variation is that one is sometimes able to refine the picture by focusing on micro-
level phenomena of motivated (or at least recurrent) patterns of variation. In Amennakhte’s 
corpus, the preposition Hr is always written in the independent occurrences of the analytical 
construction of the Present I with infinitival predicate (see e.g. twk Hr ir.t mSay.w n bnw “you 
are doing expeditions worthy of a millstone” [T3, 4-5]; twk Hr ir.t qd.w n imw “you are doing 
the round trip of a boat” [T3, 5]; st Hr saq mSay.w, nA xnm.wt Hr nhm Hr Dd nAy=sn xn.w n hnhn 
“they let the travellers enter, the childminders are thrilled while singing their lullabies” [T5, 
5]; ptr twi Hr Dd n=tn tAy=i wSb.t “behold, I am giving you my stance” [TB, ro 4, 21; see also 
r
o
 3,7]; xr ptr, bn st Hr ir.t xr.t=i gr ink “and, see, they are not looking after me in my turn”) 
whereas it is never written in dependent circumstantial syntactic position (namely after iw; as 
2
nd
 pred. Hr is written, see T5,5 quoted above), e.g.: i.ir.w wrS iw.w (Hr) ssm.t m rn.s “they do 
nothing else but moan the all day long in her name” (T2, 1-2); i.ir.tw swhA pA nty mi-qd.k, iw.f 
(Hr) ir.t biA.t aA.t “one mentions the one like you only because of the extremeness of his 
character” (T3, 5-6); iw.k (Hr) ir.t pA nty im “while you act as someone yonder”; iw=w (Hr) HT 
Hr nxn TAy msy.w n hAi nfr “while they are taking care of the full term male children” (T5, 
5
274
). A regularity of this kind would deserve checking in a broader corpus in order to specify 
its spread beyond the idiolectal level
275
, but it has per se the interest of showing how the 
syntactic environment might have had an influence on the actuation of a construction
276
 (here, 
with or without the preposition Hr). Additionally, the lack of counterexamples indisputably 
points to a certain degree of awareness of a, at least individual, written norm regarding this 
construction (that ultimately lead to levelled registers in Amennakhte’s case). 
 
The actuality and importance of levelling processes may be further illustrated by examining 
the “respect” of a norm in a single text. In TA, the elegance of the calligraphy seems to be 
reflected in the spellings and in the language itself that tends to be highly uniform and 
overwhelmingly regular. At the graphemic level, an illustration of motivated variations may 
be found in the status pronominalis of the substantive x.t “thing” (see already §4.2). The 
actual phonetic realization of the /t/ is underlined in the spellings by the systematic 
appearance of the grapheme :  (1,4),  (2,6; 2,7; 3,8),  
                                                          
273
 Winand 1992: 413. 
274
 See Meeks 1981: 78.2464. 
275
 This is compatible with (but markedly different from) the tendency observed by Winand (1992: 415-416) in 
the broader corpus of the 20
th
 dynasty; he gives the following figures, depending on the syntactic environment: 
Hr is present 41% of the time when the Present I occurs in an independent syntactic position while only 22% of 
the time after the circumstantial iw. 
276
 In the same vein, Winand (1992: 508-510) analyzed the possible influence of different syntactic environments 
on the occurrence (vs non occurrence) of the allative preposition r within the Third Future construction. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
52 
(4,8) which contrasts clearly with  (2,3),  (4,9), 
 (5,2). 
The prepositions Hr and r of the analytical predicative constructions (Present I, Future III, 
Sequential) are always written, which does not match the general trends of evolution of these 
constructions for the period.
277
 
It could be argued that these features are not register-dependent, but are rather a general 
characteristic of Amennakhte’s written production (who could turn out to be a rather 
conservative scribe). This assumption would however be immediately contradicted by the 
data of TB: this text was written years before TA and displays several features that are more 
advanced from a historical viewpoint (formality scale) and less regular (standardization scale) 
than TA (see e.g. the frequent, but non-regular and apparently non-motivated, omission of the 
prepositions in the abovementioned analytical predicative constructions). This constitutes a 
noteworthy argument in favour of the existence of a rather vivid language ideology that 
played a decisive part even in the registers that are not located at the higher end of the 
formality scale.
278
 This formal and conventionalized character of the written register of TA 
(when compared to other documentary texts) is arguably further demonstrable thanks to minor 
changes that might point to the decreasing attention of Amennakhte in the course of his 
writing
279
: 
 change from 3PL suffix pronoun =sn to =w after the preposition n (a conservative 
environment, see §4.3): iw=i Hr di.t n=sn “and I gave them” (2,3) vs r rdi.t rx.tw nA rmT-
is.t Hm.wt i.di=s n=w “list of the members of the gang and women to whom she gave” 
(3,1); 
 the quantifier nb always agrees consistently in gender with the antecedent - a written 
hypercorrection, for this type of gender agreement is no more required during the 20
th
 
dynasty -, but in col. 4,9 we find Ax.t nb (again in col. 5,7); 
 change from  to  as grapheme of the prothetic yod of the perfective relative form 
(i.e. from the older and infrequent spelling of the Late Egyptian relative form to the 
newer and usual spelling):  (3,1),  (3,9),  (3,11),  (4,1), 
 (4,11),  (5,3). 
Before concluding and in order to summarize the various facets that have been studied above, 
the different dimensions of variation can be tentatively and sketchily presented on a two-
dimensional graph
280
 in figure 10 (main texts of the corpus only). The horizontal axis 
                                                          
277
 See Winand 1992: 414-419; 449-454; 504-510. 
278
 In this respect, see Winand (1992: 418) who commented on the “particularismes de scribe” regarding the 
frequent occurrence of the preposition Hr with the Present I in some texts. Given the examples quoted, I would 
be tempted to postulate here register rather than scribal variation and to link it expressly to a language ideology 
probably developed through the norm of the didactic literature. This dimension will receive fuller treatment in 
Polis & Winand 2012. 
279
 Some mistakes are certainly due to the same phenomenon: [1] omission of the negation: ir pAy 3 Xrd.w ink, 
<bn> iw=w r aq r pS.t m Ax.t=i nb “as for these three children of mine, they shall <not> participate in the 
division of any of my goods” (4,7-8); [2] pAy=i  written instead of  (5,3). See Winand 
(current volume) for similar changes of the scribal pratices in the course of writing a document in the Tomb 
Robberies corpus. 
280
 This description of the registers is a priori culturally free, i.e. not based on etic criteria that depend on the pre-
construct categories of genres and registers. In this respect, it complements the emic approach explored by 
Donker van Heel & Haring (2003: introduction): “[a] modern attempt at classifying ancient text inevitably results 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
53 
represents the continuum of register features (verbal morphology, lexical diversity, etc.) while 
the vertical axis combines the numbers and types of register markers and the degree of 
conventionalization: 
 
 
Fig. 10. Two-dimensional representation  
of the register variation in Amennakhte’s corpus 
 
It should be noted that this graph does not capture the degree of variation within a single 
register: expectedly, some registers have well-defined norms (entailing relatively little 
variation), while other registers are less specified linguistically, so that there are considerable 
differences among the texts mobilizing this register. 
 
§4.5. Idiolectal features and the identification of scribes in Deir el-Medina 
In this last section, a possible idiolectal feature of Amennakhte will be described before 
questioning the epistemic feasibility of using graphemic and linguistic features as valuable 
criteria for identifying a scribe or an author in the community of Deir el-Medina, especially 
during the first part of the 20
th
 dynasty. 
The construction of abstract deverbal substantives with the substantive s.t “place” ( ) + 
verbal root is a well-known derivational strategy in Ancient Egyptian.
281
 However, to the best 
of my knowledge, if it is a quite frequent and well-established noun formation pattern in 
Earlier Egyptian, it has not been properly acknowledged within the New Kingdom corpus. I 
suggest recognizing two instances of such a construction in TB, r
o
 4,10: xr ptr=tn tA s.t-aHa (
                                                          
in a modern classification. It has been tried to minimize this anachronism by taking Egyptian terminology as the 
main point of departure.” 
281
 See already Firchow 1954: 93-94. 
[+ formal reg. 
markers] & [+ 
conventionalized] 
[– formal reg. 
markers] & [– 
conventionalized] 
[+ formal reg. 
features] 
[– formal reg. 
features] 
TB 
T2 &3 
T6 
T1 
TA 
T5 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
54 
) n TAty PN Hr tA s.t-in inr.w ( ) “but you are aware of the position of the 
vizier PN regarding the fact of bringing stones.” This “particularism” is systemically coherent 
and expected, but in the documentation at our disposal seems to be peculiar to 
Amennakhte.
282
 
Given the importance of the linguistic variation between registers, it is manifest that the 
use of linguistic features in the discussion of Amennakhte’s authorship is mainly to be 
achieved by comparing similar registers. However, in the present case, the numerous 
regularities and motivated variations that have been noticed in the course of the study, both 
within and across registers, might lead to interesting results. 
Before proceeding, it should be emphasized that convergent graphemic and linguistic 
criteria will hardly ever constitute definite proof in attributing a text to an individual scribe. 
From the outset, this need be supplemented by a close study of the handwriting, by an 
examination of the other dating criteria (and by taking into consideration thematic 
similarities
283
 in the case of literary compositions). In order to test the methodology, I will 
restrict here the analysis to three texts. The general principles will be tested on P.Ashmolean 
1945.97, col. 5,9-sq. (§4.5.1), i.e. the end of TA that directly follows Amennakhte’s text and 
has been written by another hand (probably the one of his son Horsheri, see n. 215). Given the 
fact that we deal with the same genre on the same document, very little variation is expected. 
Accordingly, the question will be whether some criteria mentioned above are able to account 
for the distinction between scribes and authors? Dorn recently suggested that “[e]in möglicher 
Schluss der Lehre Amunnachts dürfte in O.DeM 1219 vorliegen”
284
 whereas Bickel & 
Mathieu were rather of the opinion that “l’O.Gardiner 341, s’il n’appartient pas à la fin de cet 
Enseignement, semble lui être apparenté”
285
. Both hypotheses will be reviewed (§4.5.2) in 
order to see whether they could possibly be attributed to Amennakht. Finally, a documentary 
texts belonging to the “test corpus” will be looked at (O.Berlin P 10633) in order to determine 
whether the regularities and motivated variations of the main corpus corroborate an attribution 
(suggested on onomastic and palaeographical grounds) to Amennakhte (§4.5.4). 
 
4.5.1. The variations between TA and the end of the document are striking at several levels 
and, setting aside the differences of handwritings, they would probably lead to recognizing 
two distinct scribes. See e.g.: 
                                                          
282
 Another rare feature in Amennakhte’s writings is the use of SUFF.-imy in epithetic position with possessive 
function, see TA, 2,2 iry.i sxpr pAy 8 bAk=tn-imy “I brought up these eight servants belonging to you(r group)”. 
In the Late Egyptian corpus, I know of a single parallel in KRI VI, 571,7-8: [DATE] wsf n tA is.t (n) pA xr iw=sn 
Hqr.w gAb.w m Htr.w=sn-imy “[DATE] no work by the gang of the Tomb: they were hungry and lacking their 
wages”. Another possible characteristic feature of Amennakhte’s style is “l’emploi enclitique de -aA, que l’on 
retrouve cinq fois (dnj-aA et smj-aA dans l’Enseignement [T1], bjA.t-aA.t dans le « Poème satirique » [T2] et 
l’hymne de l’O.CGT 57002 [T5; for the meaning of this expression, see Posener 1964 ; Guglielmi 1985: 141 and 
Vernus 2010: 493 n. 9. Note the use of the antonym, biA.t nfr.t, in P. Chester Beatty IV, vo 5,6], nb-aA dans 
l’hymne de l’O.CGT 57001)” (Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 48). 
283
 Here, thematic similarities are to be distinguished from phraseological similarities. One may think, for 
example, of the use of i.nw n ir.ty=ky “look with your eyes” (both in T1β, 7 and in T3, 7; see the numerous 
parallels quoted in Hintze 1954: 35; Posener 1955: 64 & 67; Guglielmi 1985: 141; Dorn 2004: 53). A topos of 
this kind is manifestly rather register than author dependent, pace Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 48. 
284
 Dorn (2004: 55), partly based on the remarks made by Fischer-Elfert (1997: 16). 
285
 Bickel & Mathieu 1993: 32. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
55 
 [DATE] hrw pn wHm spr r qnb.t in rmT-is.t PN “[date] on this day, the workman PN appeared 
again in court” (col. 5,9). The phraseology is identical to that of TA (see 1,4), but 
dissimilarities appear at the graphemic level: hrw is written here  vs  (TA, 1,4) and 
rmT-is.t is written  vs  in TA (11 occurrences, no variation). 
 As regards the spellings, one can also quote: anx-n-niw.t  (5,10) vs  in TA 
(8 occurrences, no variation); niw.t-nxt  (5,10) vs  in TA (1,5). 
 The status pronominalis of feminine substantives is written without the grapheme  (see 
5,9-10: nA sS i.ir anx-n-niwt PN Hr Ax.t.s ( ) “the documents which the citizen PN 
wrote concerning her goods”) whereas all the occurrences of TA do have the longer 
spelling. 
 The negative Future III (col. 5,11) with substantival subject reads: bn iw PN ø pS im.w “PN 
shall not share in it”, with iw NP and no preposition r. This contrasts clearly with all the 
other occurrences of the Future III in TA. 
 
4.5.2. O.DeM 1219 & O. Gardiner 341 
When comparing the respective compatibilities of O.DeM 1219 and O.Gardiner 341 with 
Amennakhte’s scribal habits, the lexemic criteria will be expressly avoided here in order not 
to influence the results with elements of content. I will stick to the purely formal graphemic 
and linguistic features that have been identified in the main corpus. 
 
Several features speak in favour of Dorn’s hypothesis
286
 regarding O.DeM 1219: 
 The spelling of the substantive sbAy.t “teaching” status pronominalis with the grapheme  
(r
o
 3) as in T1α, 10 ( ). 
 The long spelling  of the 2SG.M suffix pronoun in syntagmatic environments similar 
to T1: after mdw/md.wt “speak/words” (rt 4  identical to T1α, 6) and ini 
“bring” (v
o
 16 in the bw sDm=f construction, cf. T1α, 15); see also vo 18 after a lacuna. The 
short spelling is found after it “father” and Dr.t “hand” (vo 16 & 17). 
 Use of the 3PL suffix pronoun =sn (ro 6 & 7 [not =w]) which is also systematic in T1. 
 Identical spellings for almost all the lexemes: nDm “sweet” ( , rt 5 = T1α, 11), aq “to 
enter” ( , rt 6, always the same spelling in the corpus [6 occ.; see e.g. TA, 4,2, TB, r
o
 
1,2]), xpr “to become” ( 287, vo 15 & 19 = T1β, 5 & T1λ, 4), qi n NP “form, nature, 
manner of NP” ( , v
o
 16 = T4,1), iwty REL.NEG ( , vo 17 = T1π, 1), kA.t “work” 
( , v
o
 18 = T1α, 3), ib “heart” (www, vo 19 = passim), Ts.w “maxims” ( , vo 20 
= T1α, 1). 
Against the attribution of this text to Amennakhte’s school, to Amennakhte himself, or more 
narrowly to the very Teaching of Amennakhte, I am unable to mention more than a single 
counterargument: the use of the negation bn in the construction iw=i xpr bn ib=i m X.t=i “it 
happened that my heart was not in my body anymore” instead of the negation nn that seems to 
be the norm in T1. However, it should be remembered that the negation bn occurs in other 
                                                          
286
 For the lexemic, phraseological and thematic similarities, see Fischer-Elfert 1997: 12-16. 
287
 On this spelling (cf. Coptic éⲱⲡⲉ **The first letter should be a Shin for /shôpe/**), see Erman (1933: § 49) 
& Fischer-Elfert (1984: 89-90). The spelling  occurs in other witnesses of T1 as well as in T5, 4;  in 
T6,v
o
 3. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
56 
literary registers very close to that of T1 (see esp. T6, r
o
 5-6). Moreover, given the fact that we 
are possibly at the very end of the text, a decrease in the level of indexical formality can not to 
be ruled out (see §4.4). Anyhow, the graphemic and linguistic features of this composition 
seem to be in agreement with all the data collected in the study of Amennakhte’s corpus. 
 
The suggestion, made by Bickel & Mathieu regarding O. Gardiner 341, receives less support 
when compared to the characteristic features of Amennakhte’s corpus. The attribution to 
Amennakhte appears to rely principally on the occurrence of two lexemes that are found in 
T1: 
 dni (l. 3 & 3) “dam, dyke” ( ) in the expression dni pw MAa.t “Maat is a dam”; this 
lemma also occurs in T1α, 3 (and other witnesses) with a similar spelling; 
 biA.t (l. 5) “character” ( ) that also occurs in T3, 6, but with a slightly different 
spelling: . 
Now that T1ξ has been connected to T1, one could also quote the spelling of mri “to love” on 
l. 1 ( ) that seems to be identical to T1ξ, l. 11. However, I see no other criteria that would 
confirm the attribution of this ostracon to our author. Given the (very) short size and 
fragmentary nature of this text, as well as the absence of any strong counterargument, it would 
be risky to deny the possibility of attributing it to Amennakhte. The question must remain 
entirely open. 
 
4.5.3. O.Berlin P 10633 
Several features of this text are closely related to the documentary registers of the main 
corpus: 
 An almost perfect correspondence between the spellings of this text and the ones of the 
main corpus, see especially Imn-nxt “Amennakhte”288, smi “to make a report”, is.t “team”, 
hrw “day”, ibd “month”, diw “rations”, bd.t “emmer”. 
 Same formulation in l. 2 (20 n hrw aq.w m pA ibd) and in TB, ro 1,2 (iw hrw18 aq m pA ibd) 
with the identical full spelling of ibd ( ) - the different expressions of cardinality are 
however noteworthy. 
 The distribution of the 3PL suffix pronouns is that expected for a text from Year 29 of 
Ramesses III written by Amennakhte, i.e. with the 3PL suff. =w after the infinitive and =sn 
after the preposition n “to”: iw.tw Hr di(.t).w n.sn “and one gave them to them”. 
Taken separately, none of these criteria would be meaningful, but once considered together,
289
 
they militate for an attribution to Amennakhte or a closely related member of the community 
                                                          
288
 To the well-known occurrences of his name, add Grandet (2003: 351)  
(Amennakhte’s hand?) and O.DeM 10034, r
o
 1:  (= P. Grandet 2006 : 225). 
289
 Other less decisive criteria could be added. [1] The occurrence of the construction bw sDm.w NP in l. 3 (bw dy 
n.n diw “the rations have not been delivered to us”) with a quite unusual spelling of the verb rdi:  
(a spelling mainly characteristic of the negative verbal complements). This negation is not attested in the main 
corpus, but the ending of this spelling is not surprising and even quite consonant with what we found in TB, r
o
 
3,2 with the perfective passive participle: is ink pA TAty didi r nHm  “am I by any chance the kind of 
vizier appointed in order to deprive?”). The preposition Hr is always written with the sequential and =tw as 
subject (l. 5, 6 & 7); in TB, the preposition Hr tends not to be written, but is there when the subject is =tw, see rt 
2,5. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
57 
who shared his scribal habits. Furthermore, if we consider the rather unusual introduction of 
the text [DATE] in sS imn-nxt “[DATE] by the scribe Amennakhte” and the mention of the 
nomination of To as Vizir of Upper and Lower Egypt (see above, n. 169), there seems to be 
little room left for doubting Amennakhte’s authorship. 
 
The three case-studies presented above are definitely not intended to exhaust the subject; they 
rather to show how a close look at the scribal habits and at the correlated types of linguistic 
variation according to register could be used as a heuristic device when it comes to identifying 
authors and scribes in the Deir el-Medina community. A large body of convergent evidence 
will always be needed (which is not always possible with small texts on ostraca) and, 
admittedly, this criterion alone will probably never be sufficient, but, as illustrated in this 
section, it would be worth taking it systematically into consideration. 
 
§5. Conclusions 
This paper is first and foremost a plea for a variationist approach to the Ancient Egyptian 
linguistic material. Indeed, we are lucky enough to have first-hand access to texts that, unlike 
e.g. the writings of most of the classical Greek and Latin authors, have not (or to a very small 
extent) been standardized by a long homogenizing scribal tradition. This means that, not only 
writing communities or sub-groups of the Egyptian society, but also individual scribes may 
come to the fore so that significant patterns of variation become discernable at different levels 
of linguistic analysis. 
In order to fully benefit from this (re-)humanized Egyptological linguistic data, one has to 
accept the texts as they stand, in their diversity, and to resist the always pressing normative 
temptation to emend the data, for the description of variation
290
 at the micro-level of the 
scribes - that is too often analysed in terms of “exceptions to” or “violations” of “rules” - is 
the key and the prerequisite for any sound approach of the language history with large-scale 
corpora. 
As has been made clear several times, the orientation of the present study is assumedly 
more methodological than empirical and indisputably more programmatic than oriented 
towards immediate results. However, the case-study centred on the writings of Amennakhte 
quite explicitly showed that the variation at the level of an individual scribe is far from being 
random and is almost entirely free from unmotivated or asystemic idiosyncrasies. On the 
contrary, a number of both intra- and extralinguistic factors have been identified in order to 
explain the variations within and across registers and to account for the permanent negotiation 
between the linguistic reality, the various degree of formality and the conventionalized nature 
of the written performance. Assuredly, if the Ancient Egyptians left us with virtually no meta-
comments on their own linguistic system, this type of investigation shows how a scribe of the 
Ramesside period with full ability to compose texts was, beyond any doubt, conscious of the 
registers he used and able to play with linguistic features and indexical markers intentionally 
                                                          
290
 “Variation is at the very heart of the mechanism responsible for selected, adaptive evolutionary change” 
(Givón 2002: 17-18). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
58 
selected
291
 in a wide multiglossic scribal repertoire that had been progressively enriched by 
the history of the language itself through textual heritage. 
Finally, two promising avenues of investigation that have not been directly addressed on 
empirical grounds should be underlined. [1] The study of scribal pratices is a necessary first 
step, but it is to be complemented and expanded by relating it to the linguistic variation within 
a community, a broader region or at the level of the entire body of texts. The dynamics of 
language in a community, the identification of innovative scribes and agents of propagation 
and stabilization of features recently integrated in the written repertoire belongs, to be sure, to 
the future of our field. [2] The present contribution was mainly oriented towards a synchronic 
description of register variation, but one of the ensuing goals will be to rethink and refine our 
approach to the Ancient Egyptian diachrony, starting from an accurate description of register 
variation for each period. Indeed, as Biber puts it “a register perspective is crucial to complete 
an understanding of the processes of language development and change: […] linguistic 
change interacts in complex ways with changing patterns of register variation”
292
. The 
Ancient Egyptian corpus is a tantalizing locus for analysing how structural changes enter a 
language in particular registers
293
 and subsequently evolve at different rate in different 
registers as well as for determining the situational and cultural parameters that make possible 
and support such evolutions through the permanent mobilization and reconstruction of an 
evanescent, although pervasive, language ideology. 
 
 
Bibliography 
U. Ammon, N. Dittmar, K.J. Mattheier & P. Trugdill [eds.] (2004), Sociolinguistics/Sozio-
linguistik: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society, vol. 1. 
Berlin – New York, De Gruyter Mouton (HSK 3.1). 
P Andrássy, J. Budka & Fr. Kammerzell [eds.] (2009), Non-Textual Marking Systems. Writing 
and Pseudo Script from Prehistory to Present Times, Göttingen (LingAeg. Studia 
Monographica 8). 
G. Andreu [ed.] (2002), Les artistes de Pharaon. Deir el-Médineh et la Vallée des Rois, Paris. 
— [ed.] (2003), Deir el-Médineh et la Vallée des Rois. La vie en Égypte au temps des 
pharaons du Nouvel Empire. Actes du colloque organisé par le musée du Louvre les 3 et 4 
mai 2002, Paris, Khéops – Musée du Louvre, p. 281-308. 
J. Assmann (1975), Ägyptische Hymnen und Gebete, Zürich & Munich, Artemis. 
— (1991), “Die Entdeckung der Vergangenheit. Innovation und Restoration in der 
ägyptischen Literaturgeschichte”, in J. Assmann (ed.), Stein und Zeit. Mensch und 
Gesellschaft im alten Ägypten, München, p. 303-313. 
— (1997), “Gottesbeherzigung: „Persönliche Frömmigkeit“ als religiöse Strömung der 
Ramessidenzeit”, in L’imperio ramesside. Convegno internazionale in onore di Sergio 
Donadoni, Roma, p. 17-43. 
                                                          
291
 On this point, see Stauder’s (2011) promising results regarding the “Égyptien de tradition” of the 18
th
 
dynasty. 
292
 Biber 1995: 13; see also Romaine 1980 & 1982. 
293
 See Goldwasser 1991b about “dynamic canonicity” and Junge (2001: 21) who stated that “the norms of 
registers change for written languages also. The speed with which changes appear in particular types of texts 
depends upon their relative position in the norm hierarchy: the more developed the norm, the slower it changes.” 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
59 
P. Auer & J.E. Schmidt [eds.] (2010), Language and Space. An International Handbook of 
Linguistic Variation. Volume 1: Theories and Methods, Berlin – New York, De Gruyter 
Mouton (HSK 30.1). 
Sch. Allam (1973), Hieratische Ostraka und Papyri aus der Ramessidenzeit (= Urkunden zum 
Rechtleben im Alten Ägypten), Tübingen. 
J. Allen (1994), “Colloquial Middle Egyptian. Some Observations on the Language of Heqa-
nakht”, in LingAeg 4, p. 1-12. 
— (2004), “Traits dialectaux dans les Textes des Pyramides du Moyen Empire”, in S. Bickel 
& B. Mathieu (eds.), D’un Monde à l’autre. Textes des Pyramides & Textes des 
Sarcophages (Actes de la Table Ronde Internationale « Textes des Pyramides versus 
Textes des Sarcophages », IFAO, 24-26 Septembre 2001), Cairo (BdÉ 139), p. 1-14. 
G. Bailey & G. Tillery (2004), “Some Sources of Divergent Data in Sociolinguistics”, in 
C. Fought (ed.), p. 11-30. 
J. Baines (1983), “Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society”, in Man NS 18, p. 572-599. 
— (1985), Fecundity Figures: Egyptian Personification and the Iconology of a Genre, 
Chicago, Carducci. 
— (1990), “Restricted Knowledge, Hierarchy, and Decorum: Modern Perceptions and 
Ancient Institutions”, in JARCE 27, 1-23. 
— (1996), “Classicism and Modernism in the Literature of the New Kingdom”, in 
A. Loprieno (ed.), p. 157-174. 
— (2002), “Research on Egyptian Literature: Background, Definitions, Prospects”, in 
Z. Hawass (ed.), Egyptology at the Dawn of the Twenty-first Century. Proceedings of the 
Eight International Congress of Egyptologists, Vol. 3, Cairo, The American University in 
Cairo Press, p. 1-26. 
— (2007), Visual and Written Culture in Ancient Egypt, Oxford, OUP. 
J. Baines & Chr. Eyre (1983), “Four Notes on Literacy”, in GM 61, p. 65-96. 
— (1989), “Interaction between Orality and Literacy in Ancient Egypt”, in K. Schousboe & 
M.T. Larsen (eds.), Literacy and Society, Copenhagen, Akademisk Forlag, p. 91-118. 
D. Barton (2007), Literacy. An Introduction the the Ecology of Written Language, Blackwell. 
D. Barton & M. Hamilton (1998), Local Literacies. Reading and Writing in one Community, 
London & New York, Routledge. 
J.C. Beal (2008), “Variation in Late Modern English: Making the best use of ‘bad data’”, in 
S.M. Fitzmaurice & D. Minkova (eds.), Studies in the History of the English Language IV. 
Empirical and Analytical Advances in the Study of English Language Change, Berlin, 
Mouton de Gruyter (Topics in English Linguistics 61), p. 327-336. 
J. von Beckerath (1983), “Ostrakon München ÄS 396”, in SAK 10, p. 63-69. 
— (2000), “Bemerkungen zu Papyrus Turin 1885 Verso II-III”, in R.J. Demarée & A. Egberts 
(eds.), p. 1-7. 
A. Berg (2005), Social Networks and Historical Sociolinguistics: Studies in Morphosyntactic 
Variation in the Paston letters (1421–1503), Berlin – New York, De Gruyter Mouton. 
H. van den Berg & K. Donker van Heel (2000), “A Scribe’s Cache from the Valley of 
Queens? The Palaeography of Documents from Deir el-Medina: Some Remarks”, in 
Demarée & Egberts (eds.), p. 9-49. 
G. Berruto (2010), Identifying Dimensions of Linguistic Variation in a Language Space, in 
P. Auer & J.E. Schmidt (eds.), p. 226-241. 
D. Biber (1995), Dimensions of Register Variation. A Cross-Linguistic Comparison, 
Cambridge, CUP. 
D. Biber & S. Conrad (2009), Register, Genre, Style, Cambridge, CUP. 
D. Biber & Ed. Finegan [eds.] (1994), Socio-Linguistic Perspectives on Register, Oxford, 
OUP. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
60 
S. Bickel & B. Mathieu (1993), “L’écrivain Amennakht et son Enseignement”, in BIFAO 93, 
p. 31-51 & pl. I-VIII. 
S. Bickel & A. Loprieno [eds.] (2003), Basel Egyptology Prize; 1. Junior Research in 
Egyptian History, Archaeology, and Philology, Basel, Schwabe & Co. (Aegyptiaca 
Helvetica 17). 
M.L. Bierbrier (1975), The Late New Kingdom Egypt (c. 1300-664 b.c.) – A Genealogical and 
Chronological Investigation, Warminster. 
— (1980), “Terms of Relationship at Deir el-Medîna”, in JEA 66, p. 100-107. 
A.M. Blackman (1926), “Oracles in Ancient Egypt”, in JEA 12, p. 176-185. 
Fr. Breier (2008), “Das Napatische. Eine ägyptomeroitische Kreolsprache und ihr Verhältnis 
zum Altnubischen”, in LingAeg 16, p. 323-330. 
B. Bryan (1996), “The disjunction of text and image in Egyptian art”, in P. Der Manuelian 
(ed.), Studies in Honor of William Kelly Simpson, vol. 1, Boston, p. 161-168. 
M. Broze (1996), Mythe et roman en Égypte ancienne. Les aventures d’Horus et Seth dans le 
Papyrus Chester Beatty I, Leuven, Peeters (OLA 76). 
H. Brunner (1957), Altägyptische Erziehung, Wiesbaden, Harrasowitz. 
G. Bouvier & K. Bouvier (2006), “L’activité des gens de la Nécropole à la fin de la xx
e
 et à la 
xxi
e
 dynastie, d’après les graffiti de la Montagne thébaine : le transfert des momies 
royales”, in Dorn & Hofmann (eds.), p. 21-29. 
G. Burkard (1977), Textkritische Untersuchungen zu altägyptischen Weisheitslehren des Alten 
und Mittleren Reiches, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (ÄA 34). 
— (2006), Amunnacht – Schreiber und Poet aus Deir el Medine: Zum Ostrakon O. Berlin P 
14262, Abstract of the lecture at http://www.liv.ac.uk/sace/events/confer/Abstracts_ 
for_Ancient_Egyptian_Literature_conference.htm 
R.A. Caminos (1954), Late Egyptian Miscellanies, London, OUP (Brown Egyptological 
Studies 1). 
H. Carter & A.H. Gardiner (1917), “The Tomb of Ramesses IV and the Turin Plan of a Royal 
Tomb”, in JEA 4, p. 130-158. 
J. Černý (1935), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deir el Médineh (N
os
 1 à 
113), Cairo (DFIFAO 3). 
— (1936), “Une famille de scribes de la nécropole royale de Thèbes”, in CdÉ 11 [n
o
 22], 
p. 247-250. 
— (1945), “The Will of Naunakhte and the Related Documents”, in JEA 31, p. 29-53 & 
pl. VIII-XII. 
— (1956), Graffiti hiéroglyphiques et hiératiques de la nécropole thébaine, Cairo, IFAO 
(DFIFAO 9). 
— (1976), Coptic Etymological Dictionary, Cambridge, CUP. 
— (
3
2004), A Community of Workmen at Thebes in the Ramesside Period, 3
rd
 ed., Cairo (BdÉ 
50). 
J. Černý & A. H. Gardiner (1957), Hieratic Ostraca, vol. I, Oxford. 
J. Černý & S.I. Groll (
4
1993), A Late Egyptian Grammar, 4
th
 ed., Roma (Studia Pohl: Series 
Maior. Dissertationes Scientificae de Rebus Orientis Antiqui 4). 
W. Chafe & D. Tannen (1987), “The Relation between Written and Spoken Language”, in 
Ann. Rev. Anthropol. 16, p. 383-407. 
L.A. Christophe (1957), “Sur le Graffito 1247 de la Nécropole Thébaine”, in BIFAO 56, 
p. 173–188. 
Ph. Collombert (2008), “Par-delà Bien et Mal. L’inscription de la reine Katimala à Semna”, in 
Kush 19, p. 285-218. 
A. Compagnon (1998), Le démon de la théorie. Littérature et sens commun, Paris, Seuil. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
61 
K.M. Cooney (2006), “An Informal Workshop: Textual Evidence for Private Funerary Art 
Production in the Ramesside Period”, in Dorn & Hofmann (eds.), p. 43-55. 
E. Coseriu (1980), “‘Historische Sprache’ und ‘Dialekt’”, in J. Göschel, P. Ivić & K. Kehr 
(eds.). Dialekt und Dialektologie. Ergebnisse des internationalen Symposions „Zur 
Theorie des Dialekts“, Marburg/Lahn, 5.-10. September 1977, Wiesbaden, Steiner, p. 106-
122. 
L. Coulon (1999), “La rhétorique et ses fictions. Pouvoir et duplicité du discours à travers la 
littérature égyptienne du Moyen Empire”, in BIFAO 99, p. 103-132. 
W. Croft, K. Denning & S. Kemmer (1990), “Typology and diachrony in the work of Joseph 
H. Greenberg”, in W. Croft, K. Denning & S. Kemmer (eds.), Studies in Typology, 
Amsterdam – Philadelphia, John Benjamins, p. IX-XVIII. 
W.E. Crum (1939), A Coptic Dictionary, Oxford, OUP. 
J.C. Darnell (2006), The Inscription of Queen Katimala at Semna: Textual Evidence for the 
Origins of the Napatan State, Yale (Yale Egyptological Studies 7). 
A. David (2006), Syntactic and Lexico-Semantic Aspects of the Legal Register in Ramesside 
Royal Decrees, Wiesbaden (GOF IV/35,8). 
— (2010), The Legal Register of Ramesside Private Law Instruments, Wiesbaden (GOF 
IV/35,8). 
B.G. Davies (1999), Who’s Who at Deir el-Medina. A Prosopographic Study of the Royal 
Workmen’s Community, Leiden (Egyptologische Uitgaven 13). 
V.L. Davis (1973), Syntax of the Negative Particles bw and bn in Late Egyptian, München 
(MÄS 29). 
R.J. Demarée (2002), Ramesside Ostraca, Londres. 
— (2008), “Letters and Archives from the Necropolis at Thebes”, in L. Pantalacci (ed.), La 
lettre d’archive. Communication administrative et personnelle dans l’Antiquité proche-
orientale et égyptienne. Actes du colloque de l’université de Lyon 2, 9-10 juillet 2004, 
Cairo (BiGén 32 ; Topoi. Orient-Occident, suppl. 9), p. 43-52. 
R.J. Demarée & A. Egberts [eds.] (1992), Village Voices. Proceedings of the Symposium 
“Texts from Deir el-Medîna and their Interpretation”, Leiden, May 31 – June 1, 1991, 
Leiden (CNSW Publications 13). 
— [eds.] (2000), Deir el-Medina in the Third Millennium AD. A tribute to Jac. J. Janssen, 
Leiden (Egyptologische Uitgaven 14). 
R.J. Demarée & J.J. Janssen [eds.] (1982), Gleanings from Deir el-Medîna, Leiden 
(Egyptologische Uitgaven 1). 
P. Der Manuelian (1999), “Semi-Literacy in Egypt: Some Erasures from the Amarna Period”, 
in Em. Teeter & J.A. Larson (eds.), Gold of Praise. Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of 
Edward F. Wente, Chicago (SAOC 58), p. 285-298. 
Ph. Derchain (1996), “Auteur et société”, in Loprieno (ed.), p. 83-94. 
K. Donker van Heel & B.J.J. Haring (2003), Writing in a Workmen’s Village. Scribal Practice 
in Ramesside Deir el-Medina, Leiden (Egyptologische Uitgaven 16). 
Ér. Doret (1986), The Narrative Verbal System of Old and Middle Egyptian, Geneva (Cahiers 
d’orientalisme 12). 
A. Dorn (2004), “Die Lehre Amunnachts”, in ZÄS 131, p. 38-55 & pl. II-VII. 
— (2006), “mAA-nxt.w=f, ein (?) einfacher Arbeiter, schreibt Briefe”, in Dorn & Hofmann 
(eds.), p. 67-85. 
— (2009), “Ein Literatenwettstreit und das Ende der Diglossie als Sprachgeschichtliche 
Schwelle. Essayistische Gedanken zur Literatur des Neuen Reiches”, in Kessler et al., 
p. 70-82. 
A. Dorn & T. Hofmann [eds.] (2006), Living and Writing in Deir el-Medine. Socio-historical 
Embodiment of Deir el-Medine Texts, Basel (Aegyptiaca Helvetica 19). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
62 
A. Dorn & St. Polis (2012), “More Literary Texts of the Scribe Amennakhte”, in BIFAO. 
P. Eckert (2004), Variation and a Sense of Place, in C. Fought (ed.), p. 107-118. 
W.F. Edgerton (1951a), “The Strikes in Ramses III’s Twenty-Ninth Year”, in JNES 10, 
p. 137-145. 
— (1951b), “Early Egyptian Dialect Interrelationships”, in Bulletin of the American Schools 
of Oriental Research 122, p. 9-12. 
A. Erman (
2
1933), Neuägyptische Grammatik, 2
nd
 ed., Leipzig. 
Chr. Eyre (1979), “A ‘Strike’ Text from the Theban Necropolis”, in J. Ruffle, G.A. Gaballa & 
K.A. Kitchen (eds.), Glimpses of Ancient Egypt, Studies H.W. Fairman, Warminster, p. 80-
91. 
Ch.A. Ferguson (1983), “Sport Announcer Talk: Syntactic Aspects of Register variation”, in 
Language and Society 12, p. 153-172. 
— (1994), “Dialect, Register, and Genre: Working Assumptions about Conventionalization”, 
in D. Biber & Ed. Finegan (eds.), p. 15-30. 
O. Firchow (1954), “Zu den Wortverbindungen mit c.t”, in ZÄS 79, p. 91-94. 
H.-W. Fischer-Elfert (1984), “Textkritische Kleinigkeiten zur „Lehre des Amenemhet“”, in 
GM 70, p. 89-90. 
— (1997), Lesefunde im literarischen Steinbruch von Deir el-Medineh, Wiesbaden, 
Harrassowitz (KÄT 12). 
P.J. Frandsen (1990), “Editing Reality: The Turin Strike Papyrus”, in S.I. Groll (ed.), Studies 
in Egyptology presented to Miriam Lichtheim, Jérusalem, vol. I, p. 166-199. 
H.-W. Fischer-Elfert (1984), “Textkritische Kleinigkeiten zur „Lehre des Amenemhet“”, in 
GM 70, p. 89-90. 
— (1984), “Ich bin das Schiff – du bist das Ruder. Eine Danksagung an den Lehrer”, in SAK 
11, p. 335-345. 
— (1999), Die Lehre eines Mannes für seinen Sohn. Eine Etappe auf dem „Gottesweg“ des 
loyalen und solidarischen Beamten des Mittleren Reiches. Textband (I) & Tafelband (II), 
Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (ÄA 60). 
— (2006), “Literature as a Mirror of Private Affairs: The Case of Menna and his Son Mery-
Sekhmet”, in Dorn & Hoffman (eds.), p. 87-92. 
S. Fleischman (2000), “Methodologies and Ideologies in Historical Linguistics: On Working 
with Older Languages”, in S.C. Herring, P. van Reenen & L. Schøsler (eds.), Textual 
Parameters in Older Languages, John Benjamins, p. 33-58. 
C. Fought [ed.] (2004), Sociolinguistic Variation: Critical Reflection, Oxford, OUP. 
W.-P. Funk (1988), “Dialects Wanting Homes: A Numerical Approach to the Early Varieties 
of Coptic”, in J. Fisiak (ed.), Historical Dialectology, Regional and Social, Berlin – New 
York, Mouton de Gruyter (Trends in Linguistics, Studies and Monographs 37), p. 149-192. 
A.H. Gardiner (1935), Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum I-II, London. 
— (1948), Ramesside Administrative Documents, London. 
A. Gasse (1992), “Les ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el-Medina : Nouvelles 
orientations de la publication”, dans R.J. Demarée & A. Egberts (eds.), p. 56-68. 
M. Gilula (1991), “The King’s Egyptian”, in LingAeg 1, p. 125-127. 
T. Givón (2002), Bio-Linguistics. The Santa Barbara Lectures, Amsterdam – Philadelphia, 
John Benjamins. 
H. Goedicke & E.F. Wente (1962), Ostraka Michaelides, Wiesbaden. 
O. Goelet (2008), “Writing Ramesside Hieratic: What the Late Egyptian Miscellanies Tell us 
about Scribal Education”, in S.H. D’Auria (ed.), Servant of Mut. Studies in Honor of 
Richard A. Fazzini (PdÄ 28), p. 102-110. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
63 
St. Gohy, B. Martin Leon & St. Polis (2011), “Automatic Text Categorization in Late 
Egyptian”, in St. Polis & J. Winand (eds.), Information Technology and Egyptology in 
2010, Liège (AegLeod). 
St. Gohy (2012), “À la frontière des genres. Étude de cas : la lettre de Menna (O. Chicago 
OIC 12074)”.  
O. Goldwasser (1991a), “On the Choice of Registers. Studies on the Grammar of Papyrus 
Anastasi I”, in S.I. Groll (ed.), Studies in Egyptology presented to Miriam Lichtheim, 
Jérusalem, p. 200-240. 
— (1991b), “On Dynamic Canonicity in Late-Egyptian: The Literary Letter and the Personal 
Prayer”, in LingAeg 1, p. 129-141. 
— (1995), “On the Conception of the Poetic Form – A Love Letter to a Departed Wife. 
Ostracon Louvre 698”, in Israel Oriental Studies 15, p. 57-69. 
— (1999), “‘Low’ and ‘High’ Dialects in Ramesside Egyptian”, in St. Grunert & I. Hafemann 
(eds.), Textcorpus und Wörterbuch. Aspekte zu ägyptischen Lexicographie, Leiden (PdÄ 
14), p. 311-328. 
— (2001), “Poetic License in Nineteenth Dynasty Non-Literary Late-Egyptian?”, in LingAeg 
9, p. 123-138. 
G. Goyon (1949), “Le papyrus de Turin dit “des mines d’or” et le Wadi Hammamat”, in 
ASAE 49, p. 337-392. 
P. Grandet (2000), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deîr el-Médînéh. 
Tome VIII, N
os
 706-830, Cairo (DFIFAO 39). 
— (2003), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deîr el-Médînéh. Tome IX, N
os
 
831-1000, Cairo (DFIFAO 41). 
— (2006), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deîr el-Médînéh. Tome X, N
os
 
10001-10123, Cairo (DFIFAO 46). 
— (2010), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deîr el-Médînéh. Tome XI, 
Nos 10124-10275, Cairo (DFIFAO 48). 
J.H. Greenberg (1986), “Were there Egyptian Koines?”, in J.A. Fishman, A. Tabouret-Keller, 
M. Clyne, Bh. Krishnamurti & M. Abdulaziz (eds.), The Fergusonian Impact. In Honor of 
Charles A. Ferguson on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday. Volume 1: From Phonology to 
Society, Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter (Contributions to the Sociology of Language 42), 
p. 271-290. 
N.-C. Grimal (1981), Études sur la propagande royale égyptienne I. La stèle triomphale de 
Pi(‘ankh)y au musée du Caire (JE 48862 et 47086-47089), Cairo (MIFAO 105). 
S.I. Groll (1975), “The Literary and Non-literary Verbal Systems in Late Egyptian”, in OLP 
6-7, p. 237-246. 
— (1984), “A Short Grammar of the Spermeru Dialect”, in Studien zu Sprache and Religion 
Ägyptens. Zu Ehren von Wolfhart Westendorf überreicht von seinen Freunden and 
Schülern, Göttingen, p. 41-64. 
— (1987), “The Negative sDm.n=f System in the Kūbban Dialect”, in J. Osing & G. Dreyer 
(eds.), Form und Mass, Beiträge zur Literatur, Sprache und Kunst des alten Ägypten. 
Festschrift für Gerhard Fecht zum 65. Geburtstag am 6. Februar 1987, Wiesbaden, 
Harrassowitz (ÄAT 12), p. 154-166. 
E. Grossman (2009), “Periphrastic Perfects in the Coptic Dialects. A Case Study in 
Grammaticalization”, in LingAeg 17, p. 81-118. 
— (2011), “Destandardization”, Lecture at the International Conference “Scribes as Agents of 
Language Change”, Cambridge 10
th
-12
th
 April 2011. 
— (forth.), “Typology, Dialectology, and Diachrony: The Grammaticalization of Prohibitive 
Constructions in Coptic”, in E. Grossman, M. Haspelmath & T.S. Richter (eds.), Egyptian-
Coptic Linguistics in Typological Perspective, Amsterdam (TSL). 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
64 
W. Guglielmi (1983), “Eine ‚Lehre‘ für einen reiselustigen Sohn (Ostrakon Oriental Institute 
12074)”, in WdO 14, 147-166. 
— (1985), “Das Ostrakon Gardiner 25 Verso und seine hyperbolischen Vergleiche”, in ZÄS 
112, p. 139-143. 
Fr. Hagen (2006), “Literature, Transmission, and the Late Egyptian Miscellanies”, in 
R.J. Dann (ed.), Current Research in Egyptology 5. Proceedings of the Fifth Annual 
Symposium, January 2004, Durham, Oxford, Oxbow, p. 84-99. 
— (2007), “Ostraca, Literature and Teaching at Deir el-Medina”, in R. Mairs & A. Stevenson 
(eds.), Current Research in Egyptology 6. Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Symposium, 
January 2005, University of Cambridge, Oxford, Oxbow, p. 38-51. 
S. Häggman (2002), Directing Deir el-Medina. The external Administration of the Necropolis, 
Uppsala (Uppsala Studies in Egyptology 4). 
M.A.K. Halliday (1978), Language as Social Semiotic. The Social Interpretation of Language 
and Meaning, London, Edward Arnold. 
— (1988), “On the Language of Physical Science”, in M. Ghadessy (ed.), Registers of written 
English: Situational Factors and Linguistic Features, London, Pinter, p. 162-178. 
B.J.J. Haring (2000), “The Scribe of the Mat, from Agrarian Administration to Local Justice”, 
in R.J. Demarée & A. Egberts [eds.], p. 129-158. 
— (2003a), “From Oral Practice to Written Record in Ramesside Deir el-Medina”, in Journal 
of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 46, p. 249-272. 
— (2003b), “Pratique écrite et pratique orale à Deir el-Médineh”, in Andreu (ed.), p. 139-156. 
— (2006), “Scribes and Scribal Activity at Deir el-Medina, in Dorn & Hofmann (eds.), 
p. 107-112. 
— (2009), ““In Life, Prosperity, Health!” Introductory Formulae in Letters from the Theban 
Necropolis”, in Kessler et al., p. 180-191. 
B.J.J. Haring & O.E. Kaper [eds.] (2009), Pictograms or Pseudo Script? Non-Textual Identity 
Marks in Practical Use in Ancient Egypt and Elsewhere. Proceedings of a Conference in 
Leiden, 19-20 December 2006, Leiden, Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 
Peeters. 
J.A. Harrel & V.M. Brown (1989), “Oldest Geologic Map is Turin Papyrus”, in Geotimes 
34/3, p. 10-11. 
— (1992), “The Oldest Surviving Topographical Map from Ancient Egypt (Turin Papyri 
1879, 1899, and 1969)”, in JARCE 29, p. 81-105. 
W.V. Harris (1989), Ancient Literacy, Harvard University Press. 
W. Helck (1960), Materialen zur Wirtschaftsgeschichte des Neuen Reiches (Teil II), 
Wiesbaden. 
— (2002), Die datierten und datierbaren Ostraka, Papyri und Graffiti von Deir el-Medineh, 
Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (ÄA 63). 
W. Hovestreydt (1997), “A Letter to the King Relating to the Foundation of a Statue (P. Turin 
1879 vso.)”, in LingAeg 5, p. 107-121. 
A. Hudson (1994), “Diglossia as a Special Case of Register Variation”, in Biber & Finegan 
(eds.), p. 294. 
R.A. M. Hüttner (2000), “Die Votivstele des Vorarbeiters Chons (KHM Wien, ÄS Inv.Nr. 
8212)”, in GM 178, p. 59-63. 
Fr. Hintze (1954), “Ein Bruchstück einer unbekannten Weisheitslehre”, in ZÄS 79, p. 33-36. 
K. Jansen-Winkeln (1995), “Diglossie und Zweisprachigkeit im alten Ägypten”, in WZKM 85, 
p. 85-115. 
J.J. Janssen (1975), Commodity Prices from the Ramessid Period: An Economic Study of the 
Village of Necropolis Workmen at Thebes, Leiden, Brill. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
65 
— (1979), “Background Information on the Strikes of Year 29 of Ramesses III”, in OrAnt 18, 
p. 301-308. 
— (1982), “A Draughtsman who became Scribe of the Tomb: Horshire, Son of Amennakhte”, 
in Demarée & Janssen (eds.), p. 149-153. 
— (1984), “A Curious Error (O. IFAO. 1254)”, in BIFAO 84, p. 303-306. 
— (1987), “On the style of Egyptian Handwriting”, in JEA 73, p. 161-167. 
— (1992), “Literacy and Letters at Deir el-Medîna”, in Demarée & Egberts (ed.), p. 81-94. 
— (1994), “An Exceptional Event at Deir El-Medina (P. Turin 1879, verso II)”, in JARCE 31, 
p. 91-97. 
— (2005), “Accountancy at Deir el-Medîna: How Accurate are the Administrative Ostraca?”, 
in SAK 33, p. 147-157. 
— (2009), Furniture at Deir el-Medîna, Including Wooden Containers of the New Kingdom 
and Ostracon Varille 19, London (GHP 9). 
J. Johnson (1977), “The Dialect of the Demotic Magical Papyrus of London and Leiden”, in 
Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes, Chicago (SAOC 39), p. 105-132. 
B. Johnstone (2004), “Place, Globalization, and Linguistic Variation”, in Fough (ed.), p. 65-
83. 
Fr. Junge (1985), Sprachstufen und Sprachgeschichten, dans ZDMG suppl. 6, p. 17-34. 
— (2001), Late Egyptian Grammar: An Introduction, trad. de Fr. Junge, Neuägyptisch. 
Einfürhung in die Grammatik, Wiesbaden, 1996 par D. Warburton, Oxford, Griffith 
Institute. 
Fr. Kammerzell, “The Sounds of a Dead Language. Reconstructing Egyptian Phonology”, in 
Göttinger Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft 1, p. 21-41. 
R. Kasser (1991), “Geography, Dialectal”, in The Coptic Encyclopedia, vol. 8, p. 133-141. 
C.A. Keller (1984), “How many draughtsmen named Amenhotep? A study of some Deir el 
Medina Painters”, in JARCE 21, p. 119-129. 
— (2003), “Un artiste égyptien à l’œuvre : le dessinateur en chef Amenhotep”, in Andreu 
(ed.), p. 83-114. 
B. Kemp (
2
2006), Ancient Egypt. Anatomy of a civilization, London & New York, Routledge. 
D. Kessler et al. [eds.] (2009), Texte – Theben – Tonfragmente. Festschrift für Günter 
Burkard, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (ÄAT 76). 
K.A. Kitchen (1968-1990), Ramesside Inscriptions. Historical and Biographical, 8 vol., 
Oxford. 
D. Klotz (2006), “Between Heaven and Earth in Deir el-Medina: Stela MMA 21.2.6”, in SAK 
34, p. 269-283. 
Y. Koenig (1981), “Notes sur la découverte des Papyrus Chester Beatty”, in BIFAO 81, p. 41-
43. 
— (1991), “Les ostracas hiératiques du musée du Louvre”, in RdÉ 42, p. 95-116. 
B. Kortman [ed.] (2004), Dialectology meets Typology. Dialect Grammar from a Cross-
Linguistic Perspective, Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter (TLSM 153). 
D. Kurth (2007 & 2008), Einführung ins Ptolemäische: eine Grammatik mit Zeichenliste und 
Übungsstücken, vol. 1 & 2, Hützel. 
W. Labov (1994), Principles of linguistic change. Volume 1: Internal factors, Oxford, 
Blackwell. 
A. Leahy (1981), “smn and di mn”, in GM 48, p. 35-39. 
G. Lenzo Marchese (2004), “Les colophons dans la littérature égyptienne”, in BIFAO 104, 
p. 359-376. 
L. Lesko (1990), “Some Comments on Ancient Egyptian Literacy and Literati”, in S.I. Groll 
(ed.), Studies in Egyptology presented to Miriam Lichtheim, Jérusalem, vol. II, p. 656-667.  
— (1994), “Literature, Literacy and Literati”, in Lesko (ed.), p. 131-144. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
66 
— [ed.] (1994), Pharaoh’s Workers. The Villagers of Deir el-Medina, Londres, Ithaca. 
T.J. Logan & J.G. Westenholz (1972), “¤Dm.f and ¤Dm.n.f Forms in the Pey (Piankhy) 
Inscription”, in JARCE 9, p. 111-119. 
J. López (1978), Ostraca ieratici N. 57001 – 57092, Vol. III/1, Milan. 
— (1982), Ostraca ieratici N. 57320 – 57449, Vol. III/3, Milan. 
A. Loprieno (1982), “Methodologische Anmerkungen zur Rolle der Dialekte in der 
ägyptischen Sprachentwicklung”, in GM 53, p. 75-95. 
— (1994), “As a summary: New tendencies in Egyptological Linguistics”, in LinAeg 4, 
p. 369-382. 
— (1995), Ancient Egyptian. A Linguistic Introduction, Cambridge, CUP. 
— (1996a), “Defining Egyptian Literature: Ancient Texts and Modern Theories”, in Loprieno 
(ed.), p. 39-58. 
— (1996b), “Linguistic variety and Egyptian literature”, in Loprieno (ed.), p. 515-529. 
— (2001), La pensée et l’écriture : pour une analyse sémiotique de la culture égyptienne. 
Quatre séminaires à l’École pratique des hautes études, Section des sciences religieuses, 
15-27 mai 2000, Paris, Cybèle. 
— (2006), “As a Conclusion: Towards a Detailed Perspective on Deir el-Medina”, in Dorn & 
Hofmann (eds.), p. 165-170. 
A. Loprieno [ed.] (1996), Ancient Egyptian Literature. History & Forms, Leiden (PdÄ 10). 
A. Lucas & A. Rowe (1938), “The Ancient Egyptian Bekhen-Stone”, in ASAE 38, p. 127-156. 
M. Luiselli (2003), “The Colophons as an Indication of the Attitudes towards the Literary 
Tradition in Egypt and Mesopotamia”, in Bickel & Loprieno (eds.), p. 343-360. 
— (2011), Die Suche nach Gottesnähe. Die altägyptische „persönliche Frömmigkeit“ von der 
Ersten Zwischenzeit bis zum Ende des Neuen Reiches, Wiesbaden (ÄAT 73). 
J. Lustman (1999), Étude grammaticale du Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, Paris. 
B. Mathieu (1993), “Sur quelques ostraca hiératiques littéraires récemment publiés”, in 
BIFAO 93, p. 335-347 & fig. 1-9. 
— (2002), “Lire et écrire à Deir el-Médineh : combien de lettrés”, “La littérature égyptienne à 
travers les documents de Deir el-Médineh”, “Ostracon : Enseignement d’Amennakhte, fils 
d’Ipouy”, in Andreu (ed.), p. 219, p. 220-227, p. 221. 
— (2003), “La littérature égyptienne sous les Ramsès d’après les ostraca littéraires de Deir el-
Médineh”, in Andreu (ed.), p. 117-137. 
— (
2
2008), La poésie amoureuse de l’Égypte ancienne. Recherche sur un genre littéraire au 
Nouvel Empire, 2
nd
 ed., Cairo (BdÉ 115). 
M. Matthiew (1930), “The Ostracon No. 1125 in the Hermitage Museum”, in Publications de 
la Société Égyptologique à l’Université d’État de Leningrad 5, p. 25-27, 1. pl. 
A.G. McDowell (1992), “Awareness of the Past in Deir el-Medîna”, in Demarée & Egberts 
(eds.), p. 95-109. 
— (1994), “Contact with the Outside World”, in Lesko (ed.), p. 41-59. 
— (1996), “Student Exercises from Deir el-Medina: The Dates”, in Der Manuelian (ed.), 
Studies in Honor of William Kelly Simpson, vol. 2, Boston, p. 601-608. 
— (1999), Village Life in Ancient Egypt. Laundry Lists and Love Songs, Oxford. 
— (2000), “Teachers and Students at Deir el-Medina”, in Demarée & Egberts (ed.), p. 217-
223. 
D. Meeks (
2
1998), Année lexicographique. Égypte ancienne¸ Paris, Cybèle. 
E.S. Meltzer (1980), “Dialect Features in Middle Kingdom Inscriptions”, in Newsletter ARCE 
No. 112, p. 34-36. 
— (1990), “The “Prehistory” of Late Egyptian i(w)n(A): A Hypothesis”, in GM 114, p. 71-79. 
J. Milroy (1992), Linguistic Variation and Change: On the Historical Sociolinguistics of 
English, Oxford, Blackwell (Language in Society 19).  
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
67 
L. Milroy (1987), Language and Social Networks, Oxford, Blackwell. 
— (2004), Language Ideologies and Linguistic Change, in Fought (ed.), p. 161-177. 
L. Milroy & M. Gordon (2003), Sociolinguistics. Method and Interpretation, Oxford, 
Blackwell. 
J. Milroy & L. Milroy (1985), “Linguistic Change, Social Network and Speaker Innovation”, 
in Journal of Linguistics 21, p. 339-384. 
G. Moers (2001), “Der Papyrus Lansing: Das Lob des Schreiberberufes in einer ägyptischen 
„Schülerhandschrift“ aus dem ausgehenden Neuen Reich”, in O. Kaiser et al. (eds.), TUAT. 
Ergänzungslieferung, Gütersloh. 
— (2002), “The Interplay of Reenactment and Memory in the Complaints of 
Khakheperreseneb”, in LingAeg 10, p. 293-308. 
— (2008), “Zur Relevanz der Namenliste des pChester Beatty IV für Versuche einer 
funktionalen Binnendifferenzierung des gemeinhin als „literarisch“ bezeichneten 
Gattungssystem des Mittleren Reiches”, in C. Peust (ed.), Miscellanea in honorem 
Wolfhart Westendorf, Göttingen (GM Beihefte 3), p. 45-52. 
— (2009), “Der „Autor“ und sein „Werk“. Der Beginn der Lehre des Ptahhotep in der 
Tradition des Neuen Reiches”, in Kessler et al. (eds.), p. 319-332. 
— (2010), “New Kingdom Literature”, in A.B. Lloyd (ed.), A Companion to Ancient Egypt, 
Vol. 2, Oxford, Blackwell, p. 685-708. 
M. Müller (2004), “Der Turiner Streikpapyrus (pTurin 1880)”, in B. Janowsky & G. Wilhelm 
(ed.), TUAT, N.F. 1: Texte zum Rechts- & Wirtschaftsleben, Gütersloh, p. 165-184. 
— (2006), “Magie in der Schule? Die magischen Sprüche der Schülerhandschrift pBM 10.085 
+ 10.105”, in G. Moers et al. (eds.), Jn.t Dr.w. Festschrift für Friedrich Junge, Vol. II, 
p. 449-455. 
M. Nelson & F. Hassanein (1995), “« Sortie au jour » d’un membre oublié de la famille 
d’Ipouy”, in Mnemonia 6, p. 229-236 & pl. XLII-XLIII. 
T. Nevalainen (1999), “Making the Best Use of “Bad” Data. Evidence for Sociolinguistic 
Variation in Early Modern English”, in Neuphilologische Mitteilungen 100/4, p. 499–533. 
T. Nevalainen, J. Klemola & M. Laitinen (2006), “‘Triangulation’ of Diachrony, 
Dialectology, and Typology: An Overview”, in T. Nevalainen, J. Klemola & M. Laitinen 
(eds.), Types of Variation. Diachronic, Dialectal and Typological Interfaces, Amsterdam, 
John Benjamins (SLCS 76), p. 3-19. 
J. Osing (1975), s.v. Dialekte, in Lexicon der Ägyptologie, Vol. I, Wiesbaden, p. 1074-1075. 
L. Pantalacci (1996), “Fonctionnaires et analphabètes : sur quelques pratiques administratives 
observées à Balat”, in BIFAO 96, p. 359-367. 
R.B. Parkinson (1999), Cracking Codes. The Rosetta Stone and Decipherment, Cambridge. 
— (2002), Poetry and Culture in Middle Kingdom Egypt. A Dark Side to Perfection, London, 
Equinox. 
A. Peden (2001), The Graffiti of Pharaonic Egypt. Scope and Roles of Informal Writings 
(c. 3100-332 B.C.), Leiden, Brill (PdÄ 17). 
W. Pleyte & F. Rossi (1869-1876), Papyrus de Turin, Wiesbaden, réimpr. de 1981. 
P.W. Pestman (1982), “Who were the Owners, in the ‘Community of Workmen’, of the 
Chester Beatty Papyri”, in Demarée & Janssen (eds.), p. 155-172. 
C. Peust (1999a), Egyptian Phonology. An Introduction to the Phonology of a Dead 
Language, Göttingen, Peust & Gutschmidt (Monographien zur ägyptischen Sprache 2). 
— (1999b), Das Napatanische. Ein agyptischer Dialekt aus dem Nubien des späten ersten 
vorchristlichen Jahrtausends. Texte, Glossar, Grammatik, Göttingen, Peust & Gutschmidt 
Verlag (Monographien zur Agyptischen Sprache 3). 
— (2007), “Die Konjugation für „gehen“ im Neuägyptischen”, in GM 212, p. 67-80. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
68 
St. Polis (2011), “Le serment du P. Turin 1880, v
o
 2, 8-19. Une relecture de la construction iw 
bn sDm.f à portée historique”, dans M. Collier & S. Snape (eds.), Ramesside Studies in 
Honour of K.A. Kitchen, Bolton, Rutherford Press Limited, p. 387-402. 
St. Polis & A. Stauder (2012), “The Construction ib=f r sDm and the Verb ib in Ancient 
Egyptian”, in SAK. 
St. Polis & J. Winand (2012), “Language Change and Language Ideology in Late Egyptian: 
The Influence of Situational Parameters on the Written Registers”, in E. Grossman and 
M. Wagner (eds.), Scribes as Agents of Language Change. 
H.J. Polotsky (1960), “The Coptic Conjugation System”, in Orientalia 29, p. 392-422. 
G. Posener (1938), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el-Médineh. Tome I 
(n
os
 1001 à 1108), Cairo (DFIFAO 1). 
— (1951a), “Les richesses inconnues de la littérature égyptienne (recherches littéraires, I)”, in 
RdÉ 6, p. 27-48, pl. I. 
— (1951b), “Ostraca inédits du musée de Turin (recherches littéraires, III)”, in RdÉ 8, p. 171-
189 & pl. 12-13. 
— (1952), “Le début de l’enseignement de Hardjedef (recherches littéraires, IV)”, in RdÉ 9, 
p. 109-120, pl. I. 
— (1955), “L’exorde de l’instruction éducative d’Amennakhte (recherches littéraires, V)”, in 
RdÉ 10, p. 61-72 & pl. IV. 
— (1964), “L’expression bjA.t aA.t « mauvais caractère »”, in RdÉ 16, p. 37-43. 
— (1972), Catalogue des Ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el-Médineh, tome II/fasc. 3 
(n
os
 1227-1266), Cairo (DFIFAO 18). 
— (1977), Catalogue des Ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el-Médineh, tome III/fasc. 1 
(n
os
 1267-1409), Cairo (DFIFAO 19). 
— (1978), Catalogue des Ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el-Médineh, tome III/fasc. 2 
(n
os
 1410-1606), Cairo (DFIFAO 20). 
— (1980), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques littéraires de Deir el Médineh. tome III/fasc. 3, 
(n
os
 1267-1675), Cairo (DFIFAO 20). 
— (1980b), “L’auteur de la Satire des métiers”, in J. Vercoutter (ed.), Livre du centenaire 
1880-1980, Cairo (MIFAO 104), p. 55-59. 
J.Fr. Quack (1994), Die Lehren des Ani. Ein neuägyptischer Weisheitstext in seinem 
kulturellen Umfeld, Fribourg (OBO 141). 
— (2001), “Ein neuer Versuch zum Moskauer literarischen Brief”, in ZÄS 128, p. 167-181. 
— (2002), “Beiträge zum Peripherdemotischen”, in T.A. Bács (ed.), A Tribute to Excellence. 
Studies offered in Honor of Ernö Gaál, Ulrich Luft, László Török, Budapest (StuAeg 17), 
p. 393-403. 
— (2004), “Gibt es einen stammhaften Imperativ iyi „komm“”, in LingAeg 12, p. 133-136. 
— (2006), “Die Rolle der Hieroglyphenschrift in der Theorie vom griechischen 
Vokalalphabet”, in W. Ernst & F. Kittler (eds.), Die Geburt des Vokalalphabets aus dem 
Geist der Poesie. Schrift, Zahl und Ton im Medienverbund, München, p. 75-98. 
— (2010), “Sehnsucht nach der Heimat und Lob des Erbauers. Ägyptische Städtepreisungen 
in ramessidischen Papyri und Ostraka”, in J.Chr. Gertz & D. Jericke (eds.), Ort und 
Bedeutung. Beiträge zum Symposion „Die Darstellung von Orten. Von der  Antike bis in 
die Moderne“ am 20. und 21. Juni 2008 in Heidelberg, Kamen (Kleine Arbeiten zum Alten 
und Neuen Testament 10), 19-48. 
St. Quirke (1996), “Archive”, in Loprieno (ed.), p. 379-401. 
— (2004), Egyptian Literature about 1800 BC: Questions and Readings, London (GHP 2). 
Chl. Ragazolli (2008), Éloges de la ville en Égypte ancienne. Histoire et littérature, Paris. 
— (2010), “Weak Hands and Soft Mouths. Elements of Scribal Identity in the New 
Kingdom”, in ZÄS 137, p. 157-170. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
69 
Chr. Reiche (2004), “Zur Anwendung von Netzwerkkonzept, Strukturtheorie und Semiotik 
bei der Erforschung von Gesellschaft und Kultur Ägyptens im inner- und interkulturellen 
Kontaktraum”, in R. Gundlach & A. Klug (eds.), Das ägyptische Königtum im 
Spannungsfeld zwischen Innen- und Aussenpolitik im 2. Jahrtausend v. Chr., Wiesbaden, 
Harrassowitz, p. 35-69. 
V. Ritter (2008), “Ostraca hiératiques et ostraca figurés. Quelques nouveaux raccords”, in GM 
217, p. 81-87. 
J. Rizzo (2005), “Bjn : de mal en pis”, in BIFAO 105, p. 295-320. 
S. Romaine (1980), “The Relative Clause Marker in Scots English: Diffusion, Complexity, 
and Style as dimensions of Syntactic Change”, in Language in Society 9, p. 221-247. 
— (1982), Socio-Historical Linguistics. Its Status and Methodology, Cambridge, CUP 
(Cambridge Studies in Linguistics 34). 
J. Romer (1984), Ancient Lives, New York. 
S. Rosmorduc, St. Polis & J. Winand (2009), “Ramses. A New Research Tool in Philology 
and Linguistics”, in N. Strudwick (ed.), Information Technology and Egyptology (= 
Proceedings of the XXI
st
 Table Ronde “Égyptologie et Informatique”), Piscataway (N.J.) 
p. 155-164. 
Ed. Sapir (1921), Language, New York, Harcourt Brace. 
S. Sauneron (1952), “Plutarque : Isis et Osiris (chap. IX)”, in BIFAO 51, p. 49-51. 
— (1959), Catalogue des ostraca hiératiques non littéraires de Deir el-Médineh (n
os
 550 à 
623), Cairo (DFIFAO 13). 
— (1959b), “Les songes et leur interprétation dans l’Égypte ancienne”, in Les songes et leur 
interprétation, Paris, Seuil. 
S.D. Schweitzer (2008), “Nochmals zum stammhaften Imperativ von jyi/jwi”, in LingAeg 16, 
p. 319-321. 
W. Schenkel (1983), Aus der Arbeit an einer Konkordanz zu den altägyptischen Sargtexten. 
Teil I: Zur Transkription des Hieroglyphisch-Ägyptischen (unter Mitarbeit von Rainer 
Hannig). Teil II: Zur Pluralbildung des Ägyptischen, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (GOF 
IV/12). 
A. Shisha-Halevy (1981), “Bohairic-Late Egyptian Diaglosses: A Contribution to the 
Typology of Egyptian”, in D.W. Young (ed.), Studies Presented to H.J. Polotsky, Beacon 
Hill, p. 413-438. 
— (2007a), “Determination-Signalling Environment in Old and Middle Egyptian: Work-
Notes and Reflections”, in Studies in Semitic and General Linguistics in Honor of Gideon 
Goldenberg, Münster, Ugarit Verlag (Alter Orient und Altes Testament 334), p. 223-254. 
— (2007b), Topics in Coptic Syntax: Structural Studies in the Bohairic Dialect, Leuven, 
Peeters (OLA 160). 
M. Silverstein (1979), “Language Structure and Linguistic Ideology”, in P.R. Clyne, 
W.F. Hanks & C.L. Hofbauer, The Elements: A Para Session on Linguistic Units and 
Levels, Chicago, Chicago Linguistics Society, p. 193–247. 
— (1992), “The Uses and Utility of Ideology: Some Reflections”, in Pragmatics 2(3), p. 311-
323. 
J.J. Smith (1996), An Historical Study of English: Function, Form and Change, London, 
Routledge. 
S.T. Smith (2001), “The Practice of Sealing in the Administration of the First Intermediate 
Period and the Middle Kingdom”, in CRIPEL 22, p. 161-194. 
W. Spiegelberg (1921), Ägyptische und andere Graffiti (Inschriften und Zeichnungen) aus der 
thebanischen Nekropolis, Heidelberg. 
E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis & G. Kokkinakis (2001), “Automatic Text Categorization in 
Terms of Genre and Author”, in Computational Linguistics 26/4, p. 471-495. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
70 
A. Stauder (2011), “L’émulation du passé à l’ère thoutmoside : la dimension linguistique”, in 
S. Bickel (ed.), Vergangenheit und Zukunft. Die Konstruktion historischer Zeit in der 18. 
Dynastie, Basel, Schwabe (Aegyptiaca Helvetica 22). 
— (forthcoming), “Linguistic dating of Middle Egyptian literary texts: A first approach”. 
M. Stenroos (current volume), “From Scribal Repertoire to Text Community: The Challenge 
of Variable Writing Systems”. 
N. Strudwick (1995), “The Population at Thebes in the New Kingdom. Some Preliminary 
Thoughts”, in J. Assmann, E. Dziobek, H. Gucksch et al. (eds.), Thebanische 
Beamtennekropole. Neue Perspektiven archäologischer Forschung, Heidelberg (SAGA 
12), p. 97-105. 
D. Sweeney (1994), “Idiolects in the Late Ramesside Letters”, in LingAeg 4, p. 275-324. 
— , “Women and Language in the Ramesside Period, or, Why Women Don’t say please”, in 
Chr. Eyre (ed.), Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Egyptologists. 
Cambridge 3-9 September 1995, p. 1109-1118. 
— (1998), “Friendship and Frustration: A Study in Papyri Deir el-Medina IV-VI”, in JEA 84, 
p. 101-122. 
I. Tieken-Boon van Ostade, T. Nevalainen & L. Caon [eds.] (2000), Social Network Analysis 
and the History of English (Special issue of the European Journal of English Studies 4.3). 
J. Toivari-Viitala (2001), Women at Deir el-Medina. A Study of the Status and Role of the 
Female Inhabitants in the Workmen’s Community during the Ramesside Period, Leiden 
(Egyptologische Uitgaven 15). 
S. Uljas (2010), “Archaeology of Language. A Case Study from Middle Kingdom/Second 
Intermediate Period Egypt and Nubia”, in SAK 39, p. 373-382. 
D. Valbelle (1985), « Les ouvriers de la tombe ». Deir el-Médineh à l’époque ramesside, 
Cairo (BdÉ 96). 
I. Venturini (2007), “Le statut des exercices scolaires au Nouvel Empire : Balbutiement 
d’écoliers ou entraînements d’étudiants”, in J.-Cl. Goyon & Chr. Cardin (eds.), 
Proceedings of the International Congress of Egyptologists. Actes du neuvième congrès 
international des égyptologues. Grenoble, 6-12 septembre 2004, vol. 2, Leuven, Peeters 
(OLA 150), p. 1885-1896. 
P. Vernus (1978), “Littérature et autobiographie. Les inscriptions de %A-Mwt surnommé 
Kyky”, in RdÉ 30, p. 115-146. 
— (1982), “Deux particularités de l’égyptien de tradition : nty iw + présent I ; wnn.f Hr sDm 
narratif”, in L’égyptologie en 1979, vol. 1, Paris, p. 81-89. 
— (1985), “ Études de philologie et de linguistique (IV). XIII. Non-existence et définition du 
sujet : bn prédicatif en Néo-égyptien”, in RdÉ 36, p. 153-168. 
— (1987), “Études de philologie et de linguistique (VI)”, in RdÉ 38, p. 163-181. 
— (1990), “Les espaces de l’écrit dans l’Égypte pharaonique”, in BSFE 119, p. 35-56. 
— (1993), Affaires et scandales sous les Ramsès. La crise des valeurs dans l’Égypte du 
Nouvel Empire, Paris, Pygmalion. 
— (1994), “Observations sur la prédication de classe (“Nominal Predicate”)”, in LingAeg 4, 
p. 325-348. 
— (1995), Essai sur la conscience de l’histoire dans l’Égypte pharaonique, Paris, 
Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études. 
— (1996), “Langue littéraire et diglossie”, in Loprieno (ed.), p. 555-564. 
— (2002), “Les vies édifiantes de deux personnages illustres de Deir el-Medineh”, in Andreu 
(ed.), p. 57-69. 
— (2003), “La piété personnelle à Deir el-Medineh. La construction de l’idée de pardon”, in 
Andreu (ed.), Deir el Medineh et la Vallée des rois, Paris, Khéops – Musée du Louvre, 
p. 281-308. 
Polis – Beyond Free Variation 
 
71 
— (2009), Dictionnaire amoureux de l’Égypte pharaonique, Paris, Plon. 
— (
2
2010), Sagesses de l’Égypte pharaonique, Paris, Actes Sud. 
— (2012), “La datation de l’Enseignement d’Aménemopé”, in Dating Egyptian Literary Texts, 
Göttingen (LingAeg. Studia Monographica). 
W. Vycichl (1958), “A Late Egyptian Dialect of Elephantine”, in Kush 6, p. 176-178. 
E.F. Wente (1990), Letters from Ancient Egypt, Atlanta. 
D. Werning (2011), “Linguistic Dating of the Netherworld Books Attested in the New 
Kingdom. A Critical Review”, in Dating Egyptian Literary Texts, Göttingen (LingAeg. 
Studia Monographica, 44 p. 
J. Winand (1992), Études de néo-égyptien, I. La morphologie verbale, Liège (AegLeod 2). 
— (1995a), “La grammaire au secours de la datation des textes”, in RdÉ 46, p. 187-202. 
— (1995b), “review of W. Schenkel (1990), Einführung in die altägyptische Sprach-
wissenschaft, Darmstad”, in BiOr 52, col. 307-316. 
— (2007), “Encore Ounamon 2,27-28”, in LingAeg 15: 299-306. 
— (2011), “The Report of Wenamun: A Journey in Ancient Egyptian Literature”, in 
M. Collier & S. Snape (eds.), Ramesside Studies in Honour of K.A. Kitchen, Bolton, 
Rutherford Press Limited, p. 541-559. 
J. Winand, St. Polis & S. Rosmorduc (2011), “Ramses. An Annotated Corpus of Late 
Egyptian”, in P. Kousoulis (ed.), Proceedings of the X
th
 International Association of 
Egyptologists Congress, 10 p. 
St. Wimmer (1995), Hieratische Paläographie der nicht-literarischen Ostraka der 19. und 
20. Dynastie, 2 vol., Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz (ÄAT 28). 
E. Winter (1963), “Altorientalische Alterümer in London und Oxford”, in Archiv für 
Orientforschung 20, p. 201-202 & fig. 18. 
K. Zibelius-Chen (2007), “Critical review of Darnell 2006”, in BiOr 64, col. 377-387. 
L.M.J. Zonhoven (1979), “The Inspection of a Tomb at Deir el-Medîna (O. Wien Aeg. 1)”, in 
JEA 65, p. 89-98 & pl. XI. 
