Using Distributional Similarity for Identifying Vocabulary  
Differences between Individuals 
Kapila Ponnamperuma, Chris Mellish, Peter Edwards 
Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 5UA, UK 
{k.ponnamperuma,c.mellish,p.edwards}@abdn.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Distributional Similarity (DS) techniques have been widely used in cor-
pus based thesaurus and taxonomy construction, language modelling, 
etc. However the application of DS across two corpora is a fairly novel 
concept, which leads to the identification of co-occurrences of words 
between corpora. In this paper we have used DS measures to study vo-
cabulary differences (idiolect) of individuals in an interdisciplinary re-
search environment. We have compared the performance of three DS 
measures including our extension to an established method.   Our re-
sults show that distributional similarity can be successfully used in 
identifying vocabulary differences between individuals. 
 
1. Introduction 
Distributional Similarity (DS) makes the assumption that similar words share similar gram-
matical relationships. DS techniques have been widely used in corpus based thesaurus and 
taxonomy construction, language modelling, etc [11,13]. Motivated by J. Lin’s work [8], 
which investigated terminology differences in cookery recipes by applying DS techniques 
across two corpora, we investigated the vocabulary differences of authors in an interdiscipli-
nary research environment. Vocabulary differences have been identified as one of the major 
communication barriers among interdisciplinary researchers, which we intend to address 
within the ourSpaces1 virtual research environment developed under the Policy Grid II project. 
The application of distributional similarity across two corpora is a fairly novel concept, which 
leads to the identification of co-occurrences of words between corpora. Our motivation was to 
establish a measure of similarity/differences of vocabulary between individuals, and in partic-
ular to look for situations where two authors from different disciplines might be using differ-
ent words to express similar concepts.  
Although there have been many studies using computational aspects of dialectic vari-
ations of languages [10], language variations at the individual level (idiolect) have received 
little attention. Barlow [1] has used corpus based bigram profiling to study the idiolect of 5 
different US press secretaries. Louwerse [9] has studied the idiolect and sociolect of selected 
authors using Boolean and vector based similarity measures. A considerable body of work 
can be found in the area of authorship attribution [5] relevant to our work. Among many fea-
tures used for authorship attribution, use of syntax and part of speech [3] and content words 
[4] have improved the results considerably. These methods draw some parallels with our ap-
proach as both use some syntactic analysis of documents, made possible by the availability of 
reliable statistical parsers. 
In this paper we propose a novel approach based on Distributional Similarity (DS) 
and deep parsing of documents for studying individual variations in vocabulary. We hypothe-
sise that a single author tends to use the same words in the same context and that one can pre-
dict different words being used for a similar concept by comparing the contexts of the words. 
The next section discusses the methodology including the experiment we carried out to test 
our hypothesis, followed by results and discussion. 
 
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1www.ourspaces.net 
2. Method 
Generally the distributional similarity of two words is computed by comparing corresponding 
feature vectors, which consist of object, subject, modifier, etc (or inverse relationships de-
pending on whether the target is a verb or a noun) of each word with other words.  In this sec-
tion we discuss the grammatical parsing and feature vectors, feature weights, different DS 
measures followed by the explanation of our experiment and the evaluation.   
 
Parsing and Constructing Feature vectors: Documents were parsed using the Rapid Accu-
rate Statistical Parser (RASP) [2] and dependency triples involving nouns were extracted. Out 
of 16 grammatical relationship types used in RASP, direct and indirect objects, subjects and 
modifiers were selected for our experiment due to the facts that these relationships showed 
higher parsing precision and recall in RASP and usually higher presence in corpora. We also 
inferred a new object relationship type from transitive indirect objects (iobj) and direct object 
(dobj) relationship types as shown in Figure 1, which led to relationships with far richer in-
formation content (IC) than the two original relationships on their own by removing the prep-
osition, which carries less information content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Transitive direct and indirect object relationships (in RASP output format) 
 
The above RASP triples were simplified by removing tags and taking the singular form of 
each verb. These simplified triples can be represented as (w1, r1, w2) where w1 is the head; r 
is the grammatical relationship (or role) and the w2 is the dependent of any dependency triplet.  
Then the feature vectors were constructed for each noun for object, subject and modifier rela-
tionship types (roles). A sample feature vector for the word analysis is given in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2- A sample feature vector for word analysis 
 
 
Feature Weights: Pairwise mutual information, first presented by [7] and used by much DS 
related work was chosen as the weighting function in our experiment. Mutual Information 
(MI) is defined as follows: 
 
MI(w, r,w’)     =    log!
𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞 𝑤, 𝑟,𝑤! 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞(∗, 𝑟,∗)
𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞 𝑤, 𝑟,∗ 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞(∗, 𝑟,𝑤)
 
 
Where freq(w,r,w’) is the number of  triples (w,r,w’) within the corpus, freq(*,r,*) is the 
number of triples with role r, freq(*,r,w’) is the co-occurrence of w’ with role r and freq 
(w,r,*) is co-occurrence of word w with role r. Positive mutual information indicates that 
there is a genuine association between w and w’ and only positive values are considered for 
the similarity measure calculations. 
 
Distributional Similarity Measures: Out of many distributional similarity measures [6], D. 
Lin’s [7] Information Theoretic based technique has been used by many studies as a baseline 
over some of the distance and cosine based techniques, due to its higher accuracy and recall. 
Weeds et al [11] take document retrieval approaches to word similarity and use a relatively 
smaller corpus. Yarowsky [14] has claimed that the direct objects of a verb play a more dom-
inant role than its subjects whereas modifiers play a more dominant role for nouns. In line 
with this finding we propose to enhance D. Lin’s measure by assigning a higher (0.5) weight 
for modifiers when comparing nouns. 
(|iobj| |complexity:16_NN1| |of:17_IO|), (|dobj| |of:17_IO| |issue+s:19_NN2|) 
   =>(|obj| |complexity:16_NN1| |issue+s:19_NN2|) 
	  
Analysis obj_of[conclude, set, square],  
sub_of[affect, find, show, suggest] 
mod[causal, conceptual] 
 
Experiment Setup: Our experiment was twofold. First, we investigated the performance of 
the 3 DS measures described above for examining the vocabulary differences of two re-
searchers from different disciplines. In order to investigate the performance of DS measures, 
we created two corpora (corpora C and D) by selecting journal papers from two authors in the 
transport domain. Three distributional measures, namely Lin [7], Weeds [11] and Weighted 
Lin were calculated for each noun from corpora C and D. For the second part, we divided 
each corpus into two, allowing us to compare two corpora from the same author as well as 
corpora from different authors. The best performing measure from the first part of the exper-
iment was selected for this exercise.  
 
Corpus C1+C2 D1+D2 C1 C2 D1 D2 
Author C D C C D D 
Triples 16778 16087 9594 7184 8126 7952 
Unique Nouns 1360 1021 1397 1091 808 648 
D 
Table 1 –Corpus Statistics 
 
Evaluation Methods: For each noun in the first corpus, we compute the similarity with all 
nouns in the second corpus and then, from all combinations, we select the 20 with the highest 
scores using each metric. In order to keep the workload of human evaluators at a manageable 
level, we used the top 20 pairs instead of comparing each word pair. To evaluate the perfor-
mance of the three DS measures we used theWordNet based Wu and Palmer similarity meas-
ure (WuP) [12], (ranges from 0 to 1) and the average similarity (as judged by human evalua-
tors in an online survey). The average human-judged similarity and the average WuP similari-
ty of noun pairs in the top 20 (with identical nouns counted as completely similar with simi-
larity of 1) are measures of overall success in capturing similarity, using DS. The WuP meas-
ure is rather conservative, however, and so the human judges were asked to rate any two 
words that could be used interchangeably by different authors in any context as to some ex-
tent similar.  
We assume that in general the authors use words similarly and hence that the number of 
identical nouns occurring in the top 20 should be highest when two corpora from the same 
author are compared.Therefore for the second part of the experiment, we calculate the per-
centage of identical and similar noun pairs in the top 20. Similar nouns were selected based 
on an empirically determined threshold of 0.8 [15] for the WuP measure. 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
Table 2 shows the evaluation of 3 DS measures using the WuP measure and human judgment. 
WuP scored all three measures rather similarly though the weighted Lin measure has a slight 
edge over Weeds and Lin. However, weighted Lin has a considerable advantage when con-
sidering the scores given by human evaluators. Therefore we selected the weighted Lin meas-
ure for the second part of our experiment. 
Table 3 shows the evaluation of the author comparison results. Trials 1 and 2 consist 
of corpus pairs from the same author while trials 3 to 6 consist of corpus pairs from different 
authors. We have calculated the percentage of identical nouns, percentage of similar (not 
identical) nouns as identified by the WordNet Wu and Palmer measure at threshold of 0.8. 
As shown in Table 3, it is clear that using the weighted Lin measure, we found a high 
percentage (65%-100%) of identical pairs in the top 20 results and a low percentage (0%-5%) 
of semantically similar (not identical) pairs between corpora from the same author. Of course, 
if the percentage of identical nouns is large then there is little remaining space to see similar 
words in the top 20. These results support our hypothesis that the same author would use the 
same words in similar contexts. 
Interestingly, a relatively high percentage (20%-30%) of semantically similar pairs 
and identical noun pairs were found in the top 20 results in cross author comparisons. This 
supports our initial intuition that different authors may use semantically similar but different 
words in the same context. 
Method Wu and 
Palmer  
Human 
evaluators 
 Trial Corpora Identical 
Nouns (%) 
Similar (not iden-
tical) nouns (%) 
Lin 0.819 0.668 
 1 C1-C2 65 5 
 2 D1-D2 100 0 
Weeds 0.820 0.681 
 3 C1-D1 20 20 
 4 C1-D2 20 30 
Weighte
d Lin 0.822 0.764 
 5 C2-D1 25 30 
 6 C2-D2 15 20 
 
      Table2 – Comparison of DS methods        Table 3 – Comparison of corpora   
 
 We believe that the feature vectors and frequencies constructed from users’ docu-
ments, blogs, etc can be successfully used as personal vocabulary models. These personal vo-
cabulary models could be used as the basis for mapping between the words used by different 
users within the ourSpaces virtual research environment, which could in turn bridge bridge 
communication barriers between members of interdisciplinary projects. 
 
Acknowledgments: The research described here is supported by the UK Economic & Social 
Research Council (ESRC) under the Digital Social Research programme; award: RES-149-
25-1027 and RES-149-25-1075. 
References 
1. Barlow, M. 2010, “Individual Usage: A Corpus-based Study of Idiolects”, 34 Internation-
al LAUD Symposium. 
2. Briscoe, T. 2006, “An introduction to tag sequence grammars and the RASP system par-
ser”, Cambridge University. 
3. Hirst, G. &Feiguina, O. 2007, “Bigrams of Syntactic Labels for Authorship Discrimina-
tion of Short Texts”, LLC, 22(4), 405-417. 
4. Koppel, M., Akiva, N. and Dagan, I. (2006a), “Feature Instability as a Criterion for Se-
lecting Potential Style Markers”, Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
and Technology 57(11), 1519-1525. 
5. Koppel, M., Schler, J. &Argamon, S. 2009, “Computational methods in authorship attrib-
ution”, J.Am.Soc.Inf.Sci.Technol., 60(1), 9-26. 
6. Lee, L. 1999, “Measures of Distributional Similarity”, Proc of the 37th annual meeting of 
the ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 25 
7. Lin, D. 1998, “An InformationTheoretic Definition of Similarity”, In Proc. of the 15th 
Int. Conf. on Machine LearningMorgan Kaufmann, 296. 
8. Lin, J. 2006.  “Using Distributional Similarity to Identify Individual Verb Choice”. Procs 
of the Fourth Int. Natural Language Generation Conference, 33-40, Sydney, ACL 
9. Louwerse, M.M. 2004, “Semantic Variation in Idiolect and Sociolect: Corpus Linguistic 
Evidence from Literary Texts”, Computers and the Humanities, 38(2), 207-221. 
10. Nerbonne, J. &Kretzschmar, W. 2003, “Introducing Comp. Techniques in Dialectome-
try.”, Computers and the Humanities, 37(3), 245-255. 
11. Weeds, J., Dowdall, J., Schneider, G., Keller, B. & Weir, D.J. 2005, “Using distributional 
similarity to organise biomedical terminology”, Terminology, 11(1),107-141. 
12. Wu, Z. & Palmer, M.S. 1994, “Verb Semantics and Lexical Selection”, ACL,133. 
13. Yang, D. & Powers, D.M.W. 2008, “Automatic thesaurus construction”, ACSC,147. 
14. Yarowsky, D. 1993, “One Sense per Collection”, ARPA Human Language technology 
Workshop, 266. 
15. Zhang, X., Jing, L., Hu, X., Ng, M. & Zhou, X. 2007, “A comparative study of ontology 
based term similarity measures on PubMed document clustering”, Procs of the 12th int. 
conference on Database systems for advanced applications, Springer-Verlag, 115. 
