 The corporate blog as an emerging genre of computer-
mediated communication: features, constraints, 
discourse situation
Doctoral thesis outline
Cornelius Puschmann
Department of English Language and Linguistics
University of Düsseldorf
cornelius.puschmann@uni-duesseldorf.de
The central  focus of  this  dissertation project  rests  on a register  study1 of  an emergent type of 
professional discourse: the corporate blog. A phenomenon that has only appeared in the course of 
the last two years, corporate or enterprise blogging is the use of blogs by business professionals to 
further organizational goals2. Corporate blogs serve a variety of purposes – they are used both for 
extra-organizational (marketing, public relations, customer relationship management, recruiting) 
and intra-organizational  communication (internal  management,  expert  blogging)  as  well  as  for 
other issues pertinent to large organizations, e.g. knowledge management.
My research approaches the object of study from two different directions. In the first part of my 
thesis, I will seek to describe corporate blogs empirically via a text-typographic corpus study3. My 
assumption is that systematically collecting and heuristically assessing textual data will contribute 
to  a  larger  picture  of  this  evolving  genre.  Core-linguistic  aspects  of  corporate  blogs,  especially 
lexical,  morphosyntactic and discursive-interactional characteristics will be at the center of this 
part of the investigation. My goal is to conduct both a qualitative evaluation of individual texts and 
specific linguistic constructions in them and to approach the corpus data holistically, using scalar 
statistical  measures such as lexical  density4,  f-score5 and propositional  idea density6,  as well  as 
degree  of  dimensional  variation7.  I  will  attempt  to  evaluate  the  usefulness  of  inductive  (data-
driven)  methods in  this  context8 and use  data  from reference corpora to  contrastively  analyze 
1 I use both the terms register and register study with the meaning assigned to them by Biber and Finegan 
(1994), who lament that “the analysis of genre, register and stylistics is seen as relating to written varietes 
and as based on literary and rhetorical interests rather than linguistic ones”. This view in the discipline, 
paired with a noticeable neglect of written material that is still partly common in many areas, has lead to a 
relatively  low volume of publications on the topic of (written) registers, at least outside of the domain of 
historical linguistics. The field thus appears fragmented between (computer-mediated) discourse analysis, 
traditional stylistics, ethnographic and rhetorical approaches and pragmatics (where the focus – similar 
to sociolinguistics – seems to be largely on synchronous communication, e.g. chat and instant messaging).
2 cf. Weil (2006).
3 With this approach I follow Biber's (1992) suggestion of a macroscopic analysis of a written genre.
4 cf. Stubbs (1996).
5 cf. Heylighen and Dewaele (2002).
6 As implemented by Brown et al (2007).
7 Following Biber (1992), but with a restricted set of features.
8 The context here is the notable contrast in how different disciplines approach the concept of genre. Many 
researchers involved in computational linguistics and computer science have a utilitarian concept of 
corporate blogs in relation to other text types, both along the domain and modal axes9.
Proceeding from this empirical and largely quantitative view on the text type, I will then switch to 
an assessment of the corporate blog as a domain-specific genre or register, that is, to the contextual 
metastructure framing the process in which individual textual instantiations are produced. While 
the first  part  uses  only the linguistic  data itself  as  evidence (and is  thus purely  empirical)  the 
second integrates meta-discursive observations from the speech community10, as well as the highly 
significant technological situatedness of blogs into the description. By adding the pragmatic and 
sociotechnical dimensions to the picture, I will seek to explain the emergence of corporate blogs 
plausibly as more than just an inevitable technological development, but instead as the result of a 
shift  from  one-to-N-oriented,  unidirectional  broadcasting  to  a  communicative  paradigm  more 
similar to immediate interpersonal communication. I will illustrate that corporate blogs are seen by 
their  proponents  as  a  means  of  overcoming  a  looming  communicative  crisis  threatening 
institutions because of their static and highly conventionalized genre practices, which often seem 
opaque, construed and manipulative to outsiders.
A central point of reference in both parts of the investigation will be the strategic, expressive and 
discursive creativity of the individual blogger, the stylistic variability that results from it, and how 
this  degree  of  individual  freedom of  expression  can  be  aligned  with  organizational  goals.  The 
question  of  whether  stylistic  heterogeneity  must  always  be  the  passing  characteristic  of  an 
emerging genre or whether it can be its core constituent will be reviewed. Furthermore, questions 
such as  the  relevance  of  authorial  authenticity  and reliability  will  be  discussed  in  the  light  of 
deceptive practices such as ghostblogging and flogging, which are considered moral transgressions 
by many non-corporate bloggers.
Because it is devised as a systematic study of both textual instantiations (text typology) and of the 
socio-cognitive frame in which they produced (register/genre),  this  work must  take theoretical 
models  and  approaches  from  multiple  areas  of  linguistics  and  from  entirely  other  fields  into 
account.
My conception of genre as functionally underdetermined closely follows Swales, who describes a 
genre as “a class of communicative events [...] with a shared communicative purpose” (1990). In 
the same vein Bazerman speaks of typified texts and remarks that “by using [them] we are able to 
advance our own interests” (1994) - something certainly very closely aligned with the goal-oriented 
corporate mindset. The conductive role of genres in social interactions is equally stressed by Miller 
genre, regarding it as a system for the labeling of text in clearly delineated categories which are primarily 
formally defined. In contrast to this, rhetorics and other theory-minded fields seem to have largely 
abandoned form and instead see the functional dimension of a genre as the constitutive element.
9 That is, a comparison of corporate blogs both with other types of corporate discourse (memo, mission 
statement, press release) and with other types of blogs (political, personal).
10 In the tradition of an ethnographic study of a domain-specific variety, such as those conducted by Smart 
(2006) and Artemeva & Freedman (2001).
(1984) and later applied specifically to blogs (Miller and Shepard 2004). Work in the ethnographic 
tradition of genre research especially in the domain of professional communication is exemplified 
by Artemeva (2005) and Smart (2006) and based on prior theoretical exploration, especially by 
Bhatia  (1993)  and  Berkenkotter  and  Huckin  (1995).  Important  contribution  from  the  field  of 
research into genres of computer-mediated communication and specifically blogging come from 
Herring  et  al  (2004,  2005)  who  draw  on  previous  work  in  CMC  genre  analysis  (Yates  and 
Orlikowski  1992,  Orlikowski  and  Yates  1994),  as  well  as  from  Efimova  and  de  Moor  (2005), 
Anjewierden  and  Efimova  (2006),  Efimova  and  Grudin  (2007)  and  Schmidt  (2007).  The 
approaches used in these studies propagate a holistic view of blog research, not limiting themselves 
to  linguistic  features,  but  also  investigating  aspects  such  as  network  structure  and  blogger 
motivation. Works with a strong applied and computational focus also investigate blogs, analyzing 
large amounts of language data in the context of automated genre classification (Santini  2004, 
2005), authorship attribution (Stamatatos et al. 2000, 2001; Koppel et al. 2003), age (Schler et al. 
2006) gender (Koppel et al. 2002) and personality (Nowson et al. 2005). In many of these studies 
feature sets  such as that developed by Biber  are devised11 and then used to test  a data set for 
statistically  salient patterns such as lexeme frequencies,  part-of-speech frequencies and n-gram 
frequencies. The theoretical considerations of rhetorics and traditional genre studies seem furthest 
away from these approaches, which share a largely utilitarian outlook on genre.
To summarize, my goal will be to integrate these diverse approaches into a complete register study 
to the extent possible, because all of them have something to offer from the point of view of the 
researcher. I am guided by the realization that a text is more than a sequence of words and that a 
genre  is  in  turn  more  than  the  sum  of  its  collected  instantiations,  while  at  the  same  time 
recognizing  that  the  systematic  study  of  variation  among  texts  using  statistical  measures  has 
opened a completely new avenue into linguistic investigation.
References
Anjewierden, A., and L. Efimova. “Understanding weblog communities through digital traces: a 
framework, a tool and an example.” On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems 2006: 
OTM 2006 Workshops. 4277/2006 (2006): 279-289.
Artemeva, N. “A Time to Speak, a Time to Act: A Rhetorical Genre Analysis of a Novice Engineer's 
Calculated Risk Taking.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication. 19.4 (2005): 
389.
Artemeva, N., and A. Freedman. “"Just the Boys Playing on Computers": An Activity Theory 
11 In contrast to Biber's original method many newer approaches focus more strongly on syntactic features, 
for example in the form of POS n-grams (cf. Santini). This is due largely to an increased reliability of 
automated taggers and thus less need to focus largely on lexical types, as was the case in the past due to 
computational constraints.
Analysis of Differences in the Cultures of Two Engineering Firms.” Journal of Business and 
Technical Communication. 15.2 (2001): 164.
Bazerman, C. “Systems of genres and the enactment of social intentions.” Genre and the new 
rhetoric. (1994): 79-101.
Berkenkotter, Carol, and Thomas N. Huckin. Genre Knowledge in Disciplinary Communication: 
Cognition, Culture, Power. L. Erlbaum Associates, 1995.
Bhatia, V. K. (Vijay Kumar). Analysing genre: Language Use in Professional Settings. Longman, 
1993.
Biber, Douglas. Variation across Speech and Writing. Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Biber, Douglas, and Edward Finegan. Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register. Oxford University 
Press, USA, 1993.
Efimova, L., and A. de Moor. “Beyond Personal Webpublishing: An Exploratory Study of 
Conversational Blogging Practices.” System Sciences, 2005. HICSS'05. Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on. (2005): 107a-107a.
Efimova, L., and J. Grudin. “Crossing Boundaries: A Case Study of Employee Blogging.” System 
Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on. (2007): 
86.
Herring, S.C. et al. “Bridging the gap: a genre analysis of Weblogs.” System Sciences, 2004.  
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on. (2004): 11 pp.
Herring, Susan C. et al. “Conversations in the Blogosphere: An Analysis "From the Bottom Up".” 
Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'05). 
4 (2005): 107b.
Heylighen, F., and J. M. Dewaele. “Variation in the Contextuality of Language: An Empirical 
Measure.” Foundations of Science. 7.3 (2002): 293-340.
Koppel, M., and J. Schler. “Exploiting Stylistic Idiosyncrasies for Authorship Attribution.” 
Proceedings of IJCAI'03 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and 
Synthesis. (2003): 69-72.
Koppel, M., S. Argamon, and A. R. Shimoni. “Automatically Categorizing Written Texts by Author 
Gender.” Literary and Linguistic Computing. 17.4 (2002): 401.
Brown, C. et al. “Measuring Propositional Idea Density through Part-of-Speech Tagging.” (2007). 
Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, Anaheim, Ca.
Miller, C. R. “Genre as social action.” Quarterly Journal of Speech. 70.2 (1984): 151-167.
Miller, C. R., and D. Shepherd. “Blogging as Social Action: A Genre Analysis of the Weblog.” Into 
the Blogosphere: Rhetoric, Community, and Culture of Weblogs. University of Minnesota.  
http://blog. lib. umn. edu/blogosphere. (2004).
Nowson, S., J. Oberlander, and A. Gill. “Weblogs, genres and individual differences.” Proceedings 
of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. (2005): 1666–1671.
Orlikowski, W. J., and J. Yates. “Genre Repertoire: The Structuring of Communicative Practices in 
Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly. 39.4 (1994).
Santini, M. “A Shallow Approach to Syntactic Feature Extraction for Genre Classification.” 
Proceedings of the 7th Annual Colloquium for the UK Special Interest Group for 
Computational Linguistics. (2004).
---. “Genres In Formation? An Exploratory Study of Web Pages using Cluster Analysis.” Proc.  
CLUK. 5 (2005).
Schler, J. et al. “Effects of Age and Gender on Blogging.” AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on 
Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW). (2006): 06-03.
Schmidt, J. “Blogging Practices: An Analytical Framework.” Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication. 12.4 (2007).
Smart, Graham. Writing the Economy: Activity, Genre, and Technology in the World of Banking. 
Equinox Publishing (UK), 2006.
Stamatatos, E., N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis. “Computer-Based Authorship Attribution 
Without Lexical Measures.” Computers and the Humanities. 35.2 (2001): 193-214.
Stamatatos, E., G. Kokkinakis, and N. Fakotakis. “Automatic text categorization in terms of genre 
and author.” Computational Linguistics. 26.4 (2000): 471-495.
Stubbs, Michael. Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-Assisted Studies of Language and Culture. 
Blackwell Publishers, 1996.
Weil, Debbie. The Corporate Blogging Book: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know to Get It  
Right. Portfolio, 2006.
Yates, J., and W. J. Orlikowski. “Genres of Organizational Communication: A Structurational 
Approach to Studying Communication and Media.” The Academy of Management Review. 
17.2 (1992): 299-326.
