International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 62– No.4, January 2013 
7 
Use of Generalized Regression Neural 
Network in Authorship Attribution 
 
R. Chandrasekaran 
Department of Statistics 
Madras Christian College 
Tambram, Chennai, INDIA-600 059 
 
G. Manimannan 
Department of Statistics 
Madras Christian College 
Tambram, Chennai, INDIA-500059 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Identification of authorship of writings of unknown 
authorship is a special type of problems in the field of 
Stylometry.  In this paper, the classification of articles of 
ambiguous authorship to the articles written by 
contemporary Tamil scholars of the same period, namely 
Mahakavi Bharathiar (MB), Subramaniya Iyer (SI), and T. 
V. Kalyanasundaram (TVK) is discussed. During the pre-
independence period, these three popular scholars had 
written number of articles on India’s Freedom Movement in 
the magazine called, India. Initially, all the three writers 
contributed their articles by attributing their names. Later, all 
the three patriots wrote articles on the same theme for 
anonymous publications without mentioning their names due 
to the oppressive attitude of the then British regime. 
Over the last two decades, the application of Artificial 
Neural Network models has increased considerably in areas 
of pattern classification and recognition problems in the field 
of Stylometry. In the present research, an attempt is made to 
apply the Generalised Regression Neural Network to the 
problem of authorship attribution  for articles of ambiguous 
authorship and to assign them to the contemporary writers of 
the same period. Different sets of variables such as 
morphology and function words are made use of for 
classification purposes.  Subsequently, results of authorship 
attribution are discussed.   
KEYWORDS 
Stylometry, Authorship attribution, Artificial Neural 
Network,    Generalized Regression Neural Networks. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Stylometry is the study of the quantifiable of human language, 
or the statistical analysis of literary style (Holmes, 1995; 
Holmes and Forsyth, 1995). This involves attempting to 
formally capture the creative, unconscious elements of 
language particular to individual writers and speakers. 
Although researchers have studied writing for centuries, the 
discipline of stylometry is fairly recent, and while its origins 
date back to the late 19th century, the field as it is now began 
with work on the Federalist Papers in 1968 (Mosteller and 
Wallace, 1968).  The problem of authorship attribution began 
with discipline known as Stylometry. Stylometry mainly 
concerns itself with authorship attribution studies, although 
chronological studies on the dating of work within the corpus 
of an author have also investigated. Writing in a forensic 
background, Bailey (1979) proposed three rules to define the 
situation necessary for authorship attribution: 
1. The number of putative authors should constitute a 
well- defined set. 
2. The lengths of the writings should be sufficient to 
reflect the linguistic behavior of the author of the 
disputed text and also those of the candidates. 
3. The texts used for comparison should be 
commensurate with the disputed writing.  
A computational stylistic study of doubtful authorship should 
involve comparisons of the disputed text with works by each 
of the possible candidate authors using suitable statistical 
tools on quantifiable features of the texts-features which 
reflect the style of the writing as defined above. 
One modern addition to the tools available for the 
computational stylometry is that of the Artificial Neural 
Network (ANN). These are the computational methods 
closely based on the concept of biological neuron, the idea 
being that simple, trained processing elements will result in 
much more difficult behavior when used in combination.  
In recent years, many scholars have successfully demonstrated 
that this technique of machine learning field can be applied to 
authorship attribution. Merriam and Mathews (1993, 1994) 
have trained a multi layer perception network to distinguish 
the works of Shakespeare and Marlowe. Tweedie et al. (1996) 
have provided a useful review of  the applications of ANNs in 
the area of computational stylometry and have used this 
machine-learning package for the reanalysis of the Federalist 
Papers.  Kjell (1994) have taken up authorship study using 
letter-pair frequency features with neural network 
classification. Recently, authorship identification problem is 
also attempted by the authors using the Radial Basis Function 
Network (Chandrasekaran  and Manimannan, 2008).  The 
present study attempts to use the Generalised Regression 
Neural Network (GRNN) as one of the suitable neural 
network classification tool. 
2. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK 
An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is a mathematical model 
represented by interlinked simple computational elements, 
called neurons that could compute, learn, remember and 
optimize the way a human brain works (Bishop, 2003; 
Heykin, 2001; Wasserman, 1989, 1993).  The neurons in 
ANN are called nodes. The interconnected nodes (neurons) 
are arranged into several layers namely, the input, 
intermediate (hidden) and the output layers.  Depending on 
the signals (data) transmitted by various nodes, a set of 
outputs is computed by the nodes that received the signals 
from the other nodes. 
Initially the network should be subjected to learning process. 
The network must learn decision surfaces from a set of 
training patterns so that these training patterns are classified 
correctly (Gose, Johnsonbaugh and Jost, 1997). After training, 
the network must also be able to generalize, that is, correctly 
classify test patterns it has never seen before. Usually any 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 62– No.4, January 2013 
8 
neural network should be such that it has the ability to learn 
well and also to generalize well. 
The general procedure is to have the network learn the 
appropriate weights from a representative set of training data. 
In all but the simplest cases, however, direct computation of 
the weights is difficult. Instead, learning starts off with 
random initial weights and adjusts them in successive 
iterations, until the required outputs are produced. 
The supervised and the unsupervised learning methodologies 
are adapted by the ANN.  In supervised learning, the objective 
is to predict one or more output variables from one or more 
input variables (Bishop, 2003; Ripley, 1996).  In the 
unsupervised learning, there are no target variables.  The 
network trains itself to extract the features from the input 
variables using which the input variable themselves can be 
predicted.  
Tweedie et. al. (1996) discussed the application of neural 
networks in stylometry and their usefulness for a number of 
reasons:  
1. Neural networks can learn from the data themselves. 
Implementing a rule-based system in linguistic 
computing may become complex as the number of 
distinguishing variables increases and even the most 
complex rules may still not be good enough to 
completely characterize the training data. In essence, 
neural networks are more adaptive.  
2. Neural networks can generalize. This ability is 
particularly required in the literary field, as only limited 
data may be available. 
3. Neural networks can capture non-linear interactions 
between input variables. 
4. Neural networks are capable of fault tolerance. Hence a 
particular work, which is not in line with the usual 
writing style of an author, will not affect the network to 
a considerable extent. Thus neural networks appear to 
promise much for the field of stylometry. Their 
application would appear to be worthy of investigation. 
The pioneering work in the application of neural nets in 
Stylometry was undertaken by Merriam and Mathews (1993). 
In their paper, a very small set of function word frequencies is 
used as input to a multiplayer perceptron (a neural net having 
a hidden layer) to examine four plays that have been attributed 
both to Shakespeare and John Fletcher.  
In the present context an attempted is made to use the 
concepts of Radial Basis Function Network for the authorship 
attribution problem. 
3. GENERALIZED REGRESSION 
NEURAL  NETWORK 
The Generalized Regression Neural Network is a kernel based 
feed forward neural network with an architecture having three 
layers namely, the input, hidden and output layers (Powell, 
1992; Wasserman, 1989, 1993).  The Generalized Regression 
Neural Networks use the kernel or Basis Function  method 
which is introduced as a technique for performing exact non-
linear interpolation tasks on a set of data points in a 
multidimensional space (Bishop, 2003; Powell 1992, 
Wasserman 1993).   
 
 
A number of basis functions such as Gaussian, quadric, multi-
quadric, cubic and thin-plate-spine, have been proposed by 
many authors.  A direct implementation of this method leads 
to the feed forward neural network with an architecture having 
three layers namely, the input, hidden and output layers.  The 
input layer corresponds to xi, the hidden layer to basis 
function φ(.)’s and the output layer to f(xi) or yi.  The net of 
each of the hidden layer is non-linear while that of output is 
linear.  Usually, each of the basis function φ(.) associated with 
the hidden node i is localized yielding greater value when the 
input x is closer to its center xi  and tends to zero as x deviates 
from the center.  In general, the nonlinear function φ 
transforms a nonlinearly separable problem into a linearly 
separable one.  The exact interpolation needs n hidden nodes 
for n input data points and hence grows with the number of 
data points.  Instead of having a hidden node for each of the 
data point, a reduced number of hidden nodes could be 
considered.  This could be achieved by selecting a fixed 
number C of data points chosen at random from the input data 
set, using orthogonal least square or K-means clustering 
algorithm.   
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Generalized Regression Neural Network   y = f(x). 
4. DATABASE 
The present study deals with the literary works of three 
contemporary Tamil scholars, namely, Mahakavi Bharathi 
(MB), T. V.Kalyanasundaranar (TVK), and Subramaniya Iyer 
(SI). In the Pre–Independence period, these three scholars 
have written number of articles on India's Freedom Movement 
in the magazine called India. Initially, all the three scholars 
have written articles by attributing their names. The 
oppressive attitude of the then British Regime made all the 
three writers to write articles on the same topic anonymously 
in the same magazine. For this quantitative attribution study, 
all attributed articles of these three scholars written on India’s 
Freedom Movement in the year 1906 are considered.  
Our study is based on nineteen articles of MB, seven of TVK 
and six of SI and twenty-three un-attributed articles. Twenty 
four function words and eighteen morphological variables 
have been used to quantify each sentence. The exact lists of 
variables of this study with their meanings are given in Table 
1 and Table 2. 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 62– No.4, January 2013 
9 
Table 1.  List of Twenty Four Function Words 
Function 
Words 
Translation 
Function 
Words 
Translation 
Um 
Aakiyaal 
Entraal 
Aavatu1 
Aaka 
Mikavum 
Pola 
Entru 
Pearil 
Irrunthu 
Kooda 
Ul 
Also 
As 
For 
For 
As 
Very much 
Like 
For 
On 
From 
Also 
Inside 
Ai 
Nodu 
Lall 
Aall 
Ukku 
Atu  
Ill 
Utan 
Um1 
Enum 
Utaiya 
Pattri 
Unmarked 
With 
With 
Unmarked 
To 
My 
In 
With 
At every 
At least 
Of 
About 
Table 2.  Lists of Morphological Variables of this Study 
with Abbreviations 
Abbreviations  Variables Name  
P_NOUN 
P_INT 
P_INF 
P_PRO 
P_NUME 
P_TWO 
P_THRE 
P_FOUR 
P_VOWE 
P_VERB 
P_SYLLA 
P_POST 
P_CLITIC 
P_CASE 
P_ADVERB 
P_CONJUN 
TENSES 
VOICES 
Nouns 
Introductory 
Intensifiers 
Pronouns 
Numerals 
Two letter Words 
Three letter Words 
Four letter Words 
Vowels 
Verbs 
Syllables 
Postpositions 
Clitics 
Case Markers 
Adverbs 
Conjunctions 
Tenses 
Voices 
 
A chi-square analysis of the nineteen articles of MB 
establishes that these articles do not differ from one another in 
terms of the frequency distribution of occurrence of these 
stylistic features.  Similar results were obtained in the case of 
other two scholars (Manimannan and Bagavandas, 2001). 
Thus, each article is converted as a raw data matrix and these 
raw data matrices form the basis for this data description. 
Hence the nineteen articles of Mahakavi Bharathiar (MB) 
consist of three hundred and fifty-three sentences, the seven 
articles of Subramaniya Iyer (SI) consist of three hundred and 
fifteen sentences and six articles of T. V. Kalyanasundaram 
(TVK) consist of three hundred and eighty-two sentences. The 
data matrix of MB is of size (353*18), of SI is of size 
(315*18) and of TVK is of size (382*18) in the case of 
morphological variables and they are (353*24), (315*24) and 
(382*24) respectively in the case of function words. The 
entire twenty-three un-attributed articles consist of three 
hundred and seventy-five sentences. Recently, 
Chandrasekaran and Manimannan (2012) have used the 
Radial Basis Function Network to identify writers of the 
articles of ambiguous authorship considered in this paper. 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Nineteen articles written by Mahakavi Bharathiar (MB), seven 
articles by Subramaniya Iyer (SI) and six articles by T. V. 
Kalyanasundaram (TVK) have been considered for the 
analysis represented by the averages of the sampled sentences.  
The 32 data points representing the means of the 
corresponding sample writings of three different authors are 
used.  The Data matrix (P) consists of 18 morphological 
variables, normalized,  computed from the chosen articles.  
The Target matrix (T) has three rows, one row for each 
author, each row consisting of 0, 1, 2 or 3.  This matrix 
element tij is define as   
tij = i      if the sample j in the data matrix P 
corresponds to the  author i; 
                  0      otherwise. 
The generalized regression neural network is created with 
appropriate parameters and the data matrices. The articles of 
ambiguous authorship is also presented in the form of a Test 
matrix (X) consisting of 18 morphological variables, 
normalized, in the form of column vectors, each column 
corresponding to one sample article of unknown authorship.  
The entire analysis was also performed on the 24 normalised 
functional variables. 
The Generalized Regression Neural Network (GRNN) 
available with the Neural Network Toolbox in the MATLAB 
software is used for the analysis.   The GRNN routine creates 
as many neurons as there are input vectors in P in the hidden 
layer.  Each neuron’s weighted input is the distance between 
the input vector and its weight vector.  The hidden layer 
weights are set to P-transpose.  Each hidden neuron’s net 
input is the element-by-element product of its weighted input 
with its bias.  The hidden neuron’s output is its net input 
passed through the radial basis function RBF(m) = exp(-m2), 
where m = net input = {||weight vector – input vector|| bias}.  
Every bias in the hidden layer is set to 0.8326/SPREAD, 
which gives radial basis function that crosses 0.5 at the 
weighted inputs of +/- SPREAD, where SPREAD lies 
between 0 and 1.  The larger the SPREAD smoother will be 
the approximation. SPREAD has been taken to be 0.9.  The 
second layer’s weight is set to T and has neurons with linear 
transfer function.  The outputs of the second layer are 
calculated as the dot product of weights (T) and the output 
vector of the hidden layer normalized by the sum of the output 
vector elements. The second layer does not have bias.   
The program yielded the output which assigned all the 23 
writings of unknown authorship to Mahakavi Bharathiar (MB) 
for morphological as well as functional variables.  This result 
supported the claims made by many scholars that these 23 
articles could have been written by Mahakavi Bharathiar 
(MB). 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 62– No.4, January 2013 
10 
6. CONCLUSION 
Assignment of articles of ambiguous authorship to the 
contemporary Tamil scholars, namely Mahakavi Bharathiar 
(MB), Subramaniya Iyer (SI), and T. V. Kalyanasundaram 
(TVK), all of them belonging to of the same period, is taken 
up in the present research.  Initially, all the three writers 
contributed their articles by specifying their names. The 
oppressive attitude of the then British regime compelled all 
the three patriots to write articles on the same theme for 
anonymous publications without mentioning their names. 
During the last two decades, the application of Neural 
Network models has increased considerably in areas of pattern 
recognition and classification problems in the field of 
Stylometry. The authorship attribution problem is attempted 
using a Generalized Regression Neural Network for 
attributing the 23 articles of ambiguous authorship to one of 
the contemporary writers of the same period, first using 
morphological variables and then functional variables.  All the 
articles are attributed to Mahakavi Bharathiar (MB). This 
result supported the claims made by many scholars that these 
23 articles could have been written by Mahakavi Bharathiar 
(MB).  Our recent research also supported the claim that these 
articles with ambiguous authorship were written by Mahakavi 
Bharathiar (MB). 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Chandrasekaran, R. and Manimannan, G. (2008), Neural 
Network Classification and Authorship Attribution of 
Articles of Unknown Authorship Using Radial Basis 
Function, International Journal of Engineering Research 
and Technology (IJERT) ISSN: 2278- 0181, 2012 
[2] Bailey, R. W. (1979), The Future of Computational 
Stylistics, Association for Literary and Linguistic 
Computing Bulletin, Vol.  7, 4-11. England. 
[3] Bishop, C. M (2003), Neural Networks for Pattern 
Recognition (First Indian Edition), Oxford University 
Press, New Delhi 
[4]  Gose, E., Johnsonbaugh, R, and Jost, S (1997), Pattern 
Recognition and Image Analysis, Prentice Hall Inc., New 
Jersey. 
[5]  Heykin, S. (2001), Neural Networks : A Comprehensive 
Foundation (Second Edition), Pearson Education 
(Singapore), New Delhi. 
[6]  Holmes, D. I. (1995),  The Analysis of Literary Style : A 
Review, Journal of Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 
Vol. 148, 328-334, England. 
[7]  Holmes D.I. and Forsyth, R.S. (1995), The Federalist 
Revisited: New Directions in    Authorship  Attribution, 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 10, 111-127, 
England. 
[8]   Kjell, B. (1994), Authorship Determination Using Letter-
pair Frequency Features with Neural Network 
Classifiers, Literary and Linguistic Computing,  Vol.9, 
119-124, England. 
[9]  Manimannan, G. and Bagavandas, M. (2001), Authorship 
Attribution : The case of Bharathiar, National 
Conference on Mathematical and Applied Statistics, 
Department of Statistics, Nagpur University, Nagpur. 
[10]  Merriam, T. and Mathews, R. (1993), Neural 
Computation in Stylometry I: An Application to the 
Works of Shakespeare and Fletcher, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, Vol.8, 203-209, England. 
[11]  Merriam, T. and Mathews, R. (1994), Neural 
Computation in Stylometry II: An Application to the 
Works of Shakespeare and Marlowe, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, Vol.9, 1-6, England. 
[12] Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1968), Inference and 
Disputed Authorship : The Federalist Papers, Addision-
Wesley,  Messachusetts. 
[13] Powell, M. J. D. (1992), The Theory of Radial Basis 
Functions Approximation, in Advances of Numerical 
Analysis , pp. 105–210 , Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
[14] Ripley, B.D. (1996), Pattern Recognition and Neural 
Networks, Cambridge University Press. 
[15] Tweedie, F. J, Singh, S., and Holmes, D. I. (1996), 
Neural Network Applications in Stylometry. The 
Federalist Papers, Computers and the Humanities, 39(1), 
1-10, 1996. 
[16] Wasserman, P.D (1989), Neural Computing : Theory and 
Practice, Von Nostrand Reinhold, New York 
[17] Wasserman, P.D (1993), Advanced Methods in Neural 
Computing, Von Nostrand Reinhold, New York. 
 
 
 
 
