 54 computer Published by the IEEE Computer Society 0018-9162/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
Cover Fe ature
Who Am I? 
Analyzing 
Digital Personas 
in Cybercrime 
Investigations
Awais Rashid, Alistair Baron, Paul Rayson, and 
Corinne May-Chahal, Lancaster University, UK
Phil Greenwood and James Walkerdine, Isis 
Forensics, Lancaster, UK 
The Isis toolkit offers the sophisticated 
capabilities required to analyze digital per-
sonas and provide investigators with clues 
to the identity of the individual or group 
hiding behind one or more personas.
D igital communities not only bring people closer together but also, inadvertently, provide crimi-nals with new ways to access potential victims online. Digital personas play a key role in crimi-
nal tactics in online social media. One criminal might hide 
behind multiple digital personas or a group of criminals 
might share a single persona when engaging with poten-
tial victims. Furthermore, the fluid nature of identity on 
online social media means that criminals can disguise 
themselves with relative ease to gain the trust of potential 
victims. Examples of such criminal exploitation of digital 
personas include the following:
 • Child sex offenders masquerading as young people 
to gain their victims’ trust. An offender might use 
multiple personas over the course of an interaction, 
initially posing as a young person and then introduc-
ing another persona—for example, an older relative. 
Alternatively, an offender group might share a single 
persona so that multiple people can groom a victim 
over a period of time.1
 • Romance scam operators using digital personas with 
appropriate age and gender to engage with multiple 
victims in online dating sites, gaining their trust and 
exploiting them for financial gain.2
 • Radicalization of youth in online forums through 
persuasive messaging.3 Offenders sometimes use mul-
tiple digital personas as a tactic. For example, one 
persona is used to vigorously support a radical cause, 
followed by silence for a few days; then a different 
persona is used to claim that the original protagonist 
has left to fight for the cause.
Effective policing of such environments is, however, 
extremely challenging—a vast amount of information is 
communicated within online social media, making manual 
analysis difficult or even impossible. Consequently, law en-
forcement agencies face huge online communication data 
analysis backlogs during cybercrime investigations, with 
backlogs of six to nine months being commonplace. 
Even though a range of commercial tools such as 
EnCase (www.guidancesoftware.com/encase-forensic.
htm) and Internet Evidence Finder (www.magnetforensics. 
com/products/internet-evidence-finder) can assist in such 
investigations, they mainly focus on data extraction. Any 
analysis of the data is left to the investigator, who has 
access only to simple techniques such as keyword-based 
searches or phrase detection based on user-defined lists. 
Such techniques do not scale, and they do not include 
models of deceptive behavior or sharing of online perso-
nas. It is not uncommon for investigators to extract data 
 April 2013 55
from hard disks or mobile 
phones using a tool such as 
EnCase and then manually 
read it to identify when an 
offense might have occurred 
and make a value judgment 
about whether one or more 
digital personas were used as 
part of the offender’s tactics. 
Given the large amounts 
of text and number of online 
participants during such 
investigations, it is virtually 
impossible for the investigator 
to analyze all digital personas 
involved—the cognitive load 
is immense.
INFORMATION 
MINING AND 
ANALYSIS RESEARCH
Relevant research on 
the mining and analysis of 
information from online 
social media has mainly 
focused on extracting the key messages prevalent in 
such media. Hansan Davulcu and colleagues focused on 
detecting sentiment markers that indicate radicalization 
and counter messages in online forums.4 A 2004 study 
demonstrated how common word use across actors 
can be used to derive knowledge about the structure of 
covert social networks and their weak points.5 Other 
work revealed that clustering of individuals in online 
communities is not driven by homophily 6 and that it is 
possible to gain deeper insights through analysis of latent 
structures in online conversations.7 
In recent years, researchers have applied techniques 
from the fields of corpus-based natural language 
processing and text mining to these problems. Corpus 
analysis, particularly at the semantic level, can describe 
the key features in extremist discourse,8 and authorship 
attribution enables automatic identification of a given 
writer or speaker.9 Analysis of digital personas and 
inherent deception tactics has not been considered to date. 
The Isis toolkit (www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/isis) addresses 
this particular challenge by enabling efficient and 
sophisticated analysis of digital personas in large-
scale online textual communications. Our approach 
complements recent research that highlights the difficulty 
in identifying authorship when language is intentionally 
obfuscated10 as well as other work demonstrating that 
automatically predicting text authorship on a large scale 
is viable.11 Our work shows that it is possible to predict 
a persona’s key attributes such as age and gender with 
acceptable accuracy regardless of whether or not the 
author is obfuscating the language.
THE ISIS TOOLKIT
As Figure 1 shows, the Isis toolkit combines statistical 
methods from corpus-based natural language processing 
with authorship attribution tools. Analysis techniques 
from corpus linguistics and natural language processing, 
such as keyword profiling, offer the capability to compare 
word frequencies. Previous work extended this approach 
to extract key grammatical categories (equating to 
features of style) and key semantic fields (showing key 
concepts).12 These techniques use large representative 
samples of writing or transcribed speech for training 
and reference comparison, have high accuracy, and are 
designed to be robust across various types of text. Using 
tools and methods from the authorship attribution field 
makes it possible to narrow the focus from language 
varieties down to the individual writer to identify the 
author’s stylistic fingerprint. 
In the past, authorship attribution techniques were 
mainly applied to determine the authorship of historical 
texts. Recently, more robust evaluation techniques have 
been developed, and authorship attribution methods 
have been applied to known problems with standard 
benchmark data.9 
The specific challenges that we faced in implementing 
the Isis toolkit included integrating the statistically sophis-
ticated but knowledge-poor techniques from authorship 
Who am I?
Proles of potential suspects or victims 
based on analysis of digital personas
Stylistic comparison
Stylistic language ngerprint
Online 
interaction
patterns
Age and gender analysis
Structural analysisNatural language analysis
Figure 1. The Isis toolkit. The toolkit combines the use of statistical methods from corpus-
based natural language processing with authorship attribution tools.
 56 computer
Cover Fe ature
attribution with linguistically informed methods from 
corpus-based natural language analysis, combining the 
macro level (models of language varieties) with the micro 
level (models of individual’s use of language). Additionally, 
these methods must operate on small quantities of noisy 
language data observed in online social networks and deal 
with masquerading or similarly deceptive behavior that 
an individual might assume in an attempt to hide his or 
her identity.
The novel investigative features of the Isis toolkit include 
the following:
 • Establish a stylistic language “fingerprint” of potential 
suspects or victims. These fingerprints can then be 
overlaid on each other and compared to study whether 
one person might be hiding behind a single persona or 
if multiple people are sharing a single persona.
 • Establish the age and gender of the person behind a 
digital persona. Isis achieves this by synthesizing 
the stylistic “fingerprint” and extracting additional 
markers using a natural-language-analysis engine. 
Furthermore, the toolkit can detect masquerading 
tactics with a high degree of accuracy—for example, 
detecting when an adult is masquerading as a child.
 • Establish online interaction patterns of particular 
digital personas. Isis analyzes both the conversation 
structure and the language used therein to determine 
a specific persona’s key characteristics such as signa-
ture moves when signing off from a conversation or 
frequently used words and phrases. The toolkit also 
can analyze a persona’s behavior—for example, iden-
tifying when a participant is typically active—not only 
within an average 24-hour period but also in terms of 
day of the week. It also can determine whether a per-
sona becomes increasingly sexual or aggressive over 
a period of days or weeks.
These techniques are equally applicable either for 
building up a profile of potential suspects or victim iden-
tification. Investigators can use them to gain a better 
understanding of the digital personas involved, and their 
use also potentially provides clues to the identity of an in-
dividual or group in the physical world.
Stylistic language “fingerprint”
The Isis toolkit can observe and scrutinize a wide range 
of subtle language traits to assist in authorship analysis. 
Examples include the proportions of punctuation charac-
ters, the use of emoticons, and vocabulary measures. The 
toolkit uses these language traits to build a stylistic “fin-
gerprint” that it can, in turn, use to represent the language 
of a particular user, a set of users, or a collection of texts.
Metrics used to construct the stylistic fingerprint range 
from simple counts, such as the number of exclamation 
marks present, to more complicated measures, such as 
the type token ratio, a vocabulary indicator. The calcula-
tion of each metric takes into account text length so that a 
mixture of sources can be combined where appropriate— 
for example, email texts are generally longer than chat 
room texts. 
Through this process, Isis can assign a list of metric 
scores to a single text or collection of texts. Examples in-
clude the collated messages from a single chat room user 
or a sample of texts chosen to represent the language of 
adult female chat room users. The toolkit can then com-
pare the metric scores produced for two or more text 
collections to indicate how likely it is that the sources of 
the texts overlap or are written by people of a similar age 
and gender. 
The Isis toolkit uses the metric scores in two ways: to 
assist with automatic age and gender analysis, and to pro-
vide a visual impression of how close two text sources are 
with regard to their linguistic style. 
Age and gender analysis
Isis performs this analysis in four steps. The first three 
steps utilize a natural-language-analysis engine, while the 
fourth combines the knowledge thus extracted with the 
metric scores from the stylistic fingerprint:
 • Step 1: Tokenize an incoming text sample and tag each 
word with a part-of-speech (POS) label—noun, verb, 
adverb, adjective, and so on.
 • Step 2: Assign each word or phrase within the text to 
one semantic field using general conceptual labels 
such as finance, warfare, government, sports, and so 
on. These first two steps rely on a set of hybrid tech-
niques to select the most likely tag in each context.
 • Step 3: Count features such as the language styles 
used at the word, POS, and semantic field levels.
 • Step 4: Compare each level to standard reference da-
tasets that have previously been processed through 
the same pipeline. 
In the case of gender, we prepare two reference data-
sets, one for males and one for females. A distance metric 
then calculates the similarity between the incoming text 
sample and each of the two reference corpora for each 
The Isis toolkit can compare the metric 
scores produced for two or more text 
collections to indicate how likely it is 
that the sources of the texts overlap or 
are written by people of a similar age 
and gender.
 April 2013 57
of the three levels. Isis produces metric scores from the 
stylistic fingerprint for each reference dataset such as dif-
ferent gender groups and uses them as features for training 
a text classifier.
Various machine learning algorithms and methods 
for feature extraction are used for a range of text clas-
sification purposes. Isis uses logistic regression with the 
metric scores as features to classify a given text into gender 
groups. Probabilities are produced that indicate the likeli-
hood that the given text should be classified as each gender 
group. These are then combined with the word, POS, and 
semantic field analyses to derive weighted combined 
scores. The system then assigns a value for how likely it 
is that the incoming text is written by a male or female 
author. Similarly, Isis can prepare reference datasets by age 
range and compare them in the same manner. 
It is possible to focus on smaller age ranges by prepar-
ing specific reference datasets. This allows the toolkit to 
present an overview of the likelihood that a text is written 
by an adult or a child, and then drill down to results for 
more precise age ranges. As Figure 2 shows, the Isis toolkit 
provides this information as a decision tree that a law en-
forcement officer can consult and interact with.
Comparing stylistic fingerprints
While the automatic prediction of age and gender is 
useful in many cases, visualizing language differences 
and similarities also can be helpful to an investigator. The 
metric scores offer the ability to plot stylistic differences 
on a graph. While more than two lists can be compared 
on the same plot, here we discuss only the comparison of 
two lists.
Given two lists of metric scores, each score is divided 
by the maximum of the two scores for that metric. Hence, 
one adjusted score for each metric is now 1, and the other 
is a fraction of that (between 0 and 1). The adjusted scores 
are then multiplied by metric weights derived through 
machine learning, which can be specialized for the text 
comparisons being performed—for example, comparing 
a user’s text against age group datasets. Radar plots of the 
adjusted and weighted metric scores can then be used to 
visually represent language style fingerprints. When the 
two plots are overlaid, the similarity or difference between 
the two text sources represented is evident, with substan-
tial overlap indicating that the language style is similar 
and little overlap indicating contrasting language styles.
In addition to displaying how close a user’s text is to a 
given age and gender dataset, the fingerprinting method 
also can be used to compare the text from two personas 
to establish whether they are actually the same individual, 
or to compare texts from one persona at different times to 
explore whether multiple individuals share the persona. 
To describe this process and demonstrate the fin-
gerprint comparison technique, Figure 3 shows the 
language style fingerprint comparison of a previously 
unseen text (the messages of a single user in one chat 
session) against the collated texts of four individuals (for 
each individual, the messages are taken from six chat 
sessions). A larger overlap (shaded purple in the figure) 
of the fingerprints indicates that the new text’s language 
style is similar to that of previous texts for an individual, 
hence the new text is more likely to be from that user. 
In Figure 3, the overlap is most marked for Individual 1 
(top left), so a judgment could be made that the new col-
lection of chat room messages is likely to be from that 
user. In this case, that judgment would be correct: the 
fingerprints are from real chat sessions conducted in a 
simulated cybercrime scenario.
Statistics summary Statistics analysisWeek analysis Date analysisDay analysis
(a) (b)
Muz
11-18
97%
15-18
55.34%
17-18
43.11%
Age analysis
19-99
3%
Muz
Male
64.97%
Gender analysis
Female
35.03%
11-14
41.66%
15-16
12.24%
Monday
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sig
ht
ing
s
Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Summary Full age analysis Full gender analysis
Figure 2. Specific reference datasets: (a) age and gender decision trees, and (b) online-offline time analysis.
 58 computer
Cover Fe ature
Online interaction patterns
The Isis toolkit also supports identification of patterns 
typical to a persona’s online presence and its interaction 
with other participants. This is achieved through structural 
analysis of the text, which extracts details such as the user-
names of those participating in the chat or date and time 
information that can be used to model the conversation 
flow to identify patterns and trends over time. 
All conversation logs entered into the toolkit are con-
verted into a generic format. A key aspect of this is breaking 
down and modeling the log in terms of the participants and 
their respective activity, such as posting messages, sharing 
links, leaving or joining the conversation, and so on. Once 
it has built this model, the toolkit can quickly analyze and 
present intelligence about a particular participant. This 
can include an analysis of language use—for example, 
frequently used stylistic characteristics such as keywords, 
names, topics, and so on—or identifying patterns of online 
and offline times. Semantic categorization allows classi-
fying parts of a conversation based on their meaning—for 
example, whether it is sexual or aggressive in nature. 
By applying these techniques to the model of a par-
ticipant’s conversation, it is possible to view any trends 
that might occur over the duration of the conversation, 
for example, to help determine whether a conversation is 
becoming increasingly sexualized.
As Figure 2b shows, the analysis of online-offline win-
dows becomes particularly relevant in online social media 
where many participants are active. By cross-referencing 
different participant models, the toolkit can show when 
participants are online together as well as the content of 
their conversation at those times. This information can be 
Individual_1
New text
Individual_2
New text(a) (b)
Individual_3
New text
Individual_4
New text(c) (d)
Figure 3. Comparison of language style fingerprints for a new text against four individuals’ fingerprints.
 April 2013 59
used to make inferences about who tends to communicate 
with whom and about what. It also can help determine if 
a suspect is switching between multiple user accounts—
a trend that is frequently seen when online personas are 
exploited for criminal purposes.
Profiling cybercriminals and victims
The various analysis techniques combine to form a key 
feature of the toolkit—the ability to generate identity pro-
files of specific digital personas. Isis can automatically 
create profiles for a specified digital persona, drawing 
upon the conversations in which it has participated to pro-
duce an overall analysis of its online activity, language, and 
identity characteristics. 
The generated profile is built from several elements, 
including
 • Language usage. This element provides a model of 
the persona’s language use within conversations and 
highlights characteristics such as people or place 
names, dates and times, frequently used words and 
phrases, aggressive or sexual content, or email ad-
dresses and URLs. It also includes nondictionary 
words about which an investigator might or might 
not be aware that could indicate an attempt at disguis-
ing what is being discussed or represent unique jargon 
used within that domain.
 • Age and gender analysis. Investigators can use a de-
cision tree to provide an inferred estimation of the 
age and gender of the person behind the persona. By 
default, this provides a summary view that presents 
the strongest path through the tree, but they also can 
view the full tree, allowing them to examine the deci-
sions the toolkit made at all points if the certainty of 
the decision is not clear-cut.
 • Online activity. An analysis of overall online activity 
can highlight when the persona has appeared online 
within relevant conversations. This analysis can take 
many forms, including indicating when a persona is 
most likely to be online over a 24-hour window and 
on which days during the week.
These profiles can provide investigators with additional 
intelligence about trends and characteristics not immedi-
ately apparent to the human eye.
DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN GENUINE 
PERSONAS AND DECEPTIVE BEHAVIOR
We have used the Isis toolkit on reference datasets and 
in live environments to test its effectiveness in correctly de-
tecting the attributes of an individual behind a persona. In 
the two test sets presented here, no deception is intended 
in the first, while in the second, an individual is using de-
ceptive tactics.
Classifying age and gender of genuine personas
For this test we used the British National Corpus (BNC), 
a reference dataset with 100 million words of written and 
spoken language that represents a wide cross-section 
of British English. We utilized the portion of BNC (1,684 
people, which constitutes 10 percent of the entire collec-
tion) where metadata about an individual, including age 
and gender, was available. We used “leave-one-out cross- 
validation” to train our system using the texts from all 
1,684 individuals except the text from the individual being 
used as a test subject—the person whose age and gender 
was being classified. We repeated this classification for all 
1,684 individuals as test subjects. 
For each classification, the Isis toolkit provides probabil-
ities that the individual belongs to a specific age band; for 
example, an individual might be predicted to be age 11 to 
18 with a probability of 74 percent, and over age 18 with a 
probability of 26 percent. The prediction then moves down 
a level, that is, to between ages 11 to 14 with a probability 
of 49 percent, and between ages 15 to 18 with a probabil-
ity of 25 percent, and so on, with gender probabilities also 
calculated. 
As the age and gender classification decision trees in 
Figure 2a show, the age group or gender with the highest 
probability is taken as the prediction at each decision point. 
A probability threshold is also used to decide whether a 
prediction is used. If the highest probability is below this 
threshold, no prediction is made, and the age or gender is 
marked as “unknown.” 
Recall and precision are used to measure the algo-
rithms’ ability to correctly classify the age and gender of 
each individual in the test set. Recall is the proportion of 
individuals tested for which the correct prediction is made; 
precision is the proportion of predictions made—that is, 
not unknown—that are correct according to the metadata.
Figures 4a and 4b give the recall and precision values 
obtained for age classification at different specificity levels, 
which are outlined in Figure 4c. Recall is 72.15 percent, 
and precision is 72.24 percent at Level 1, that is, distin-
guishing between children (ages 11–18) and adults (over 
age 18). This is based on a probability threshold of 50 per-
cent. By increasing the threshold, greater precision can 
be achieved at the cost of fewer classification decisions 
being made—that is, more unknowns are returned. With 
a higher threshold of 80 percent, the precision of adult and 
Our analysis performs better when 
deception tactics are being used, thus 
demonstrating the effectiveness of digital 
persona analysis as a valuable tool in the 
investigator’s workbench.
 60 computer
Cover Fe ature
child classification increases slightly to 77.35 percent, but 
recall drops to 59.20 percent. Naturally, the precision and 
recall drop at higher levels of the age decision tree where 
the age ranges are more specific.
As Figure 4d shows, for gender classification with a 
threshold of 50 percent, recall is 66.74 percent, and preci-
sion is 66.86 percent. Again, a higher threshold can be set; 
increasing the threshold to 80 percent improves precision 
to 71.07 percent, but recall drops to 56.08 percent.
Classifying deceptive personas
We tested our toolkit on the BNC data to determine the 
accuracy of our algorithms when individuals are not being 
deceptive. However, given our focus on detecting misuse 
of digital personas, we tested the toolkit on detecting 
masquerading behavior—when an individual hides behind 
a false persona, for example, pretending to be a child. 
We set up a “live” environment, similar to a Turing test, 
in two schools. Subjects ages 11 to 18 years chatted online 
with 10 individuals behind the scenes in sessions divided 
by age group. In each session, one-half of the individuals 
behind the scenes were children or young people of the 
same age as the chat participant, while the other half were 
masquerading behind personas purporting to be of that 
age. We then employed a similar evaluation process as 
for the BNC dataset to test the effectiveness of our toolkit 
in classifying whether the people behind the scenes were 
children or young people or masquerading as being in 
those age groups.
For deciding whether an individual is a child or an adult 
masquerading as a child, the age classification algorithm 
achieves precision and recall of 84.29 percent, with a 
probability threshold of 50 percent. The precision can 
be increased with a higher threshold; at an 80 percent 
threshold, precision increases to 93.18 percent, but recall 
drops to 58.57 percent, with fewer predictions being made. 
These results obtained using our toolkit are in stark 
contrast to the accuracy of the children’s responses, with 
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Threshold (%)
Re
ca
ll (
%
)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Threshold (%)
Pr
ec
isi
on
 (%
)
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Threshold (%)
Re
ca
ll/
Pr
ec
isi
on
 (%
)
Recall
Precision
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 2
11-14/
15-18
Level 1
11-18/
over 18
11-14/
15-18
Level 3
15-16/
17-18
11-12/
13-14
50-59/
70+
19-20/
25-29
Level 4
39-39/
40-49
19-24/
25-29
50-59/
60-69
Level 5
40-44/
45-49
30-34/
35-39
50-54/
55-59
60-64/
65-69
Age ranges
Figure 4. Age and gender classification: (a) recall and (b) precision for age classification at (c) different specificity levels, and 
(d) gender classification.
 April 2013 61
only 18 percent of children across the year groups able 
to correctly identify whether they were chatting with 
an adult or a child. For gender, precision is 80.6 percent 
with a 50 percent threshold, while recall is 77.14 percent. 
Increasing the threshold to 80 percent improves precision 
to 84.09 percent, but recall drops to 52.86 percent. These 
results are in contrast to the children correctly identifying 
the gender of the person with whom they were chatting in 
58.8 percent of the cases.
O nline social media affords “connectedness” that enables individuals and groups from various geographical, cultural, and socioeconomic 
backgrounds to interact and share experiences. However, 
the very nature of identity in online social media—a fluid 
and dynamic concept that can be created, adapted, and 
discarded with ease—makes such identities prone to 
misuse. Exploitation of digital personas has become an 
integral part of the tactics that cybercriminals use. This 
new digital world and these sophisticated criminal tactics 
call for new tools to aid investigators of online crime. 
Our experience with the Isis toolkit demonstrates that 
it is possible to detect key characteristics of individuals 
or groups behind digital personas with a high degree of 
accuracy by combining techniques from corpus-based 
natural language analysis with those from authorship 
attribution. In fact, our analysis performs better when 
deception tactics are being used, thus demonstrating the 
effectiveness of digital persona analysis as a valuable tool 
in the investigator’s workbench. 
Naturally, such linguistic analysis cannot provide 100 
percent accuracy because of the intricacies of human 
language and its use. In addition, our experience in ongoing 
trials of the toolkit in UK law enforcement agencies shows 
that expert investigator knowledge is indispensable 
to the investigative process. The toolkit is, therefore, 
intended as a means to support the work of investigators 
rather than offering full automation. Only by combining 
such sophisticated tools with the expert knowledge of 
investigators can we hope to understand and nullify the 
online tactics that criminals deploy. 
References
 1. A. Rashid et al., Technological Solutions to Offending, 
Willan, 2012, pp. 228-243.
 2. M.T. Whitty and T. Buchanan, “The Online Dating 
Romance Scam: A Serious Crime,” CyberPsychology, 
Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 181-183.
 3. G. Weimann and K. von Knop, “Applying the Notion of 
Noise to Countering Online Terrorism,” Studies in Conflict 
and Terrorism, vol. 31, no. 10, 2008, pp. 883-902.
 4. H. Davulcu et al., “Analyzing Sentiment Markers Describing 
Radical and Counter-Radical Elements in Online News,” 
Proc. 2nd Int’l Conf. Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust 
(PASSAT 10), IEEE, 2010, pp. 335-340. 
 5. J. Diesner and K. Carley, “Using Network Text Analysis to 
Detect the Organizational Structure of Covert Networks,” 
Proc. Conf. Computational Analysis of Social and Organi-
zational Systems (CASOS 04), Nat’l Assoc. Computational 
Social and Organizational Science, 2004; www.andrew.
cmu.edu/user/jdiesner/publications/NAACSOS_2004_
Diesner_Carley_Detect_Covert_Networks.pdf. 
 6. H. Bisgin et al., “A Study of Homophily on Social Media,” 
World Wide Web, vol. 15, no. 2, 2012, pp. 213-232.
 7. P. Greenwood et al., “Udesignit: Towards Social Media 
for Community-Driven Design,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Software 
Engineering (ICSE 12), IEEE, 2012, pp. 1321-1324.
 8. S. Prentice et al., “The Language of Islamic Extremism: 
Towards an Automated Identification of Beliefs, 
Motivations and Justifications,” Int’l J. Corpus Linguistics, 
vol. 17, no. 2, 2012, pp. 259-286.
 9. E. Stamatatos, “A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution 
Methods,” J. Am. Soc. Information Science and Technology, 
vol. 60, no. 3, 2009, pp. 538-556.
 10. S. Afroz et al., “Detecting Hoaxes, Frauds, and Deception 
in Writing Style Online,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Security and 
Privacy (S&P 12), IEEE, 2012, pp. 461-475.
 11. A. Narayanan et al., “On the Feasibility of Internet-Scale 
Author Identification,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Security and 
Privacy (S&P 12), IEEE, 2012, pp. 300-314.
 12. P. Rayson, “From Key Words to Key Semantic Domains,” 
Int’l J. Corpus Linguistics, vol. 13, no. 4, 2008, pp. 519-549.
Awais Rashid is the director of Security Lancaster at 
Lancaster University, UK. His research interests include 
intelligent analysis of online data, digital identity, and cy-
bersecurity behaviors. Contact him at marash@comp.lancs.
ac.uk.
Alistair Baron is a research fellow at Security Lancaster 
at Lancaster University, UK. His research deals with cy-
bersecurity challenges posed by the noisy, irregular, and 
multilingual nature of online data. Contact him at a.baron@
lancaster.ac.uk.
Paul Rayson is director of the University Centre for 
Computer Corpus Research on Language at Lancaster 
University, based in both the Department of Linguistics 
and English Language and the School of Computing and 
Communications. His applied research is in online child 
protection, learner dictionaries, and text mining. Contact 
him at p.rayson@lancaster.ac.uk.
Corinne May-Chahal is a professor of applied social science 
and cochair of the UK College of Social Work at Lancaster 
University, UK. She leads the child protection work within 
Security Lancaster. Contact her at c.may-chahal@lancaster.
ac.uk.
Phil Greenwood is the chief technology officer for Isis 
Forensics, Lancaster, UK. His expertise is in developing 
solutions to assist child protection investigations. Contact 
him at p.greenwood@isis-forensics.com.
James Walkerdine is the CEO and cofounder of Isis Fo-
rensics, Lancaster, UK. His expertise is in online forensics 
and child protection. Contact him at j.walkerdine@isis-
forensics.com.
