Artif Intell Rev (2012) 37:261–288
DOI 10.1007/s10462-011-9229-7
Off-line cursive script recognition: current advances,
comparisons and remaining problems
Amjad Rehman · Tanzila Saba
Published online: 10 May 2011
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011
Abstract This paper presents detailed review in the field of off-line cursive script recog-
nition. Various methods are analyzed that have been proposed to realize the core of script
recognition in a word recognition system. These methods are discussed in view of the two
most important properties of such systems: size and nature of the lexicon involved and
whether or not a segmentation stage is present. Script recognition techniques are classified
into three categories: firstly, segmentation-free methods or holistic approaches, that compare
a sequence of observations derived from whole word image with similar references of words
in the small lexicon. Secondly, segmentation-based methods, that look for the best match
between consecutive sequences of primitive segments and letters of a possible word simi-
lar to human-like reading technique, in which secure features found all over the word are
used to boot-strap a few candidates for a final evaluation phase; thirdly, hybrid approaches.
Additionally, different feature extraction techniques are elaborated in conjunction with the
classification process. In this scenario, implications of single and multiple classifiers are also
observed. Finally, remaining problems are highlighted along with possible suggestion and
strategies to solve them.
Keywords Script recognition · Character segmentation · Character recognition ·
Feature extraction · Holistic approaches
1 Introduction
Cursive script word recognition is the problem of transforming a word from the iconic form
of cursive writing to its symbolic form. Several component processes of a recognition sys-
tem for isolated off-line cursive script words are described. A word image is transformed
through a hierarchy of representation levels: points, contours, features, letters, and words.
However, segmentation is a vital part of script recognition. Actually, correct segmentation
A. Rehman (B) · T. Saba
College of Computer and Information Sciences, Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic University KSA,
Riyadh, KSA
e-mail: amjadbzu2003@yahoo.com
123
262 A. Rehman, T. Saba
is the base of correct recognition. Segmentation of handwriting is an operation that seeks to
decompose a word image into sub-images of individual characters therefore it is important to
understand what a character is? (Casey and Lecolinet 1996). Segmentation is a difficult and
error prone process because of the Sayre’s paradox (1973): a character cannot be segmented
before having been recognized and cannot be recognized before having been segmented.
It seems that the character segmentation process requires that the properties of a character
be known; this information may be obtained through recognition. Unfortunately, to obtain
knowledge of a character’s appearance, segmentation is required. Therefore it is obvious that
one stage is dependent on the other and knowledge of character symbol structure in a word
is helpful in segmentation. Upon scrutinizing the literature, it is not difficult to observe that
there are far more studies on the segmentation and recognition of cursive script, than there
are for hand-printed words. Several review papers highlighted different issues in cursive
script segmentation and acknowledged the segmentation stage as the most difficult step in
the process of cursive handwriting recognition (Casey and Lecolinet 1996; Dunn and Wang
1992; Lu 1995; Lu and Shridhar 1996; Elliman and Lancaster 1990; Fujisawa et al. 1992;
Steinherz et al. 1999; Plamondon and Srihari 2000; Blumenstein and Verma 2001; Vinciarelli
2002; Gang et al. 2002; Koerich et al. 2003; Bortolozzi et al. 2005; Rehman and Dzulkifli
2008; Saba et al. 2011). To examine some of the most pioneering research in segmentation
and recognition of cursive script, one must venture back to the early 1960s. This section
hopefully meets the objective of outlining a good representative of the techniques that have
been proposed over the last five decades.
A major problem in discussing segmentation is how to classify methods. Firstly, analytical
methods that employ segmentation-based recognition strategies where the segmentation can
be explicit (El-Yacoubi et al. 1999; Arica and Yarman-Vural 2002) or implicit (Gillies 1992;
Cho et al. 1995). Explicit when the segmentation is based on cut rules, and implicit when each
pixel column is a potential cut location. In the case of explicit segmentation several algorithms
have been proposed during the last few decades. They normally take into consideration a set
of heuristics and information of the foreground pixels (Kim et al. 2002) and background
pixels (Pal et al. 2003), or a combination of both (Oliveira et al. 2002) in order to generate
potential segmentation cuts. Generally, the heuristics used to make the algorithm robust make
it specific for the applied problem, and a good segmentation algorithm for numeral strings
may not have the same performance for words, and vice-versa.
Secondly, Tappert et al. (1990) classified into “external” vs. “internal” segmentation,
depending on whether recognition is required in the process. Dunn and Wang (1992) termed
as “straight segmentation” and “segmentation-recognition”.
2 Structure of script recognition system
The basic script recognition system is exhibited in Fig. 1. However, following detail review
of the available literature, we have concluded that there are three main strategies for script
recognition, plus numerous hybrid approaches that are combinations of first two. The basic
strategies are:
(i) Explicit segmentation based recognition approach, in which segments are identified
based on “character-like” properties. This process of cutting up the image into mean-
ingful components is given a special name, “dissection”, in discussions below.
(ii) Implicit segmentation based recognition, in which the system searches the image for
components that match classes in its alphabet.
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 263
Fig. 1 Script recognition system (Cheriet et al. 2007)
(iii) Segmentation free approaches, where each word in the lexicon should be built as a
model, generally applies to small and fix lexicon. These approached are also termed
as holistic approaches.
2.1 Explicit segmentation based script recognition (segmentation based recognition)
Segmentation is the most vital part of the cursive script word recognition problem particu-
larly when a classical approach is used for the recognition (Arica and Yarman-Vural 2002).
Accordingly, Frishkopf and Harmon (1961) are the pioneer to propose one such approach
for segmentation of cursive script word. They introduce a new idea to utilize upper, middle
and lower zones for cursive words analysis. However, writers are constrained to write letters
as ‘a’, ‘c’, ‘e’ etc. in the middle zone. Likewise, letters with ascenders and descenders are
written in the upper and lower zones respectively. By the analysis of zones, information
of ascender/descender enables them to locate discriminative features in each word that can
help in the segmentation process. They also include some more features independent from
ascender/descender information such as retrograde strokes, average character width etc.
Most of the researchers perform dissection via pre-segmentation. It is used to locate areas
in the word containing explicit features that are likely to occur within or between characters
in the form of valley such as ligatures. However, it also cuts the characters ‘w’, ‘v’ etc, whose
contours contain a valley and therefore, deduce as a ligature. The output of pre-segmentation
is termed “graphemes” or “pseudo-characters” (Casey and Lecolinet 1996) or “junks” (Tay
2002). A grapheme may consist of part of a character or a complete character or multiple char-
acters. Finally, the post processing stage is applied successfully to investigate each grapheme
or its combination according to certain criteria. Hence, grapheme(s) are merged or split based
on contextual post processing such that the result is a set of accurately matched symbols.
Accordingly, Sayre (1973) propose a system to recognize cursive words. Initially, they seg-
ment words into graphemes based on general features of words. The graphemes are grouped
into 17 classes with the help of classifier such that each class corresponded to letters or
group of letters. Final, identification is based on a statistical decision tree classifier. Sayre’s
system is the first of its kind that investigate features independent of stroke sequence that are
inherited in online handwriting recognizers. First historically first, Sayre’s research provide
a distinction between off-line and online cursive script recognition. Sayre achieved a 79%
word recognition rate on 84 words only.
123
264 A. Rehman, T. Saba
A number of researchers include pre-segmentation stage along with contextual knowledge
for cursive handwritten word recognition (Ehrich and Koehler 1975; Maier 1986; Lecolinet
and Crettez 1991; Grandidier 2003; Koch et al. 2004)
The algorithms propose by Maier (1986), Lecolinet and Crettez (1991) are mainly based
on the detection of the valleys of the upper profile of the word and do not use further infor-
mation about the actual shape of the ligatures. These techniques, because of their extreme
simplicity, are prone to erroneous ligature detection, such as, in case of not actually closed
loops or when a valley occurs inside a character. Similarly, Chen et al. (1992) propose charac-
ter segmentation algorithm based on singularities and regularities. Accordingly, islands and
bridges are extracted from a word image. Vertical strokes represent islands and bridges rep-
resent the points connecting islands. However, segmentation points are investigated only on
bridges. The rules that use to dissect handwritten script based on heuristics that are derived by
visual analysis of the handwritten words. In literature, many systems target ligatures between
letters in cursive text, as they are natural segmentation points. Some systems investigate liga-
tures close to the baseline, but such efforts cannot brought fruitful results due to inherited
nature of certain characters such as ‘u’, ‘w’, ‘g’ etc that do not contain ligatures close to the
baseline. Other problems also rose in unconstrained cursive writing, as writers do not care the
reference lines such as skewed writing. Additionally, certain characters components are very
similar to ligatures such as ‘u’, ‘w’, ‘m’ etc. To avoid confusion contextual post processing
is mandatory following initial segmentation. Holt et al. (1992) detect ligatures by locating
minima in the upper contour of words, location of holes, contour direction and core region
position. Segmentation points are marked if a minima in the upper contour is located, except
if the contour component in question formed part of a hole. Similarly, Kimura et al. (1992)
and Kimura et al. (1993) propose segmentation–recognition system for handwritten postal
words, for segmentation part, they analyze upper contour. According to their investigation,
prospective segmentation points are laid in those local minima that are deep enough and are
adjacent to local maxima. Finally, segmentation points shift horizontally to the right or left
to obtain valid segmented characters.
Bozinovic and Srihari (1989) perform run length analysis to locate possible character
segmentation points. Accordingly, horizontal stretches of single-runs shorter than a thresh-
old determine by average stroke width are detected and termed as single-run stretch. The
single-run stretches with clear peaks and valley points in the upper contour are detected
and removed. Finally, the remaining ones split at middle point to obtain valid segmentation
points.
According to Cheriet (1993), there are key letters in cursive script that provide clue for
character segmentation. To extract key letters, face-up and facedown valleys along with open
loop regions in cursive script are detected. Finally, fine segmentation points are determined
by background analysis.
Han and Sethi (1995) perform segmentation on handwritten postal words. They use a set
of heuristic rules based on geometrical, topological and English character features. Segmen-
tation accuracy of 85.7% reported on 50 real-world address images. Yamada and Nakano
(1996) also investigate contour features for segmentation purpose in the complete word rec-
ognition system. The top word recognition rate is 91.7% with lexicon size of 50 words.
Eastwood et al. (1997) train a neural network with feature vectors representing Possible
Segmentation Points (PSPs) as well as “negative” features that represented the absence of
segmentation point. The feature vectors manually obtain from training and test words in the
CEDAR benchmark database. The accuracy of the network on a test set of PSPs is 75.9%.
Bretto et al. (1997, 2002) propose a segmentation algorithm using hypergraph theory. They
use hypergraph theory for developing image-processing applications such as segmentation.
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 265
However, the segmentation they have dealt with is for picture images and not for cursive
handwritten words.
Favata (1997) propose a system to segment and recognize characters of the word based
on character model word recognition approach. A segmentation algorithm over-segments the
word at possible segmentation points. Possible character interpretations of strokes between
two segmentation points are produced by using a window based scanning. Scanning proce-
dure is used to extract strokes by examining a word from left to right and sending them to
an OCR system. All possible combinations of the word are represented by constructing an
augmented, directed graph. A beam search matching algorithm is used in conjunction with
a lexicon constrains the graph to locate the best possible match. Recognition accuracy up to
81% is reported for the top choice using a 1,000 word lexicon.
Yanikoglu and Sandon (1998) employ linear programming to segment off-line cursive
handwriting. Accordingly, to locate successive segmentation points in cursive script, a cost
function is evaluated at each point along the baseline. The decision to segment at a partic-
ular point and angle is determined by the weighted sum of four features derive from global
characteristics of the handwriting such as the average character width, stroke thickness and
distance from the previous segmentation point. However, weights are obtained by performing
linear programming. In their tests with 750 words written by 10 writers, 97% of the letter
boundaries are correctly located.
Dimauro et al. (1998) propose an advance approach for segmenting cursive words as part
of a recognition system to read the amount on Italian bank cheque. The segmentation tech-
nique is based on a hypothesis-then-verification strategy. Initially, hypothesis is generated
in the form of blocks by segmentation technique embedded with the “drop falling” strategy.
Each detected “block” passed to a recognizer. If the block is rejected, a hypothesis would
be generated to segment the block by using a “drop falling” algorithm. Finally, hypothesis
verifications based on recognition confidence obtain from contextual knowledge. A nearest
neighbor technique employ for this process. Segmentation hypothesis is accepted if it has
high confidence, otherwise a different hypothesis would have been selected. 77.8% word
recognition accuracy is reported based on drop falling segmentation technique.
Blumenstein and Verma propose feature-based heuristic segmenter for off-line cursive
handwritten word segmentation (Verma and Blumenstein 1996; Blumenstein and Verma
1997; Verma et al. 1998). Latter, these segmentation points forward by heuristic segmenter
validated with a trained ANN (Blumenstein and Verma 1998a,b,c). Accordingly, valid seg-
mentation points are retained only. However, the segmentation of all characters is based on
the size of segregated character, if there is no segregated character in the cursive script then
whole process does not seem to be successful. Likewise, the accuracy of the estimate of
character segmentation (based on size of segregated character) is not satisfactory for off-line
script (Madhvanath and Govindaraju 2001). Hence, heuristic algorithm cannot deal with
the varying sizes of characters and words input to the system, which are very common in
cursive handwriting. Accordingly, Blumenstein and Verma (1999a,b) extended the previous
segmentation technique by adding contour feature extraction module to detect valleys based
on immediate slope change and vertical pixel density for adding more segmentation points.
Nevertheless, the technique cannot deal with segmentation of horizontally overlapped char-
acters. Above all, for validation of segmentation points, it is laborious and time consuming to
arrange ANN training set. Despite all efforts, ANN does not bring satisfactory performance
in validation of segmentation points and vote negatively to valid segmentation points as
well. That created another critical problem of miss-segmentation (Lee and Verma 2008a,b).
Finally, all features integrated into a fully functional word recognition system (Blumenstein
and Verma 1999a,b).
123
266 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Xiao and Leedham (2000) use knowledge of characters for cursive word segmentation into
characters. They identify discriminative structures in English letters and analyzed face-up
and facedown background transitions to locate blocks consisting of more than one letter. The
blocks are over-segmented based on the face-up and facedown background regions. Finally,
based on prior character knowledge and joining properties, over-segmented character sub-
components are merged. Character segmentation accuracy up to 80% is claimed on CEDAR
cursive words.
Nicchiotti et al. (2000) propose three steps segmentation algorithm. In first step possible
segmentation points are detected by analyzing the minima in the lower contour and holes.
The second step is the determination of cut direction of the segmentation point based on
minimum number of black pixels. Last step merges the over-segmented strokes back to the
main character based on heuristic rules. They report segmentation accuracy up to 86.9% on
850 words taken from CEDAR database.
Veloso et al. (2000) hypothesized segmentation of handwritten cursive words based on
natural segmentation points and ligatures. Accordingly, natural segmentation points are ana-
lyzed using histogram projection taken from five different angles and ligature candidates
obtained from morphological operations of opening and closing. To search best structuring
elements to determine ligature in the set of training words, they employ genetic algorithm.
Finally, Viterbi’s algorithm is implemented to determine qualified ligatures. Kavallieratou
et al. (2000) propose a simplified variation in transformation based learning (TBL) method
and extracted rules to detect segment boundaries. It includes two stages, a pre-segmentation
stage process provides a first estimation of the segment boundaries following a machine-
learning algorithm that refines the pre-segmentation and provides the final segment bound-
aries. They report character segmentation accuracy rate up to 82%. However, do not employ
benchmark database for experiments.
Blumenstein and Verma (2001) analyze character segmentation scheme that is an improved
version of old segmentation technique (Blumenstein and Verma 1999a,b). Following heu-
ristic segmentation, left character (preceding the segmentation point) and centre character
(centred on the segmentation point) are extracted. Confidences obtain from trained character
networks (upper and lower character network) and segmentation point’s validation neural
network fused to obtain final segmentation decision. Accordingly, two major experiments
are conducted using 300 test words from CEDAR database. The first experiment is based
on earlier single neural segmentation points validation scheme of Blumenstein and Verma
(1999a,b) while second based on fusion of neural confidences. It is demonstrated in second
experiment that fusion of neural confidences reduce segmentation errors and therefore, seg-
mentation accuracy is improved Blumenstein and Verma (2001). The comparative character
segmentation error rates for experiment I and II are tabulated in Table 1.
Verma (2002) over-segment cursive handwritten word and extracted left, centre charac-
ters and segmentation point to obtain a character confidence via neural validation. Finally,
all confidence values are fused to turn out correct segmentation points and true-segmented
characters. Average segmentation accuracy up to 73.62% reported for two major experiments
conducted on 300 CEDAR words with different settings.
Table 1 Comparison of segmentation error rate (%)
Experiments Over-segmentation Miss Bad Bad + correct anchorage points
I (Single neural validation) 8.15 1.45 14.26 9.6
II (Fused neural confidence) 7.47 2.04 11.64 6.3
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 267
Table 2 Segmentation error
rates
Author(s) Segmentation error rates (%)
Over Missed Bad
Cheng and Blumenstein (2005b) 8.73 0.1 8.63
Cheng and Blumenstein (2005a) 2.72 2.42 4.56
Verma (2003) propose rule-based segmentation of handwritten words. Following heuristic
segmentation, a sequence of rules proposed to check the validity of the existing segmentation
points and to cover miss-segmentation. Five reference lines are detected that made the entire
process computationally expensive. Finally, rules for removing and inserting segment lines
based on weak assumption; even though, neural network is trained for those assumptions but
require a lot of training. Despite all efforts, over-segmentation is 10.02% and bad segmen-
tation is up to 8.7%, however miss-segmentation is minimum up to 0.2%. Overall 81.08%
segmentation accuracy on CEDAR database is claimed.
Ghosh et al. (2004) propose direct segmentation approach in their fully automated off-line
handwriting recognition system. The segmentation phase employs many heuristic based set of
rules in an iterative procedure and finally a neural network validation system is implemented.
Accurate segmentation rate is 83.6%. However, over-segmentation and bad segmentation
is considerably high up to 10.8 and 5.4% respectively, whereas, missed segmentation rate
is 0.2%.
Cheng and Blumenstein (2005b) propose feature-based heuristic segmentation algorithm
consisted of two steps. In first step, prospective segmentation points are found by analyz-
ing ligatures and global characteristics of handwriting. In the second step, fused left and
centre character confidence values. Additionally, trained ANN uses for segmentation points
validation based on modified direction features propose by Blumenstein et al. (2003). The
improved segmentation algorithm is examined on test set of CEDAR database. Latter, Cheng
and Blumenstein (2005a) improve their own previous work (Cheng et al. 2004; Cheng and
Blumenstein 2005b) and propose enhanced heuristic segmenter (EHS) to improve segmen-
tation of cursive handwriting. In the first step, enhanced heuristic segmenter makes use of
two enhanced features: ligature detection and neural assistance to locate prospective seg-
mentation points. In the second step, left, right character confidence outputs are fused with
neuro-segmentation point’s validation. CEDAR benchmark database is employed for training
and testing steps. Comparative study of segmentation error rates are shown in Table 2.
Samrajya et al. (2006) investigate Hypergraph model to segment a cursive handwritten
word image into isolated characters. Hypergraph model treats an image as packets of pixels.
Authors claim that by recombining these packets of different sizes a given word image can be
segmented into characters if at least one of the combinations provided a correct segmentation.
However, neither segmentation results are presented for comparison nor the technique seems
to yield successful results for horizontal overlapped and touching characters.
Dawoud (2007) introduce iterative cross section sequence graph (ICSSG) for the character
segmentation. ICSSG tracks the characters growth at equally spaced thresholds. The itera-
tive thresholding reduces the effect of information loss associated with image binarization.
However, the experiments are performed on handwritten digits only.
Recently, Lee and Verma (2008a) propose a new segmentation algorithm for off-line cur-
sive handwriting recognition. Initially, word images are dissected heuristically based on pixel
density between upper and lower baselines. Each segment passed through multiple expert-
based validation processes to determine valid character boundaries. An average segmentation
123
268 A. Rehman, T. Saba
error up to 5.25% for miss-segmentation, over-segmentation and bad segmentation is reported
on 218 test words of CEDAR. Additionally, Lee and Verma (2008b) propose over-segmen-
tation and validation strategy based segmentation algorithm for off-line cursive handwriting
recognition. In the first step, word image over-segmented such that all valid segmentation
points are marked. In the second step, invalid segmentation points are detected and extracted
through a validation module. An average segmentation error up to 5.50% for miss-segmen-
tation, over-segmentation and bad segmentation is reported on 311 test words of CEDAR.
2.2 Implicit segmentation based script recognition (recognition based segmentation)
Segmentation based approaches try to segment a given word into smaller entities. It is proved
to be difficult however, not impossible to segment a given word into its individual characters
without knowing the word’s identity. Researchers usually split a word into entities that do
not necessarily correspond to exactly one character each, and therefore, consider a number
of possible segmentation alternatives at the same time. Typically, an over-segmentation of
the given input word is attempted. That is, the image of a character that occurs within a word
may be broken into several constituents, also called graphemes.
At the same time, the segmentation procedure avoids merging two adjacent characters, or
parts of two adjacent characters, into the same constituent. A large number of heuristics for
achieving such kind of segmentation have been reported in the literature.
Once through pre-segmentation, the given input word has been transformed into a
sequences of graphemes, (g1, g2, . . . , gn). All possible combinations of adjacent graph-
emes up to a maximum number M are performed based on contextual processing to finalize
segmentation decision. However, implicit segmentation-based methods are employed as an
alternative to integrate segmentation and recognition processes. Accordingly, Hidden Mar-
kov Models (HMM) based approaches are emerged. Actually, this approach is developed for
speech recognition where it brought fruitful results (Rabiner 1989). Therefore, its success
diverts researchers’ attention to apply HMM in word recognition. Bose and Kuo (1994), Elms
et al. (1989) prove benefits of applying HMM based techniques to recognize printed words.
Procter and Elms (1998) use technique of Elms et al. (1989) for handwritten numeral strings
recognition. Other works, Zimmermann and Bunke (2002) also stamp HMM based approach
as a good method for recognizing handwritten words. From these studies, it is concluded
that integrating segmentation and recognition can handle problems faced in classical seg-
mentation of both handwritten numeral strings and handwritten words. However, Britto et al.
(2001a,b) observe some cost attached to that integration, loss in recognition performance is
caused by combining segmentation with recognition. Therefore, a segmentation/verification
strategy seems to be suitable to compensate the loss in terms of recognition cause by the
implicit-segmentation strategy. Nevertheless, on the downfall side, it also increases compu-
tation time considerably. Latter, Bretto et al. (2002) present a segmentation algorithm using
hypergraph theory. They use hypergraph theory for developing image-processing applica-
tions such as segmentation. However, the segmentation they deal with is for picture images
and not for cursive handwritten words.
On the other hand, some recognition based segmentation techniques also generate a set
of hypotheses by using windows, scanning the image and then select the best hypothesis
based on recognition. For example, Burges et al. (1992) propose an implicit based segmen-
tation technique that utilizes a combination of linear searching and neural classification. The
technique is termed as Shortest Path Segmentation and is two steps process. First, number
of equally spaced windows combines to determine legal cuts. Second, a graph is created
that contains node representing all acceptable window segments. Based on neural network
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 269
decision, each node in the graph is assigned a distance. The shortest traversal through the
graph use to represent the best segmentation/recognition of the word.
Fukushima and Imagawa (1993) also employ a selective criteria based on neural model.
The search strategy explores a search area with a size larger than one character. Finally, based
on features representing recognizable patterns a word image is traversed. Consequently, such
patterns activate particular nodes in the neural network. Once a recognizable pattern is found,
the network segments and recognizes a character in the area automatically. Following initial
recognition, search to recognize next character in the neighboring area started and so on.
In implicit segmentation domain many other techniques exist that do not segment the
image directly as in explicit segmentation. However, it segments a feature representation of
the word image. Most of Hidden Markov-based schemes lie in this category (Gilloux 1993;
Gilloux et al. 1993; Chen and Kundu 1993; Chen et al. 1994, 1995; Procter and Illingworth
1999; Tay et al. 2003 etc).
Lu and Shridhar (1996) also use lexicon to direct both word segmentation and recognition.
Likewise, Sin and Kim (1997) approach models all handwritten Latin words or composite
characters with a finite state network (FSN) using a set of Hidden Markov models. Each
HMM is associated to either a letter or a ligature pattern, while the FSN stands for a word
or a character model that is designed as a network of letter and ligature HMMs, according to
both the writing order and the spatial structure. Recognition is performed by applying either
graph searching or linear searching algorithms, so that segmentation is achieved simulta-
neously with recognition. However, since it needs to learn HMMs for words, the propose
solution is language and lexicon dependent. Similarly, Tay et al. (2003) fuse HMMs and ANN
for off-line cursive handwriting segmentation/recognition. Segmentation graph is generated
that describes all possible ways to segment a word into letters. To recognize a word, ANN
computes the observation probabilities for best path of each segmentation candidate in the
segmentation graph. Finally, the best path probabilities are multiplied to compute likelihood
for each word in the lexicon using fused letter HMMs.
Typically, it is supposed that the recognizer not only returns an ordered list of class names,
but also render a confidence for each class. Once all possible combinations of graphemes
are classified, a search procedure is started based on the confidence values return by the
classifier, the best sequence of characters matching the input word image. Typically, linear
searching or some A*-type search algorithm is used, propose by Ha et al. (1998). The search
procedure often runs under the control of a dictionary of legal words. As an alternative, the
dictionary may be used in a post-processing phase. Many instances of this generic procedure
are reported in the literature (Favata 2001; Liu and Gader 2002). An advantage of segmen-
tation based word recognition schemes as discussed above is that the problem is reduced to
isolated character recognition—a problem for which a number of quite mature algorithms
have become available. On the other hand, graphemes (parts of character) recombination is
based on heuristic rules that are derived by human intuition.
Cavalin et al. (2006) propose two-stage HMM based method for recognition of strings
of characters (words or numerals). In first stage, an implicit segmentation scheme is applied
to segment either words or numeral strings and verification performs in the second stage.
Accordingly, foreground and background features are combined to compensate the loss in
terms of recognition rate during implicit segmentation in previous stage. Word recognition
accuracy up to 88.2% is reported on lexicon of size 3,771.
Hamamura et al. (2007) propose an analytic word recognition algorithm based on improved
posteriori probability ratio. Accordingly, a new evaluation function is proposed and they
claimed 9.1% improvement in recognition accuracy. The development of automatic pro-
cedures that is able to learn segmentation rules from training data. Finally, automatically
123
270 A. Rehman, T. Saba
inferred parameters guided searching process for fitting the optimal character hypotheses.
However, no benchmark database is employed for experimentations.
In conclusion, the challenge is to find some way to compensate the loss in recognition
performance resulting from the necessary trade-off between segmentation and recognition
carried out in an implicit segmentation-based method (Bortolozzi et al. 2005). Implicit meth-
ods use argument that in case of cursive script, segmentation cannot be attained without
recognition, because without understanding the character included in the word there is no
good criteria to avoid segmentation errors. Nevertheless, there are evidences that implicit seg-
mentation approaches for word recognition has some drawbacks, such as, in case of words
with broken, touched, illegible or missed characters cannot recognize. On the hand, classical
approaches for segmentation also face serious problems such as collapse problem. This para-
dox is discussed by Sayre (1973). Therefore, success seems in the hybrid strategies, detailed
in next section
2.3 Hybrid strategies
Analytical approaches (explicit and implicit) for segmentation and recognition have their
own shortcomings. Consequently, hybrid strategies are suggested to overcome their individ-
ual limitations discussed below.
Explicit based segmentation approach or external segmentation, in which segments are
identified based on “character-like” properties, use spatial information. Such approaches
propose all character hypotheses to the recognizer that may consists of full character, part
of a character termed as junks, multiple characters or a part of one character attach with
the other character due to overlapping of characters even in normalized cursive handwrit-
ing. Consequently, recognizer apart from performing classification between characters also
needs to model the junk characters and multiple characters that are known as collapse prob-
lems (LeCun et al. 1998), one of the main causes of high misclassification rate. To handle
this problem, some researchers include character knowledge into segmentation process and
employ ANN trained on valid characters to give high confidence for each segmentation point
(Cheng and Blumenstein 2005a; Lee and Verma 2008a,b). Even with various heuristic, rules
and algorithms sill this approach does not provide robust segmentation for real world cursive
handwriting except for machine printed characters or hand printed characters (Lee and Verma
2008a,b; Zhang et al. 2007; Camastra 2007).
On the other hand, implicit based segmentation searches the image for components that
match classes in its alphabet also termed as recognition based segmentation. This type of
approaches delays all segmentation decisions until recognition (Tay et al. 2003). Initially, the
word image is divided into maximum number of slices Xmax, then different strategies are
adopted to combine these slices to form true character hypothesis based on recognition. How-
ever, there is a trade-off in selecting Xmax, smaller the value is base of efficient computation as
less number of character hypothesis are generated but on the downfall side characters written
wide cannot be covered in the hypothesis. Whereas, larger value of Xmax, generates more
slices that again have two main shortcomings. First, it is computationally expensive since
it increases number of character hypothesis and therefore, all hypotheses generated must
be evaluated. This very important issue has been ignored often in the literature (Oliveira
et al. 2005). Second, number of junks are increased significantly that is additional burden on
character recognizer in modelling junks (Cavalin et al. 2006).
Another problem that is faced by implicit based recognizer is that segment of one character
look like part of another character or a valid character itself, which is called the class-overlap-
ping problem (Tay 2002). Additionally, there is evidence that segmentation upon recognition
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 271
Fig. 2 a The original IAM word image sample which is cursive and slanted, b resulting image after slant
correction, c resulting image after thinning, d all CSC over-segmenting the image, e fine segmented word after
thresholding
has some shortcoming particularly in case of word with illegible or missed characters (Sayre
1973). Furthermore, Britto et al. (2001a,b) have observed some loss in recognition perfor-
mance caused by recognition based segmentation.
Therefore, keeping in view limitations of each analytical approach, success seems to fuse
both approaches termed as hybrid strategies. This strategy also uses pre-segmentation as in
classical approaches, however definition of primitives are not so strict. Therefore, word image
are dissected to ensure that all legal character boundaries are marked. To remove incorrect
segmentation points obtain as a trade-off during dissection, a set of hypothesis are tested by
merging segments of the image and invoking a classifier to score the combination of seg-
ments. The literature is replete with hybrid approaches proposed by a number of researchers
to optimize algorithms with linear searching techniques, contextual and lexicon knowledge
(Casey 1992; Kimura et al. 1992; Favata and Srihari 1992; Bruel 1994; Sinha et al. 1993;
Kim and Govindaraju 1997; Kim et al. 2000; Hanhong 2002; Liu et al. 2002; Grandidier
2003; Koch et al. 2004; Farah et al. 2005 etc)
More recently Rehman and Dzulkifli (2008) proposed a new fast segmentation approach
for off-line cursive handwritten words with accuracy up to 91.21 on a subset of IAM database.
Authors proposed certain rules to analyze ligatures along with knowledge of character shape.
Stepwise results are exhibited in the Fig. 2.
This concludes the section on character segmentation. Many systems are briefly outlined
in all categories as stipulated by Casey and Lecolinet (1996). In fact, some of the most
successful systems have been segmentation based, which has many problems. The detailed
analysis (Blumenstein and Verma 2001; Verma et al. 2004; Chen and Leedham 2005; Rehman
and Dzulkifli 2008) has shown that most existing segmentation algorithms have three major
problems: (1) inaccurately cutting characters into parts; (2) missing many segmentation
points; and (3) over-segmenting a character many times, which contributes to errors in the
word recognition process. Most researchers have evaluated their segmentation accuracy as
an overall word recognition performance. Additionally, database and experimental setup
123
272 A. Rehman, T. Saba
is different among the researchers. Hence it is difficult, if not impossible, to compare their
results. However, some of the top results for segmenting cursive words are outlined in Table 3
for fair comparison. The list is by no means exhaustive; however the objective was to pro-
vide a representative spread of the techniques that have been developed for the past two
decades.
3 Feature extraction
The purpose of feature extraction is to achieve most relevant and discriminative features
to identify a symbol uniquely (Blumenstein et al. 2007). In OCR applications, extracted
features used to distinguish between all existing character classes. The research commu-
nity is agreed that discriminative feature plays an important role in successful recognition
of printed and cursive characters (Suen 1986; Impedovo et al. 1991). Accordingly, many
feature extraction technique are proposed and investigated in the literature that may be used
for numeral and character recognition. Consequently, recent techniques show very prom-
ising results for separated handwritten numerals recognition (Wang et al. 2005), however
the same accuracy has not been attained for cursive character classification (Blumenstein
et al. 2007). It is mainly due to ambiguity of the character without context of the entire
word (Cavalin et al. 2006). Second problem is the illegibility of some characters due to
nature of cursive handwriting, distorted and broken characters (Blumenstein et al. 2003).
Finally, the segmentation process may cause some irregularities depending on the approach
adopted (Blumenstein and Verma 2001). Research community has been trying to surmount
above-mentioned problems in two ways. Firstly, exploration of features best for recogni-
tion. Secondly, search of different classification schemes and their fusion (Lazzerini and
Marcelloni 2000).
According to Suen (1986), there are two main categories of features: statistical features
and structure features. Statistical features derive from statistical distribution of every point
in a character matrix such as moments, histograms, profile projection and zoning (Kimura
et al. 1992; Blumenstein et al. 2003, 2007; Kim et al. 2000; Vamvakas et al. 2007).
Statistical features are also known as global features as they are usually extracted and
averaged in sub-images such as meshes (Kang and Kim 2004). Initially, statistical features
are developed to recognize machine printed characters (Suen et al. 1980). While, structural
features are based on geometric and topological features of characters such as contours, loops,
end points (Koerich et al. 2003). In this regard, Trier et al. (1996) present a detailed review of
feature extraction methods for off-line isolated character recognition such as template match-
ing, deformable templates, zoning, contour profile, profile projection, geometric moments
invariants, Zernike moments, Fourier descriptors, Spline curve estimation. The methods are
applicable to gray level character images, binary character images, thinned character images,
character contours and character graphs.
The statistical features in its simplest form use all points in the character matrix of binary
image that contains black and white pixels only. Initially, all extracted features are employed to
template matching, where similarities are judged from measured distance between unknown
pattern and stored patterns. The minimum distance between unknown pattern and stored
patters is the best match (Suen 1986; Impedovo et al. 1991; Aburas and Rehiel 2008). On
the other hand, uses of all that features create dimensionality problems commonly known as
curse of dimensionality (Tay 2002). Therefore, to overcome this problem, researchers explore
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 273
Table 3 Comparison of Segmentation Results
Author Segmentation
approach
Segmentation
rate (%)
Database used Comments
Tappert et al. (1990) Feature
based + rule
based
81.08 CEDAR Number of
words not
mentioned
Han and Sethi (1995) Heuristic
algorithm
85.7 Latin
handwritten
Words on 50
real mail
envelopes
Only 50 mail
envelopes
are taken
Eastwood et al. 1997 ANN + feature
based seg-
mentation
75.9 Cursive Latin
handwritten
from
CEDAR
database
100,000
training
pattern used
Blumenstein and Verma (1997) ANN + con-
ventional
method
81.21 2568 words
from
CEDAR
Yanikoglu and Sandon (1998) Linear pro-
gramming
97 750 words No bench
mark
database
used
Nicchiotti et al. (2000) Rule-based 86.9 CEDAR 850 test words
used only
Kavallieratou et al. (2000) Transfer based
learning
82 Not mentioned Not mentioned
Verma and Gader (2000) Feature
based + ANN
76.52 CEDAR Words number
not
mentioned
Verma et al. (2001) Fusion of
multiple
word
recognition
techniques
91 CEDAR 317 words
used for
testing
Blumenstein and Verma (2001) Feature
based + ANN
78.85 CEDAR Words number
not
mentioned
Verma (2002) Feature
based + ANN
84.87 CEDAR 300 test words
only
Verma (2003) Rule-based 81.08 CEDAR Words number
not
mentioned
Cheng et al. (2004) Feature
based + ANN
95.27 CEDAR 317 test words
Cheng and Blumenstein (2005a) Ligature
detec-
tion + ANN
84.19 CEDAR 317 test words
Samrajya et al. (2006) Hyper-
graph + liga-
ture
analysis
Not men-
tioned
CEDAR Not mentioned
Rehman and Dzulkifli (2008) Ligature and
shape
analysis
91.21 CEDAR 2,936 words
123
274 A. Rehman, T. Saba
statistical distribution of points in a character matrix. In statistical domain, five methods are
reported in the literature.
3.1 Moments
Initially Hu (1962) introduces moments features for pattern recognition, commonly known as
moments invariants as features are invariant to rotation, scale and translation. Later, moments
the research community with less or more modification such as raw moments and central
moments has extensively used invariants. Raw moments are used as a coordinate function
for each point in the image (Tucker and Evans 1974). Suen et al. (1980) and Impedovo et al.
(1991) calculate central moments by taking distance of points from center of gravity. It is
demonstrated that central moments enhance recognition accuracy and are invariant to the
translation of the images in comparison of raw moments.
3.2 Zoning
In this method of feature extraction, character matrix is divided into several small zones.
These zones are further manipulated from different aspects to extract features such as den-
sity of zones, transitions of foreground to background and vice versa. Projection: where the
2D image is represented as one-dimensional and features are computed accordingly (Kim
et al. 2000). Gader et al. (1997) propose feature extraction technique based on transition
information for character classification. Their technique calculates and locates transition of
pixels from background to foreground and vice versa horizontally and vertically. Recently
Vamvakas et al. (2007), propose a hybrid feature extraction scheme for isolated Greek charac-
ter recognition. The first scheme calculates density of each zone composing character image
and second computes projection area of left, right, up and down character’s profile.
3.3 Crossing and distances
Few researchers have also employed crossing and distances features. Number of times an
image crossed vector at certain angles such as 0◦, 45◦, 90◦ etc and distance of character
boundaries from a bounding box. Kim et al. (2000) extract two sets of features using cross-
ing and distances. The first set consists of transition features that are calculated from rows
and columns of character image and the second set is composed of distances of the first image
pixel detected from the upper & lower boundaries along the vertical lines and from left &
right boundaries along horizontal lines (Suen et al. 1980; Impedovo et al. 1991).
(i) Characteristic loci: In this type of features, horizontal and vertical vectors are crossed
from each background pixel and count crossing of line segment in the horizontal and
vertical direction (Knoll 1969).
(ii) n- Tuples: This feature extraction scheme simply uses occurrence of all black and
white pixels in the image (Ullmann 1969).
On the other hand, in literature, structural features are also investigated to represent charac-
ters with high tolerance to distortions and style variations. In this domain, researchers have
explored extensively geometrical and topological features of character image (Govindan and
Shivaprasad 1990). In this regard, Arica and Yarman-Vural (2001) also present a compre-
hensive review on structural features information. It includes all structural features such as:
maxima and minima, shape, cross points, branch points, strokes and their direction, cusps
below and above a threshold, angular change, degree of curvature, nature of the starting and
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 275
ending points, their coordinates, the distance and the primitive features such as line segments,
intersection of line segment, length of line segment, convex polygons, and loops, etc. More-
over, Trier et al. (1996) emphasis that contour can also be used as features such as height
ratio,width of the character, vertical and horizontal profile ratio, location of maxima and min-
ima in profiles. However, popular techniques for structural features extraction are coding and
graphs. In the former technique, strokes of the character are mapped in 2D parameter space
and in the later, the character is divided into a set of topological fragments such as strokes,
loops, cross points etc then these fragments are represented by relational graphs (Arica and
Yarman-Vural 2001). Again, there are two types of image representation by graphs. The
first explores relationships between strokes and edges (Lu et al. 1991) and second, uses
coordinates of the character shape (Cheng et al. 1993).
A number of techniques extract features from character’s contours. Kimura and Shridhar
(1991) divide contour profile into two halves and discrete function of each half is approxi-
mated to extract features. Yamada and Nakano (1996) explore direction histogram in character
image to extract features. A multi-template based strategy with clustering feature is adopted to
recognize segmented characters. Likewise, Kimura et al. (1997) evaluate features by calculat-
ing local histograms based on chain code information for segmented character classification.
Krzyyzak et al. (1990) extract features from inner and outer contours of characters: simple
topological features extracted from the inner contours and fifteen Fourier descriptors are
extracted from the outer contours. Oh and Suen (1998) extract two feature set based on dis-
tance transformation and Directional Distance Distribution (DDD). In the first feature set,
distance of each white pixel to the nearest black pixel in the character image is calculated
without character skeletonization. The second feature set composes of information encoding
both black/white and directional distance distributions. Additionally, a new method of map
tiling is introduced and is applied to the DDD feature to improve its discriminative ability.
All experiments are carried out on three different sets of characters consisting of numerals,
English letters, and Hangul letters. Promising results reported to confirm the best combina-
tion of DDD feature and the map tiling. Blumenstein et al. (2003, 2004, 2007) and Verma
(2002, 2003) and Verma et al. (2004) use directional features extracted from character con-
tours. The technique replaces foreground pixels of character contours with suitable direction
values. Finally, image is divided into windows to extract features. Likewise, Mitrpanont and
Limkonglap (2007) also analyze contours of Thai characters to capture movement of features
for Thai character recognition. Recently, Blumenstein et al. (2007) investigate an improved
feature extraction technique that concerns with local features and in this technique character
contours provide direction information. In this anticipated technique the foreground pixels
are replaced from a character contour to suitable numerical direction values using chain
code information. Finally, the image is divided into several windows, and from each window
features are extracted
Other studies by some researchers have also integrated these complementary features (sta-
tistical and structural) to investigate properties of character in order to improve recognition
accuracy (Britto et al. 2004). Camastra and Vinciarelli (2001, 2003) propose hybrid feature
extraction technique for character recognition. Structural features derive from foreground
pixel density and directional information while statistical features include character’s frac-
tion below baseline and character’s width/ height ratio. Recently, Vamvakas et al. (2007)
integrate two types of statistical features: density features and profile projection features
to recognize off-line Greek characters. They have demonstrated that hybridization brought
better recognition accuracy as compare to individual scheme.
Fourier descriptors are also explored by research community for character recognition.
Shridhar and Badreldin (1984) combine topological features with Fourier descriptors to
123
276 A. Rehman, T. Saba
enhance character recognition performance. Likewise, Trier et al. (1996) use Fourier descrip-
tors to represent skeleton of characters. On the other hand, Fourier descriptors have some
disadvantages: above all these features are not helpful to detect spur on the boundary of
characters and therefore, cannot distinguish between O and a Q (Impedovo et al. 1991).
However, this feature can be advantageous to filter noise on character’s boundary.
Hence, it concludes section on pre-processing, cursive word segmentation and character’s
feature extraction. Many systems are briefly outlined in all categories as stipulated by Casey
and Lecolinet (1996). In fact, some of the most successful systems have been segmenta-
tion based particularly for large lexicon environment (Lee and Verma 2008a). Some of the
top results are outlined in Table 4 for fair comparison. The list is by no means exhaustive,
however the objective is to provide a representative spread of the techniques that have been
developed for the past few decades for pre-processing, segmentation and feature extraction.
Nevertheless, it would be very difficult to assess pre-processing and segmentation techniques
separated from the systems for which they are developed.
Finally yet importantly, despite, having a certain level of maturity, still there is an urgent
need to improve the available segmentation and recognition technology (Gatos et al. 2007).
Over the period, researchers focused on accuracy and therefore, proposed computationally
expensive techniques in the course of word recognition (Samrajya et al. 2006). That resulted
into slow speed systems. However, it is very hard if not impossible to increase speed without
losing some accuracy (Koerich et al. 2003).
4 Off-line cursive script recognition
Script recognition techniques has been developed and investigated for the classification of
characters, words and features. The recognition techniques are divided into two main catego-
ries: statistical and intelligent recognition. The statistical classifiers make decision based on
statistical decision function. An optimal criterion is derived to determine the probability of
the observed pattern belonging to a certain class. Many successful recognition techniques are
based on this strategy such as template matching, Bayesian classifier, Polynomial discrim-
inate classifier, Fuzzy logic/rules, k-Nearest–Neighbor (K-NN). However, some statistical
methods require all training samples be stored and compared for the classification process
(Liu and Fujisawa 2005). That has been found to be impractical in real-world applications.
Recently, neural network classifiers are proved to be powerful and successful for character/
word recognition (Verma et al. 2004; Blumenstein et al. 2007). However, to improve the
intelligence of these ANNs, huge iterations, complex computations, and learning algorithms
are needed, which also lead to consume the processor time. Therefore, if the recognition
accuracy is improved, the consumed learning time will increase and vice versa. Which is the
main drawback of ANN based approaches (Aburas and Rehiel 2008). HMM-based classi-
fiers remained highly successful for numeric recognition and recognition rates above 98%
for off-line handwritten, isolated numerals are reported in the literature (Cavalin et al. 2006;
Britto et al. 2004; Arica and Yarman-Vural 2002; Cai and Liu 1999). Likewise, for the global
word recognition problem, HMMs based techniques are growing successfully (Günter and
Bunke 2005; Schambach 2005; Viard-Gaudin et al. 2005; Grandidier 2003; Kundu and Chen
2002; Senior and Robinson 2002; Plamondon and Srihari 2000; El-Yacoubi et al. 1999). On
the other hand, for analytical approaches, neural network classification has been commonly
used in conjunction with dynamic programming (Gader et al. 1997).
Recently, few researchers have employed support vector machines for numeral/character
classification successfully and promising results above 99% are reported (Liu and Fujisawa
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 277
Table 4 Performance comparison of script recognition accuracy
Authors Classifier Lexicon
size (in
words)
Problem
domain
RR (%) Constraints
Caesar et al. (1993) ANN 400 Words
(ENG)
94.5 Omni, Holistic
Burges et al. (1993) DP/ANN 1,000 Zip code
and
hand-
written
words
47 Unc, Omni
Chen et al. (1994) HMM 271 City names 72.3 Unc, Omni
Gader et al. (1994) ANN/DP 100 Address
mail
USPS
85.8 Unc, Omni
Cho et al. (1995) HMM 10,000 Images
from real
enve-
lopes
67.09 Cur, Omni
Bunke et al. (1995) HMM 150 Words
(ENG)
98.40 Cur, WD
Gader et al. (1995) DP 746 NIST 80.41 Hand-printed,
Omni
Gilloux et al. (1995a) HMM 100 LOB
corpus of
modern
English
92.7 Omni
Gilloux et al. (1995b) RBF/HMM 30 Legal amount
words of
French
postal/cheque
83.7 Omni
Guillevic and Suen (1993) HMM/KNN 32 CENPARMI
cheque
Database
71.8 Omni, Holistic
Olivier et al. (1995) HMM 27 French
checks
72.0 Omni, Holistic
Mohamed and Gader (1996) HMM/DP 100 City
Names
(ENG)
89.3 Unc, Omni
Kim and Govindaraju (1997) DP 1,000 Legal
amount
of Bank
checks
73.8 Unc, Omni
Knerr et al. (1997) NN/HMM 30 Legal &
courtesy
amount
of bank
76.7 Omni, Holistic
Knerr et al. (1998) HMM 30 LA
words(ENG)
92.9 Omni, Analytic
Guillevic and Suen (1998) HMM/KNN 30 LA
words(ENG)
86.7 Cur, Omni
Farouz et al. (1998) HMM/
ANN
1,000 Words
(ENG)
95.5 Unc., Omni
Dzuba et al. (1998) DP 40,000 Words
(ENG)
60.7 Cur., Omni
123
278 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Table 4 continued
Authors Classifier Lexicon
size (in
words)
Problem
domain
RR (%) Constraints
Chiang (1998) NN 100 USPS
database
mail
87.4 Omni,
Analyti-
cal
Knerr et al. (1998) HMM/
ANN
28 Legal
amount
words
(ENG)
92.9 Cur., Omni
Senior and Robinson (2002) HMM/NN 1,334 LOB
corpus of
modern
English
93.4 MONO,
Analyti-
cal
Lallican and Viard-Gaudin (1998) HMM/
ANN
197 Words
(ENG)
92.1 Omni,
Analyti-
cal
Procter and Illingworth (1999) HMM 713 LOB
database
88.4 Cur, WD
Madhvanath et al. (1999) DP 1,000 Street
names
US mail
74 Cur,
Holistic
Omni.
El-Yacoubi et al. (1999) HMM 1,000 City
Names(FR)
88.9 Unc, Omni
Kim et al. (2000) HMM/
MLP
32 LA words 92.2 Cur, Omni
Mohamed and Gader (2000) HMM/
Fuzzy
100 USPS mail
stream
78.2 Unc, Omni
Scagliola and Nicchiotti (2000) DP 1,000 CEDAR
database
83.8 Cur, Omni
Marti and Bunke (2001) HMM 7,719 English
sentence
60.05 Unc, Omni
Favata (2001) DP 1,000 CEDAR
database
82 Unc, Omni
Freitas et al. (2001) HMM 39 Isolated
words
77 Unc, Omni
Oliveira et al. (2002) MLP 12 Numerical
strings
87.2 Unc, Omni
Xu et al. (2003) HMM/
MLP
29 Month
words
85.3 Unc, Omni
Kundu and Chen (2002) HMM 100 Postal
words
88.2 Unc, Omni
Arica and Yarman-Vural (2002) HMM 1,000 Characters 90.8 Cur, WD
Koch et al. (2004) MLP 1,000 Letters
(FR)
67.8 Unc, Omni
Koerich et al. (2004) HMM 1,000 City
names(FR)
91 Unc, Omni
Howe et al. (2005) Boosted
trees
GW20 51.1–63.5
Günter and Bunke (2004) HMM + En-
sembled
methods
IAM 71.58
Günter and Bunke (2005) HMM + En-
sembled
methods
IAM 75.61–82.28
Viard-Gaudin et al. (2005) HMM IRONOFF 92.4
Koerich et al. (2005) SNN + HMM SRTP 77.62–99.29
Schambach (2005) HMM Siemens 60
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 279
Table 4 continued
Authors Classifier Lexicon
size (in
words)
Problem
domain
RR (%) Constraints
Koerich et al. (2006) SNN + HMM SRTP 78
Gatos et al. (2006a) K-NN 3,799 IAM 81.05 Unc, Ana-
lytical
Gatos et al. (2006b) SVM IAM 87.68
Tomoyuki et al. (2007) Posterior
probabil-
ity/
DP
1,646 City names
(mail of
Euro-
pean
coun-
tries)
80.2 Unc, Ana-
lytical
Pinales Ruiz et al. (2007) CNN 3,410 CEMPAR-
MI
(Eng-
lish + French)
93.5 Unc,
Holistic
RR recognition rate, Unc unconstrained, WD writer dependent, Cur cursive, Omni Omni writer, MONO single
writer, K-NN K-nearest-neighbor, LOB lancaster–OSLO/Bergen, USPS United State Postal Serves
2005). Moreover, support vector machines also have been used successfully for classification
of words in recent studies (Gatos et al. 2006b).
4.1 Script recognition using fused classifiers
Multiple classifiers combination for handwriting recognition is a new trend growing signif-
icantly. It has also been found that the use of multistage and combined classifiers has been
more reliable than the classification decision of the best individual classifier for numeral/char-
acter classification (Camastra and Vinciarelli 2003; Cao et al. 1995). This idea is presented in
the literature under various title such a: classifier fusion (?), classifier combination (Alkoot
and Kittler 1999), mixture of experts. Moreover, researchers support different combination
strategies in terms of accuracy and reliability. Some interesting results and comparison can
be found in Suen et al. (1993), Alkoot and Kittler (1999), Verma (2002), Breukelen et al.
(2000), Chellapilla et al. (2006).
More recently, ensemble of classifiers in the fields of machine learning and pattern recog-
nition is introduced. The main theme behind ensemble of classifiers is that several classifiers
are emerged from one classifier. It is generated by adjustment of different parameters such
as, changing the training set (Breiman 1996), the input features (Ho 1998; Optiz 1999), the
input data by injecting randomness (Valentini and Dietterich 2002) or still the parameters
and the architecture of the base classifiers (Partridge and Yates 1996).
Few researchers have implemented ensemble of classifiers to improve both accuracy and
reliability of the handwriting recognition systems (Nishimura et al. 1999; Günter and Bunke
2003; Oliveira et al. 2003a; Morita et al. 2004; Liu and Narukawa 2004)
Few researchers have followed the strategy of verification on the bargaining of speed.
Such kind of scheme has been successfully applied to handwriting recognition in (Takahashi
and Griffin 1993; Zhou et al. 2000; Britto et al. 2002; Oliveira et al. 2003b). Besides that,
two stage classification systems are also adopted by few researchers. At first stage simple
and fast classifier worked out while on the second stage, more complex and trained classifier
123
280 A. Rehman, T. Saba
is applied to classify the rejected pattern of first stage (Vuurpijl et al. 2003; Milgram et al.
2004).
The intelligent handwriting recognition systems are required to train with huge amount of
training data that is not feasible in realistic case. The collection of larger database has become
an issue in the community of handwriting recognition. Additionally, it is time consuming and
expensive to collect all possible samples and prepare its ground truth. Therefore, to avoid
huge collection of data, a new trend of training with synthetic data is invoked. Ha and Bunke
(1997) and Mori et al. (2000) made use of synthetic generation of isolated characters. The
synthetic generation of handwritten words and sentences has been described in (Guyon 1996;
Helmers and Bunke 2003). In an upper level, Varga and Bunke (2003) proposed geometrical
distortion model for complete lines of handwritten text. They have demonstrated through
several experiments using HMM-based classifiers that the use of synthetic data can improve
the recognition performance, particularly when the training data is small. Summary of rec-
ognition performances of recent off-line script recognition systems in chronological order
year wise are shown in Table 4.
5 Conclusion, remaining problems and suggestions
In this paper, a state of the art in off-line cursive script recognition and its associated com-
ponents are presented with the great emphasis on segmentation-based script recognition
technique. A critical literature review of existing techniques and comparative study of recent
achievements in the area has also been presented. Novel strategies by the authors to tackle
existing problems in preprocessing, segmentation-based script recognition have also been
presented.
The ultimate target of script recognition is to have machines which can read any text
with the same recognition accuracy as humans but at a faster rate (Lorette 1999). Indeed, the
research in this domain has shown significant improvement in this direction, however, future
research is required to focus on the following shortcomings.
Indeed, research is matured in area of numeral recognition however the same accuracy level
is not met with alphabetic. The problem of cursive character recognition remains very much
an open problem. It is mainly due to noisy, broken, multi-stroke, incomplete and ambiguous
characters. To handle this type of problem new feature extraction/selection techniques and
multistage classifiers are desired. Furthermore, salient features have still not been determined
to adequately distinguish difficult/ambiguous, segmented/cursive characters.
Regarding word recognition, the problem is seemed to be solved in small and static lexicons
using holistic strategy. However, recognition accuracy dropped significantly for larger lexi-
con. Therefore, segmentation based word recognition is an alternative solution. On the other
hand, segmentation algorithms have three major problems: first, inaccurately cutting charac-
ters into parts second, missing many segmentation points; third over-segmenting a character
many times, which contributes to errors in the word recognition process, finally, negative
effects on speed are also observed. Still, algorithms to tackle the variety of writing styles as
well as appropriate features to describe the suitable segmentation points of interest and for
subsequently determining correct/incorrect segmentations are lacking.
Therefore, it is required to propose and develop new strategies to improve segmentation
accuracy and overall accuracies for off-line cursive script recognition.
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 281
References
Aburas AA, Rehiel SA (2008) New promising off-line tool for Arabic handwritten character recognition based
On JPEG2000 image compression. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on introduction
and communication technology. From theory to applications (ICTTA, 08), pp 1–5
Alkoot M, Kittler J (1999) Experimental evaluation of expert fusion strategies. Pattern Recognit Lett 20(11–
13):1361–1369
Arica N, Yarman-Vural FT (2001) An overview of character recognition focused on off-line handwriting.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Appl Rev 31(2):216–233
Arica N, Yarman-Vural FT (2002) Optical character recognition for cursive handwriting. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell 24(6):801–813
Blumenstein M, Verma B (1997) A segmentation algorithm used in conjunction with artificial neural networks
for the recognition of real-world postal addresses. In: Proceedings of 2nd online world conference on
soft computing in engineering design and manufacturing
Blumenstein M, Verma B (1998a) An artificial neural network based segmentation algorithm for off-line hand-
writing recognition. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computational intelligence
and multimedia applications, Gippsland, pp 306–311
Blumenstein M, Verma B (1998b) A neural based segmentation and recognition technique for handwritten
words. In: Proceedings of the world congress on computational intelligence, Anchorage, pp 1738–1742
Blumenstein M, Verma B (1998c) Conventional vs. neuro-conventional segmentation techniques for handwrit-
ing recognition: a comparison. In: Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE international conference on intelligent
processing systems, Gold Coast, pp 473–477
Blumenstein M., Verma B (1999a) Neural solutions for the segmentation and recognition of difficult words
from a benchmark database. In: Proceedings of the 5th international conference on document analysis
and recognition, Bangalore, pp 281–284
Blumenstein M, Verma B (1999b) A new segmentation algorithm for handwritten word recognition. In: Pro-
ceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks, Washington, vol 4, pp 878–882
Blumenstein M, Verma B (2001) Analysis of segmentation performance on the CEDAR benchmark database.
In: Proceedings of 6th international conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 1142–1146
Blumenstein M, Verma B, Basli H (2003) A novel feature extraction technique for the recognition of seg-
mented handwritten characters. In: Fairhurst M, Downton A (eds) Proceedings of the 7th international
conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 137–141
Blumenstein M, Liu XY, Verma B (2004) A modified direction feature for cursive character recognition. In:
Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks, Budapest, Hungary, pp 2983–2989
Blumenstein M, Liu XY, Verma B (2007) An investigation of the modified direction feature for cursive char-
acter recognition. Pattern Recognit 40:376–388
Bortolozzi F, de Souza Britto A, Jr, Oliveira LS, Morita M (2005) Recent advances in handwriting recognition.
In: Pal U, Parui SK, Chaudhuri BB (eds) Document analysis, pp 1–30
Bose CB, Kuo S (1994) Connected and degraded text recognition using hidden Markov model. Pattern Rec-
ognit 27(10):1345–1363
Bozinovic RM, Srihari SN (1989) Off-line cursive script word recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell 11(1):68–83
Breiman L (1996) Bagging predictors. Mach Learn 24(2):123–140
Bretto A, Azema J, Cherifi H, Laget B (1997) Combinatorics and image processing. Graph Models Image
Proces 59:256–277
Bretto A, Cherifi H, Aboutajdine D (2002) Hypergraph imaging: an Overview. Pattern Recognit 35:651–658
Breukelen TM, Duin R, Kittler J (2000) Combining multiple classifiers by averaging or by multiplying?.
Pattern Recognit 33(9):1475–1485
Britto A Jr, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2001a) An enhanced HMM topology in an LBA framework
for the recognition of handwritten numeral strings. Proc Int Conf Adv Pattern Recognit 1:105–114
Britto A Jr, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2001b) A two-stage HMM-based system for recognizing
handwritten numeral strings. In: Proceedings of the international conference on document analysis and
recognition, Seattle, pp 396–400
Britto A Jr, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen C-Y (2002) A string length predictor to control the level building of
HMMs for handwritten numeral recognition. In: Proceedings of 16th international conference on pattern
recognition, vol 4, pp 31–34
Britto A Jr, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2004) Foreground and background information in an HMM-
based method for recognition of isolated characters and numeral strings. In: Proceedings of the 9th
international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, pp 371–376
123
282 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Bruel T (1994) Design and implementation of a system for recognition of handwritten responses on US census
forms. In: Proceedings of the IAPR workshop on document analysis systems, Kaiserlautern, pp 237–264
Bunke H, Roth M, Schukat-Talamazzini E-G (1995) Off-line cursive handwriting recognition using hidden
Markov models. Pattern Recognit 28(9):1399–1413
Burges CJC, Be JI, Nohl CR (1992) Recognition of handwritten cursive postal words using neural networks.
In: Proceedings of the 5th United States Postal Service (USPS) advanced technology conference, pp
117–124
Burges CJC, Denker JS, Lecun Y, Nohi CR (1993) Off-line recognition of handwritten postal words using
neural networks. Int J Pattern Recognit Artif Intell 7(4):689–704
Caesar T, Gloger JM, Mandler E (1993) Preprocessing and feature extraction for a handwriting recognition
system. In: Proceedings of international conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 408–411
Cai J, Liu Z-Q (1999) Integration of structural and statistical information for unconstrained handwritten
numeral recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 21(3):263–270
Camastra F (2007) A SVM-based cursive character rcognizer. Pattern Recognit 40(12):3721–3727
Camastra F, Vinciarelli A (2001) Cursive character recognition by learning vector quantization. Pattern Rec-
ognit Lett 22:625–629
Camastra F, Vinciarelli A (2003) Combining neural gas and learning vector quantization for cursive character
recognition. Neurocomputing 51:147–159
Cao J, Ahmadi M, Shridhar M (1995) Recognition of handwritten numerals with multiple feature and multi-
stage classifier. Pattern Recognit 28(3):153–159
Casey RG (1992) Segmentation of touching characters in postal addresses. In: Proceedings of the 5th USPS
advanced technology conference, pp 743–754
Casey RG, Lecolinet E (1996) A survey of methods and strategies in character segmentation. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 18:690–706
Cavalin PR, Britto AS, Bortolozzi F, Sabourin R, Oliveira LS (2006) An implicit segmentation based method
for recognition of handwritten strings of characters. In: Proceedings of ACM symposium on applied
computing, pp 836–840
Chellapilla K, Shilman M, Simard P (2006) Combining multiple classifiers for faster optical character recog-
nition. In: Proceedings of international conference on document analysis systems, LNCS 3872. Springer,
pp 358–367
Chen M-Y, Kundu A (1993) An alternative approach to variable duration HMM in handwritten word recogni-
tion. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Buffalo,
pp 82–91
Chen Y, Leedham G (2005) Independent component analysis segmentation algorithm. In: Proceedings of the
8th international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR’05), vol 2, pp 680–684
Chen M-Y, Kundu A, Zhou J, Srihari SN (1992) Off-line handwritten word recognition using hidden Markov
model. In: Proceedings of the 5th USPS advanced T
Chen M-Y, Kundu A, Zhou J (1994) Off-line handwritten word recognition using a HMM type stochastic
network. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 16(5):481–496
Chen M-Y, Kundu A, Srihari SN (1995) Variable duration hidden Morkov model and morphological segmen-
tation for handwritten word recognition. IEEE Trans Image Process 4(12):1675–1687
Cheng CK, Blumenstein M (2005a) The neural based segmentation of cursive words using enhanced heuris-
tics. In: Proceedings of the 8th international conference on document analysis and recognition, vol 2, pp
650–654
Cheng CK, Blumenstein M (2005b) Improving the segmentation of cursive handwritten words using liga-
ture detection and neural validation. In: Proceedings of the 4th Asia Pacific international symposium on
information technology (APIS 2005), Gold Coast, pp 56–59
Cheng H, Hsu WH, Kuo MC (1993) Recognition of hand printed Chinese characters via stroke relaxation.
Pattern Recognit 26(4):579–593
Cheng CK, Liu XY, Blumenstein M, Muthukkumarasamy V (2004) Enhancing neural confidence-based seg-
mentation for cursive handwriting recognition. In: 5th International conference on simulated evolution
and learning, Busan, SWA-8
Cheriet M (1993) Reading cursive script by parts. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on frontiers
in handwriting recognition, Buffalo, 25–27 May, pp 403–408
Cheriet M, Kharma N, Liu C-Lin, Suen C-Y (2007) Character recognition systems (OCR). Wiley, pp 204–206
Chiang J-H (1998) A hybrid neural model in handwritten word recognition. Neural Netw 11(2):337–346
Cho W, Lee SW, Kim JH (1995) Modeling and recognition of cursive words with hidden Markov models.
Pattern Recognit 28(12):1941–1953
Dawoud A (2007) Iterative cross section sequence graph for handwritten character segmentation. IEEE Trans
Image Process 16(8):2150–2154
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 283
Dimauro D, Impedovo S, Pirlo G, Salzo A (1998) An advanced segmentation technique for cursive word recog-
nition. In: Lee SW (ed) Advances in handwriting recognition. World Scientific, pp 255–264. Technology
Conference, pp 563–579
Dunn CE, Wang, PSP (1992) Character segmenting techniques for handwritten text—a survey. In: Proceedings
of 11th international conference on pattern recognition, vol 2, pp 577–591
Dzuba G, Filatov A, Gershuny D, Kill I (1998) Handwritten word recognition, the approach proved by practice.
In: Proceedings of 6th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Taejon, pp 99–111
Eastwood B, Jennings A, Harvey A (1997) Neural network based segmentation handwritten words. In: Pro-
ceedings of 6th international conference on image processing and its applications, vol 2, pp 750–755
Ehrich RW, Koehler KJ (1975) Experiments in the contextual recognition of cursive script. IEEE Trans Com-
put 24:182–194
Elliman DG, Lancaster IT (1990) A review of segmentation and contextuel analysis techniques for text rec-
ognition. Pattern Recognit 23(3–4):337–346
Elms AJ, Procter S, Illingworth J (1989) The advantage of using an HMM-based approach for faxed word
recognition. Int J Document Anal Recognit 1:18–36
El-Yacoubi A, Gilloux M, Sabourin R, Suen CY (1999) An HMM-based Approach for on-line unconstrained
handwritten word modeling and recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 21(8):752–760
Farah N, Souici L, Sellami M (2005) Arabic word recognition by classifiers and context. J Comput Sci Technol
20(3):402–410
Farouz C, Gilloux M, Bertille JM (1998) Handwritten word recognition with contextual hidden Morkov mod-
els. In: Proceedings of 6th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Taejon, pp
133–142
Favata JT (1997) Character model word recognition. In: Downton AC, Impedovo S (eds) Progress in hand-
writing recognition, pp 57–61
Favata JT (2001) Off-line general handwritten word recognition using an approximate beam matching algo-
rithm. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 23:393–398
Favata JT, Srihari SN (1992) Recognition of general handwritten words using hypothesis generation and
reduction methodology. In: Proceedings of the 5th USPS advanced technology conference, pp 237–251
Freitas F, Bortolozzi, Sabourin R (2001, September) Handwritten isolated word recognition: an approach
based on mutual information for feature set validation. In: Proceedings of 6th international conference
on document analysis and recognition, Seattle, pp 665–669
Frishkopf LS, Harmon LD (1961) Machine reading of cursive script. In: Cherry C (ed) Information theory.
Butterworth, London pp 300–316
Fujisawa H, Nakano Y, Kurino K (1992) Segmentation methods for character recognition: from segmentation
to document structure analysis. Proc IEEE 80(7):1079–1092
Fukushima K, Imagawa T (1993) Recognition and segmentation of connected characters with selective atten-
tion. Neural Netw 6:33–41
Gader PD, Khabou MA (1996). Automatic feature generation for handwritten digit recognition. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 18(12):1256–1261
Gader PD, Mohammed MA, Chiang JH (1994) Handwritten word recognition with character and inter char-
acter neural networks. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B 27:158–164
Gader PD, Whalen M, Ganzberger M, Hepp D (1995) Hand-printed word recognition on a NIST data set.
Mach Vis Appl 8:31–41
Gader PD, Mohamed M, Chiang J-H (1997) Handwritten word recognition with character and inter-character
neural networks. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern 27(1):158–164
Gang L, Verma B, Kulkarni S (2002) Experimental analysis of neural network based feature extractors for cur-
sive handwriting recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE world congress on computational intelligence,
pp 2837–2841
Gatos B, Pratikakis I, Perantonis SJ (2006a) Hybrid off-line cursive handwriting word recognition. In: Pro-
ceedings of 18th international conference on pattern recognition (ICPR’06), vol 2, pp 998–1002
Gatos B, Pratikakis I, Kesidis AL, Perantonis SJ (2006b) Efficient off-line cursive handwriting word recogni-
tion. In: Proceedings of the 10th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition
Gatos B, Antonacopoulos A, Stamatopoulos N (2007) ICDAR 2007 handwriting segmentation context. In:
Proceedings of the international conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 1284–1288
Ghosh M, Ghosh R, Verma B (2004) A fully automated off-line handwriting recognition system incorporat-
ing rule based neural network validated segmentation and hybrid neural network classifier. Int J Pattern
Recognit Artif Intell 18(7):1267–1283
Gillies M (1992) Cursive word recognition using hidden markov models. In: Proc fifth US postal service
advanced technology conference, pp 557–562
123
284 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Gilloux M (1993) Hidden Markov models in handwriting recognition, fundamentals in handwriting recogni-
tion. In: Impedovo S (ed) NATO ASI Series F: Computers and Systems Sciences, vol 124. Springer,
New York pp 264–288
Gilloux M, Bertille JM, Leroux M (1993) Recognition of handwritten words in a limited dynamic vocabulary.
In: Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Buffalo, 25–27
May, pp 417–422
Gilloux M, Leroux M, Bertille J-M (1995a) Strategies for cursive script recognition using hidden Morkov
models. Mach Vis Appl 8:197–205
Gilloux M, Lemarie B, Leroux M (1995b) A hybrid radial basis function/hidden Morkov model handwritten
word recognition system. In: International conference on document analysis and recognition, Montreal,
pp 394–397
Govindan VK, Shivaprasad AP (1990) Character recognition—a review. Pattern Recognit 23:671–683
Grandidier F (2003) Un Nouvel Algorithme de Sélection de Caractéristiques-Application à la Lecture
Automatique de l’ecriture Manuscrite. PhD thesis, École de Technologie Supérieure, Montreal-Canada,
Janvier
Guillevic D, Suen CY (1993) Cursive script recognition: a fast reader scheme. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on documents analysis and recognition, pp 311–314
Guillevic D, Suen C (1998) HMM-KNN word recognition engine for bank check processing. In Proceedings
of international conference on pattern recognition, Brisbane, pp 1526–1529
Günter S, Bunke H (2003) Ensembles of classifiers for handwritten word recognition. Int J Document Anal
Recognit 5:224–232
Günter S, Bunke H (2004) Feature selection algorithms for the generation of multiple classier systems and
their application to handwritten word recognition. Pattern Recognit Lett 25(11):1323–1336
Günter S, Bunke H (2005) Off-line cursive handwriting recognition using multiple classifier systems. On the
influence of vocabulary, ensemble, and training set size. Optics Lasers Eng 43(3–5):437–454
Guyon (1996) Handwritten synthesis from handwritten glyphs. In: 5th International workshop on frontiers of
handwriting recognition, pp 309–312
Ha T, Bunke H (1997) Off-line handwritten numeral recognition by perturbation method. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell 19(5):535–539
Ha T, Zimmermann M, Bunke H (1998) Off-line handwritten numeral string recognition by combining seg-
mentation-based and segmentation-free methods. Pattern Recognit 31(3):257–272
Hamamura T, Akagi T, Irie B (2007) An analytic word recognition algorithm using a posteriori probability.
Proc Int Conf Document Anal Recognit 02:669–673
Han K, Sethi IK (1995) Off-line cursive handwriting segmentation. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on documents analysis and recognition, pp 894–897
Hanhong V (2002) Incorporating contextual character geometry in word recognition. In: Proceedings of 8th
international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, pp 123–127
Helmers M, Bunke H (2003) Generation and use of the synthetic training data in cursive handwriting recog-
nition. In: First Iberian conference on pattern recognition and image analysis, pp 336–345
Ho TK (1998) The random subspace method for constructing decision forests. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell 20(8):832–844
Holt M, Beglou M, Datta S (1992) Slant-independent letter segmentation for off-line cursive script recognition.
In: Impedovo S, Simon JC (eds) From pixels to features III. Elsevier, Amsterdam p 41
Howe NR, Rath TM, Manmatha R (2005) Boosted decision trees for word recognition in handwritten doc-
ument retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 28th annual SIGIR conference on research and development in
information retrieval, pp 377–383
Hu MK (1962) Visual pattern recognition by moment invariants. IRE Trans Inf Theory 8:179–187
Impedovo S, Ottaviano L, Occhinegro S (1991) Optical character recognition–a survey. Int J Pattern Recognit
Artif Intell 5:1–24
Kang KW, Kim JH (2004) Utilization of hierarchical, stochastic relationship modeling for Hangul character
recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 26(9):1185–1196
Kavallieratou E, Stamatatos E, Fakotakis N, Kokkinakis G (2000b) Handwritten character segmentation using
transformation-based learning. In: Proceedings of 15th international conference on pattern recognition,
vol 2, pp 634–637
Kim G, Govindaraju V (1997) A Lexicon driven approach to handwritten word recognition for real-time
applications. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 19(4):366–379
Kim JH, Kim KK, Suen CY (2000) An HMM-MLP hybrid model for cursive script recognition. Pattern Anal
Appl 3:314–324
Kim KK, Kim JH, Suen CY (2002) Recognition of handwritten touching pairs of digits using structural
features. Pattern Recognit 23(1):13–21
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 285
Kimura F, Shridhar M (1991) Handwritten numerical recognition based on multiple algorithms, Pattern
Recognition 24:969–983
Kimura F, Tsuruoka S, Shridhar M, Chen Z (1992) Context-directed handwritten word recognition for postal
service applications. In: Proceedings of the 5th USPS advanced technology conference, pp 199–213, 145
Kimura F, Shridhar M, Chen Z (1993) Improvements of a Lexicon directed algorithm for recognition of uncon-
strained handwritten words. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on document analysis
and recognition, Tsukuba, pp 18–22
Kimura F, Kayahara N, Miyake Y, Shridhar M (1997) Machine and human recognition of segmented characters
from handwritten words. In: 4th international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR
‘97), pp 866–869
Knerr S, Anisimov V, Baret O, Gorski N, Price D, Simon JC (1997) The A@IA inter-check system. Courtesy
amount and legal amount recognition for French Checks”. Automatic bank cheque processing 43–86
Knerr S, Augustin E, Baret O, Price D (1998) Hidden Markov model based word recognition and its application
to legal amount reading on French checks. Comput Vis Image Understand 70(3):404–419
Knoll AL (1969) Experiments with characteristic loci for recognition of handprinted characters. IEEE Trans
Comput 18:366–372
Koch, Paquet T, Heutte L (2004) Combination of contextual information for handwritten word recognition.
In: 9th International workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Kokubunji, pp 468–473
Koerich AL, Sabourin R, Suen CY (2003) Large vocabulary off-line handwriting recognition: a survey. Pattern
Anal Appl 6(2):97–121
Koerich L, Sabourin R, Suen C-Y (2004) Fast Two–Level HMM Decoding Algorithm for Large Vocabulary
Handwriting Recognition, 9th International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, 26–29
Oct, Kokubunji, pp 232–238
Koerich AL, Sabourin R, Suen CY (2005) Recognition and verification of unconstrained handwritten words.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 27(10):1509–1522
Koerich AL, Britto A, Oliveira LES, Sabourin R (2006) Fusing high- and low-level features for handwrit-
ten word recognition. In: Proceedings of the 10th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting
recognition
Kundu YH, Chen M (2002) Alternatives to variable duration HMM in handwriting recognition. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 20(11):1275–1280
Krzyyzak A, Dai W, Suen CY (1990, April) Unconstrained handwritten character recognition using modified
back propagation model. In: Proceedings of international workshop frontiers in handwritten recognition,
pp 145–153
Lallican PM, Viard-Gaudin C (1998) Off-line handwriting modeling as a trajectory tracking Problem. In:
International workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, IWFHR’6, Taejon, pp 347–356
Lazzerini B, Marcelloni F (2000) A linguistic fuzzy recognizer of offline handwritten characters. Pattern
Recognit Lett 21:319–327
Lecolinet E, Crettez J-P (1991) A grapheme-based segmentation technique for cursive script recognition.
In: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on document analysis and recognition, St Malo, pp
740–748
LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P (1998) Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.
Proc IEEE 86(11):2278–2324
Lee H, Verma B (2008a) A novel multiple experts and fusion based segmentation algorithm for cursive hand-
writing recognition. In: Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN’08),
pp 2994–2999
Lee H, Verma B (2008b) Over-segmentation and validation strategy for offline cursive handwriting recognition.
In: Proceedings of the international conference on intelligent servers, sensor networks and information
processing, pp 91–96
Liu J, Gader P (2002) Neural networks with enhanced outlier rejection ability for off-line handwritten word
recognition. Pattern Recognit 35:2061–2071
Liu C-L, Fujisawa H (2005) Classification and learning for character recognition: comparison of methods and
remaining problems. In: Proceedings of the international workshop on neural networks and learning in
document analysis and recognition, pp 5–7
Liu C-L, Narukawa K (2004) Normalization ensemble for handwritten character recognition. In: 9th Interna-
tional workshop on frontiers of handwriting recognition, pp 69–74
Liu C-L, Nakashima K, Sako H, Fujisawa H (2002) Handwritten digit recognition using state-of-the-art
techniques. In: Proceedings of 8th international workshop on frontiers of handwriting recognition, pp
320–325
Lorette G (1999) Handwriting recognition or reading? What is the situation at the dawn of the 3rd millennium?.
Int J Document Anal Recognit 2:2–12
123
286 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Lu Y (1995) Machine printed character segmentation—an overview. Pattern Recognit 28(1):67–80
Lu Y, Shridhar M (1996) Character segmentation in handwritten words—an overview. Pattern Recognit 29:
77–96
Lu W, Ren Y, Suen CY (1991) Hierarchical attributed graph representation and recognition of handwritten
Chinese characters. Pattern Recognit 24(7):617–632
Madhvanath S, Govindaraju V (2001) The role of holistic paradigms in handwritten word recognition. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 23(2):149–164
Madhvanath S, Kleinberg E, Govindaraju V (1999) Holistic verification of handwritten phrases. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 21:1344–1356
Maier M (1986) Separating characters in scripted documents. In: Proceedings of the 8th international confer-
ence on pattern recognition, Paris, pp 1056–1058
Marti U, Bunke H (2001) Using a statistical language model to improve the performance of an HMM-based
cursive handwriting recognition system. Int J Pattern Recognit Artif Intell 15(1):65–90
Milgram J, Cheriet M, Sabourin R (2004) Speeding up the decision making of support vector classifier. In:
Proceedings of 9th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, pp 57–62
Mitrpanont JL, Limkonglap U (2007) Using contour analysis to improve feature extraction in Thai handwrit-
ten character recognition systems. In: 7th IEEE international conference on computer and information
technology, CIT 2007, pp 668–673
Mohamed M, Gader P (1996) Handwritten word recognition using segmentation-free hidden markov mod-
eling and segmentation-based dynamic programming techniques. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
18(5):548–554
Mohamed MA, Gader P (2000) Generalized hidden Morkov models—part ii: application to handwritten word
recognition. IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst 8:82–94
Mori M, Suzuki A, Siho A, Ohtsuka S (2000) Generating new samples from handwritten numerals based
on point correspondence. In: 7th International workshop on frontiers of handwriting recognition, pp
281–290
Morita M, Oliveira LS, Sabourin R (2004) Unsupervised feature selection for ensemble of classifiers. In:
Proceedings of international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition-9, pp 81–86
Nicchiotti G, Scagliola C, Rimassa S (2000) A simple and effective cursive word segmentation method.
In: Proceedings of the 7th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, September,
Amsterdam, ISBN 90-76942-01-3. International Unipen Foundation, Nijmegen, pp 499–504
Nishimura M, Kobayashi M, Maruyama Y, Nakano (1999) Off-line character recognition using HMM by
multiple directional feature extraction and voting with bagging algorithm. In: Proceedings of 5th inter-
national conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 49–52
Oh S, Suen CY (1998) Distance features for neural network-based recognition of Handwritten characters. Int
J Document Anal Recognit 1(1):73–88
Olivier C, Paquet T, Avila M, Lecourtier Y (1995) Recognition of handwritten words using Stochastic Models.
In: International conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 19–23
Oliveira LS, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2002) Automatic recognition of handwritten numerical
strings: a recognition and verification strategy. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 24(11):1438–1454
Oliveira LS, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2003a) Feature selection for ensembles: a hierarchical
multi-objective genetic algorithm approach. In: 7th International conference on document analysis and
recognition, vol 2, pp 676–680
Oliveira LS, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen CY (2003b) Impacts of verification on a numeral string recogni-
tion system. Pattern Recognit Lett 24(7):1023–1031
Oliveira LS, Britto AS, Sabourin R (2005) A synthetic database to assess segmentation algorithms. In: Pro-
ceedings of 8th international conference on document analysis and recognition, vol 1, pp 207–211
Optiz DW (1999) Feature selection for Ensembles. In: 16th International conference on artificial intelligence,
pp 379–384
Pal U, Belaid A, Choisy C (2003) Touching numeral segmentation using water reservoir concept. Pattern
Recognit Lett 24:261–272
Partridge D, Yates WB (1996) Engineering multiversion neural-net systems. Neural Comput 8(4):869–893
Pinales Ruiz J, Jaime-Rivas R, Castro MJ (2007) Discriminative capacity of perceptual features in handwriting
recognition. Telecommun Radio Eng 64(11):931–937
Plamondon R, Srihari SN (2000) On-line and off-line handwriting recognition: a comprehensive survey. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 22:63–84
Procter S, Elms AJ (1998) The recognition of handwritten digit strings of unknown length using hidden
Markov models. In: Proceedings of the 14th international conference on pattern recognition (ICPR’98),
pp 1515–1517
123
Off-line cursive script recognition 287
Procter S, Illingworth J (1999) Handwriting recognition using HMMs and a conservative level building
algorithm. In: Proceedings of 7th international Conference on image processing and its applications,
Manchester, pp 736–739
Rabiner L (1989) A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition. Proc
IEEE 77(2):257–286
Rehman A, Dzulkifli M (2008) A simple segmentation approach for unconstrained cursive handwritten words
in conjunction with the neural network. Int J Image Process 2(3):29–35
Saba T, Rehman A, Sulong G (2011) Cursive script segmentation with neural confidence. Int J Innov Comput
Inf Control 7(7)
Samrajya P, Lakshmi M, Hanmandlu, Swaroop A (2006) Segmentation of cursive handwritten words using
Hypergraph, 1-4, TENCON, IEEE region 10 Conference
Sayre KM (1973) Machine recognition of handwritten words: a project report. Pattern Recognit 5:213–228
Scagliola C, Nicchiotti G (2000) Enhancing cursive word recognition performance by integration of all the
available information. In: Proceedings of 7th international workshop on frontiers in handwriting recog-
nition, Amsterdam, pp 363–372
Schambach M-P (2005) Fast script word recognition with very large vocabulary. In: Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 9–13
Senior W, Robinson AJ (2002) An off-line cursive handwriting recognition system. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 20(3):309–321
Shridhar M, Badreldin A (1984) High accuracy character recognition using Fourier and topological descrip-
tors. Pattern Recognit 17:515–524
Sin BK, Kim JH (1997) Ligature modeling for online cursive script recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Learn 19(6):623–633
Sinha RMK, Prasada B, Houle G, Sabourin M (1993) Hybrid contextual text recognition with string matching.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 15:915–925
Steinherz T, Rivlin E, Intrator N (1999) Off-line cursive script word recognition—a survey. Int J Document
Anal Recognit 2:90–110
Suen CY (1986) Character recognition by computer and applications in handbook of pattern recognition and
image processing. In: Young TY, Fu K-S (eds) Academic Press Inc., San Diego, pp 569–586
Suen CY, Berthod M, Mori S (1980) Automatic recognition of handprinted characters—the state of the art.
Proc IEEE 68:469–487
Suen CY, Legault R, Nadal C, Cheriet M, Lam L (1993) Building a new generation of handwriting recognition
systems. Pattern Recognit Lett 14:305–315
Takahashi T, Griffin (1993) Recognition enhancement by linear tournament verification. In: Proceedings of
2nd international conference on document analysis and recognition, pp 585–588
Tappert CC, Suen CY, Wakahara T (1990) The state of the art in on-line handwriting recognition. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 12(8):787–793
Tay YH (2002) Off-line handwriting recognition using artificial neural network and hidden Morkov Model.
PhD thesis, p 78
Tay YH, Khalid M, Yusof R, Gaudin CV (2003) Off-line cursive handwriting recognition system based on
hybrid Markov model and neural networks. In: Proceedings of IEEE international symposium on com-
putational intelligence in robotics and automation, Kobe, pp 1190–1195
Tomoyuki H, Takuma A, Bunpei I (2007) An analytic word recognition algorithm using a posteriori proba-
bility. In: Proceedings of the 9th international conference on document analysis and recognition, vol 2,
pp 669–673
Trier OD, Jain AK, Taxt T (1996) Feature extraction methods for character recognition—a Survey. Pattern
Recognit 29(4):641–662
Tucker ND, Evans FC (1974) A two-step strategy for character recognition using geometrical moments. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on pattern recognition, pp 223–225
Ullmann JR (1969) Experiments with the n-tuple method of pattern recognition. IEEE Trans Comput 18:
1135–1137
Valentini, Dietterich TG (2002) Bias-Variance Analysis and Ensembles of SVM. 3rd international workshop
on multiple classifier systems. 222-231
Vamvakas G, Gatos B, Pratikakis I, Stamatopoulos N, Roniotis A, Perantonis SJ (2007) Hybrid off-line OCR
for isolated handwritten Greek characters. In: Proceedings of 4th IASTED international conference on
signal processing, pattern recognition and applications, pp 197–202
Varga T, Bunke H (2003) Generation of synthetic training data for an HMM-based handwriting recogni-
tion system. In: Proceedings of the 7th international conference on document analysis and recognition,
Edinburgh, pp 618–622
123
288 A. Rehman, T. Saba
Veloso LR, Sousa RP, De, Carvalho JM (2000) Morphological cursive word segmentation. In: Symposium on
computer graphics and image processing, 2000. XIII, Brazilian, pp 337–342
Verma B (2002). A contour character extraction approach in conjunction with a neural confidence fusion tech-
nique for the segmentation of handwriting recognition. In: Proceeding of the 9th international conference
on neural information processing, vol 5, pp 2459–2463
Verma B (2003) A contour code feature based segmentation for handwriting recognition. In: Proceedings of
7th international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR’03), pp 1203–1207
Verma B, Blumenstein M (1996) An intelligent neural system for a robot to recognize printed and handwritten
postal addresses. In: Proceedings of 4th IASTED international conference on robotics and manufacturing,
IASTED RM’96, Hawaii, pp 80–84
Verma B, Gader P (2000) Fusion of multiple handwritten word recognition techniques. In: Neural networks
for signal processing X, 2000. Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Signal Processing Society Workshop,
vol 2, pp 926–934
Verma B, Blumenstein M, Kulkarni S (1998) Recent achievements in off-line handwriting recognition sys-
tems. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computational intelligence and multimedia
applications, (ICCIMA ‘98), Gippsland, pp 27–33
Verma B, Gader P, Chen W (2001) Fusion of multiple handwritten word recognition techniques. Pattern
Recognit Lett 22(9):991–998
Verma B, Blumenstein M, Ghosh M (2004) A novel approach for structural feature extraction: contour vs.
direction. Pattern Recognit Lett 25(9):975–988
Viard-Gaudin C, Lallican P-M, Knerr S (2005) Recognition-directed recovering of temporal information from
handwriting images. Pattern Recognit Lett 26(16):2537–2548
Vinciarelli A (2002) A survey on off-line cursive word recognition. Pattern Recognit 35(7):1433–1446
Vuurpijl L, Schomaker L, Van M (2003) Architectures for detecting and solving conflicts: two-stage classifi-
cation and support vector classifiers. Int J Document Anal Recognit 5(4):213–223
Wang X, Ding X, Liu C (2005) Gabor filters based feature extraction for character recognition. Pattern Rec-
ognit 38(3):369–379
Xiao X, Leedham G (2000) Knowledge-based English cursive script segmentation. Pattern Recognit Lett
21:945–954
Xu Q, Lam L, Suen CY (2003) Automatic segmentation and recognition system for handwritten dates on
Canadian bank cheque. In: Fairhurst M, Downton A (eds) Proceedings of the 7th international confer-
ence on document analysis and recognition, pp 704–709
Yamada H, Nakano Y (1996) Cursive handwritten word recognition using multiple segmentation determined
by contour analysis. IEICE Trans Inf Syst E79-D:464–470
Yanikoglu B, Sandon PA (1998) Segmentation of off-line cursive handwriting using linear programming.
Pattern Recognit 31:1825–1833
Zhang P, Bui TD, Suen CY (2007) A Novel cascade ensemble classifier system with a high recognition
performance on handwritten digits. Pattern Recognit 40(12):3415–3429
Zhou J, Gan Q, Krzyyzak A, Suen C-Y (2000) Recognition and verification of touching handwritten numerals.
In: 7th International workshop on frontiers of handwriting recognition, pp 179–188
Zimmermann M, Bunke H (2002) Hidden Markov model length optimization for handwriting recognition
systems. In: International workshop on frontiers in handwriting recognition, Niagara-on-the-Lakes,
pp 369–374
123
