Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution through Quantitative
Analysis: Chrétien de Troyes's Lancelot
Brian J. Reilly, Moira R. Dillon
Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures, Volume 2, Number
1, Spring 2013, pp. 60-85 (Article)
Published by The Johns Hopkins University Press
DOI: 10.1353/dph.2013.0001
For additional information about this article
                                                        Access provided by Aegean University (2 Dec 2013 12:18 GMT)
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/dph/summary/v002/2.1.reilly.html
Brian J. Reilly
The Johns Hopkins University
Moira R. Dillon
Harvard University
Virtuous Circles of 
Authorship Attribution 
through Quantitative 
Analysis
Chrétien de Troyes’s Lancelot
4Authorship attribution often suffers from charges of vicious circular-ity, of conflating authorship and style. We argue for a more virtuous 
circularity for attribution arguments made through the quantitative analyses 
of stylometry. Our study investigated temporal lexeme usage, which has 
been suggested as a mark of authorship style, in the corpus traditionally 
attributed to Chrétien de Troyes. Our analyses revealed different usage pat-
terns for these lexemes after line 6150 of the Lancelot, possibly indicating 
the signature of another author in the text (traditionally presumed to be that 
of Godefroy de Lagny). By embracing probabilistic arguments instead of 
certainties, digital philology can employ stylometry to consider questions of 
authorship attribution for medieval texts.
Stylometry—the quantification and measure of an author’s style—can 
be deadly business. Traditionally used to investigate the attribution of 
a text to a particular author, stylometry often causes scandal, as when 
works by Molière get attributed to Corneille1—yet one more way to 
proclaim the death of an author. The data behind such results tend to be 
dismissed within the humanities as unrelated to the “true” marks of a 
writer’s style (Love 154–56).2 Debates over the effectiveness of stylom-
etry in identifying authorship are played out in academic journals where 
its results are judged against corpora of certain attribution. Still, there 
is at least one way to know that stylometry is working without formal 
Digital Philology 2.1 (Spring): 60–85 © 2013 The Johns Hopkins University Press  60
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 61
proof: the rise of adversarial stylometry, i.e., the attempt to use stylom-
etry against itself to preserve anonymity (or to suggest a false identifi-
cation) (Brennan and Greenstadt). In this digital age with its wars on 
terror and revolutionary springs, identifying authors (who may be dissi-
dents, terrorists, targets, etc.) has taken on new urgency. There would be 
no need to invest in the creation of computer code to deceive stylometric 
programs if those programs did not actually threaten the anonymity of 
the author. Deadly business indeed.
It would be a mistake to think that these all too modern concerns 
have no relation to debates over the authorship attribution of medi-
eval texts. Techniques of adversarial stylometry have long been used by 
authors who only intuitively grasped the metrics involved. Today, for 
example, we define an “imitation attack” as the attempt “to write a 
document such that [the] writing style will be recognized as that of an-
other specific author” (Brennan and Greenstadt 60); medievalists might 
recognize this practice as the school exercise of imitatio. We may also 
be haunted by the possibility that an unknown scribe made changes to a 
text in such a way that his style would be identified not as his own but 
as that of the original author, rendering the text we read less the product 
of a single intention than we should like or than our arguments require. 
Advances in stylometric analyses have begun to allow us to disentangle 
such continuators from original authors.3 The same is true for collab-
orative efforts. Some Shakespeareans, for example, invoke stylometric 
techniques (not without controversy) to argue for the authorship attri-
bution of this or that line of dialogue in several plays that Shakespeare 
wrote collaboratively (Vickers). Might we invest digital philology with 
the use of stylometry on medieval texts to distinguish among such com-
positional collaborators as continuator, copyist, jongleur, and—dare we 
say it—author?
While it is true that the author has long since been declared dead 
in literary studies, the debate over whether a medieval author can be 
identified by his (or, less often, her) style has been rekindled with the 
appearance in 2011 of Thinking Through Chrétien de Troyes, a col-
laborative work by the playfully self-styled “Chrétien Girls.”4 This col-
lective, Stahuljak et al., interprets Chrétien de Troyes “not as an author 
identified with a historical figure but as a body of texts attributable to 
this name”(2).5 There are many ways to proclaim the “death of author,” 
and here we see one of the most reasonable and productive: the histori-
cal author (singular) is now a living body of texts (plural). The fruits 
of such a position are found throughout this study and were already in 
seed in Kay’s 1997 “Who Was Chrétien de Troyes?”
62 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
Once the textual plurality of “Chrétien de Troyes” in the title 
Thinking Through Chrétien de Troyes is understood, we can see an im-
plicit rejection of a work like James-Raoul’s 2007 Chrétien de Troyes, la 
griffe d’un style, which emphasizes the uniqueness of the author in terms 
of his style. The author is linked to the signature of a style: la griffe d’un 
style. One need not go very far into this thick volume of stylistic analy-
ses to see its relation to the question of authorship attribution. James-
Raoul’s “Introduction” opens: 
Non pas les procédés, la technique ou la rhétorique, mais le style. 
Il s’agit de montrer que la griffe « Chrétien de Troyes » caractérise 
une manière d’écrire faisant sens, particulière, c’est-à-dire recon-
naissable en soi ou par comparaison et s’observant dans un en-
semble d’œuvres assez nettement pour identifier un auteur. 
Neither the practices, the technique, nor the rhetoric, but the style. 
The attempt is to show that the signature “Chrétien de Troyes” 
characterizes a meaningful and unique way of writing, which is to 
say that it is recognizable by itself or by comparison and that it can 
be seen in a group of works clearly enough to identify an author. 
(11)
The plurality of texts is unified (un ensemble), as is the identifiable 
author.
With due respect for this truly “thorough and detailed study” (4), 
Stahuljak et al. nevertheless draw the inevitably sharp contrast between 
it and their understanding of Chrétien’s authorship: “James-Raoul’s 
study helps contextualize the Chrétien corpus in twelfth-century intel-
lectual and literary history, but it also reveals a dangerous circularity 
between the conceptions of ‘authorship’ and ‘style’” (5). This danger-
ous circularity—dangerous presumably because vicious—is thought to 
inhere in the very idea of establishing the attribution of a unified corpus 
to a single author named Chrétien de Troyes:
The construction of a unified corpus is grounded in the premise of 
single authorship, subtended by an implicit claim to oneness: one 
author—Chrétien de Troyes—to whom was securely attributed a 
corpus of five romances. The focus on authorized authorship has 
tended to marginalize other works associated with or attributed 
to Chrétien—the lyrics, the short text Philomena, and Guillaume 
d’Angleterre—and in a circular logic, to draw from the romance 
corpus an identifying style that either renders other works marginal 
to the Chretien œuvre or excludes them altogether. (1)
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 63
Scholars construct (presumably by tradition or inference) a grouping 
of texts and attribute them to Chrétien de Troyes; they do not consider 
texts like Philomena or (especially) Guillaume d’Angleterre to be within 
that grouping; they then analyze the attributed corpus to determine the 
stylistic signature of its author; and finally, they use that signature as a 
measure by which to judge other texts, e.g., Philomena or Guillaume 
d’Angleterre, which are found to be outside the attributable grouping. 
Certainly the danger of circularity inheres in any attempt to group 
texts of uncertain attribution. But is that danger always expressed? Or 
is it avoidable? And does James-Raoul’s study avoid it? In the commen-
tary below, we point the way to a third path. By correcting some of the 
methodological limitations of James-Raoul’s study, we respond to such 
charges of vicious circularity. There are well-known, objective feedback 
loops of a more virtuous circularity that can update our beliefs about 
authorship attribution without falling prey to the very real dangers 
noted by Stahuljak et al. In short, what is needed are quantitative, sci-
entific analyses to accompany quantitative, stylistic data. James-Raoul’s 
otherwise exhaustive account of Chrétien’s style usually marshals evi-
dence of a more traditional philological and stylistic register; where it 
does, it shines. At times, however, this stylistic analysis includes quanti-
tative data, yet fails itself to be genuinely quantitative. In what follows 
we provide new analyses for a quantitative argument made by James-
Raoul about a particular attribution of authorship: that of Godefroy 
de Lagny’s authorship of the ending of the Lancelot (also known as the 
Chevalier de la Charrette)—a late twelfth-century romance which other-
wise finds itself securely within the body of texts attributed to Chrétien 
de Troyes.6
Quantitative results may, at times, confirm something we already 
know. So be it: sometimes it is nice to know why we know something. 
While a future study is planned to perform a fuller stylometric analysis 
that should complement the traditional methods found in James-Raoul’s 
book,7 we argue here that this worry over circularity in authorship at-
tribution is trivial: a third way exists and promises new insights into 
medieval authors and their works. This third way prefers probabilities 
to certainties, attributing authorship while at the same time “keeping 
these terms [‘authorship’ and ‘style’] open and potentially plural, admit-
ting the possibility of multiple styles and taking into account the agency 
of copyists, compilers, and patrons.”8 For when the author’s signature 
(la griffe) reappears, it does so through the shifting haze of probability—
subject to updated evidence but visible nonetheless.
64 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
The Lancelot is one of five Arthurian romances (romans) usually 
attributed to Chrétien de Troyes. The others are: Erec et Enide; Cligès; 
Yvain (also known as the Chevalier au Lion); and Perceval (also known 
as the Conte du Graal). The reason that one might suspect that a second 
author wrote the ending to the Lancelot is simple, for at the very end of 
the text, a second author seems to tell us just that: “Godefroiz de Leigni, 
li clers, / a parfinee la Charrete” (“The clerk Godefroy de Leigni / Has 
put the final touches on the Knight of the Cart”; lines 7102–03).9 Critics 
have long wondered why Chrétien passed the plume to Godefroy. Was 
he too preoccupied writing another of his romances, the Yvain? Was he 
unhappy with the commission given him by his “dame de Chanpaigne” 
‘Lady of Champagne’ (line 1)? Our entry into the debate here is not over 
the question why but, more basically, whether. Did a second author 
write the ending to Chrétien’s Lancelot? Can it be shown that he did? 
Or was this all a ruse? Some critics, following Hult,10 have argued that 
Godefroy of Lagny was not an actual, historical person,11 but merely a 
nom de plume for Chrétien de Troyes.12
Stahuljak et al. pay little attention to Godefroy; we could only find 
one parenthetical reference to him in their study. For James-Raoul, how-
ever, the distinction between authors is treated as a given, and the divi-
sion of labor is said to occur somewhere at lines 6140–53.13 Assuming 
Chrétien’s stylistic signature can be found, differences in style should 
be detectable if indeed a second author wrote the last 966 or so lines—
even, perhaps, if Godefroy was a skilled imitator, or if Chrétien’s boen 
gré (“approval”; line 7106) was, in fact, heavy-handed supervision. 
Such are the promises of stylometry.
A full test of this possibility is beyond the scope of this essay, in 
part because it requires digital resources not yet available for study.14 
Moreover, our response here seeks only to intervene in the debate be-
tween James-Raoul and Stahuljak et al. We believe that the results of 
a quantitative analysis of James-Raoul’s data, though in conflict with 
James-Raoul’s own non- or quasi-quantitative analyses, actually sup-
port the larger hypothesis that a stylistic signature for Chrétien (and 
Godefroy, if only by complement) may indeed begin to emerge from the 
numbers.
In our analyses, we use the following abbreviations and total line 
counts:15
E = Erec et Enide (40,910 words; 6,878 lines; 3,439 couplets)
C = Cligès (40,638 words; 6,664 lines; 3,332 couplets)
L1 = Lancelot to line 6149 (37,860 words;16 6,146 lines;17 3,073 
couplets)
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 65
L218 = Lancelot from 6150 to end (6,011 words; 966 lines; 483 
couplets)
L = Lancelot (43,871 words; 7,112 lines; 3,556 couplets)
Y = Yvain (42,111 words; 6,810 lines; 3,405 couplets)
P = Perceval (54,192 words; 8,988 lines; 4,494 couplets)
1. Temporal Lexemes (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe 
d’un style, 505–12)
The chronological progression of a narrative is often indicated implic-
itly, as in the simple sequence of actions described in the present tense: 
we know the first action described happened before the next and so 
on. But chronology may also be indicated explicitly through the use of 
certain temporal nouns, adverbs, conjunctions, etc. In analyzing explicit 
chronological indicators in Chrétien’s five romances, James-Raoul finds 
more the mark of Chrétien’s training than a signature of his individual 
style: “Ce souci [de préciser une chronologie] est présent dès le premier 
roman et ne varie guère: c’est donc le résultat d’un apprentissage pré-
alable, l’empreinte laissée par une école, la marque d’un style” (“This 
concern [to indicate chronology] is present in the first romance and 
hardly varies thereafter: it is thus the result of prior learning, the imprint 
left by a school, the trademark of a style”; 506–07). In a table listing the 
“diversity of temporal lexemes” (507–08), James-Raoul finds a “stabil-
ity” in their use across the corpus, with two exceptions.
But before we turn to these two exceptions, we note the striking 
numbers given by James-Raoul for the lexemes encore, ja, jor, mais, and 
onque: these entries, despite occurring with sufficient frequency in L1 to 
predict occurrences in L2, have no listed occurrences in L2. By collecting 
our own frequency counts of the temporal lexemes based on the 1989 
corrected edition of Ollier’s Lexique et concordance, we were able to 
distribute the counts for encore, ja, jor, mais, and onque across L1 and 
L2. We also made the following corrections:
ainçois: James-Raoul’s distribution is probably based on a mis-
count. We revise E to 22 and L1 to 32.
derechief: The 19 count given for P is a typo. The count for P is 
1, while the total count for all romances is 19, once a 
misount for Y is corrected.
hui: Ollier’s lemma is ui.19 Meaning “today” or, in the expres-
sion hui mes, ‘from now on’, one might have expected to 
find more results than the 4 James-Raoul gives. And in-
66 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
deed, our corrected count yields 86. James-Raoul’s count 
seems to come from using the uncorrected 1986 edition 
of Ollier’s concordance and is doubly wrong. In the 1986 
edition, there is a lemma hui (adv.) in the concordance 
(microfiche 1762), but not in the lexique. It has 4 occur-
rences—the same total as James-Raoul’s count. Erroneous 
though it was, that count should have given both of the 
2 instances in Lancelot to Godefroy, as does the 1986 
microfiche concordance: Lancelot vv. 6163 and 6198. But 
the count itself is in error, and the 1989 corrected edition 
of Ollier’s concordance sets things straight. In the 1986 
version, the temporal adverb ui is split between two lem-
mas, hui and ui, which have 4 and 82 entries, for a total 
of 86. In the 1989 version, those occurrences are all listed 
under the lemma ui (adv.), and the lemma hui (sm), absent 
from the 1986 microfiche concordance, is reinserted in its 
rightful place.
piece, pieça: The lemma piece indicates a quantity and can have 
temporal meanings (e.g., “a long time” or “for a mo-
ment”) or spatial meanings (e.g., “some distance” or even 
“pieces”). In the Ollier concordance, there is a lemma 
pieça (adv.; microfiche 2966), all five uses of which have 
temporal meaning. For the lemma piece (sf; microfiches 
2967 and, oddly, 2971), there are 71 occurrences divided 
among four forms given: pieç (3), piece (44), piece1 (17), 
and pieces (7). None of the uses of pieces are temporal; 
all of the uses of pieç and piece1 are temporal. Sometimes 
the translation of piece is ambiguous. The occurrences 
at E 1435, L 304, 1296, 2283, and Y 5790 could mean 
“a way” or “a while.” Even though we prefer a spatial 
rendering, we have left those cases in the count to better 
match that of James-Raoul. A line like L 5281 specifies 
“de la voie,” and so we do not include it in this group. If 
our counts still differ, it may be because we reject as non-
temporal: L 1437, 2275, 4572, and 5281; Y 283, 3378, 
4219, and 4940.
quant: Ollier’s lemma is cant. We found a slightly different distri-
bution for L1 (-2 to 174) and L2 (+2 to 31), regardless of 
the concordance edition used. James-Raoul seems to have 
only counted those 29 occurrences for L2 on microfiche 
463, neglecting to count the 2 on microfiche 465 (v. 6704) 
and 466 (v. 6509).
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 67
From the uncorrected data, James-Raoul makes the following 
inferences:
(1.1) The number of occurrences of the following eight temporal 
lexemes is elevated in L compared to the other four ro-
mances: ainçois, atant, des, lors, ore, orendroit, piece, and 
quant. (509)
(1.2) The use of the lexemes in L2 closely matches that of L1. (509)
The idea here is that Chrétien’s project in writing the Lancelot in-
volved a particular attention to temporal framings of the narrative, be-
yond that of his training. If true, we would have an example where a 
result in quantitative analysis can generate literary criticism: why should 
the Lancelot have an elevated use of temporal lexemes? James-Raoul 
also claims that this elevated use holds for both Chrétien and Godefroy, 
generating the speculation that either Chrétien gave Godefroy explicit 
instructions in this matter or that Godefroy may have intuited the sup-
posedly striking and novel stylistic temporality of the Lancelot’s first 
6100 plus lines. To come back to our opening discussion, we may trans-
late claim 1.2 as a successful “imitation attack,” making us think that 
Godefroy’s temporal-lexeme signature is the same as Chrétien’s.
But are those eight lexemes really so elevated when compared to the 
other romances? There is no consideration of total word counts to tell. 
And even if there is agreement for these eight lexemes between the two 
authors, do the other data reveal any differences which might show two 
signatures present in one text? Let us consider the claims in turn with 
the requisite quantitative analysis.
(1.1.a) First, to evaluate whether, as a group, the selected eight tem-
poral lexemes were significantly elevated in L as compared to the other 
romances, we conducted an Independent T-Test with 10,000 bootstrap-
ping samples taken with replacement. Independent T-Tests are employed 
to compare the means of two groups, calculated using the values ob-
tained at all data points (in our case, the mean percentages of each tem-
poral lexeme). Bootstrapping is used to determine a confidence interval 
for any test statistic (in our case, the difference between two means) 
when the distribution of that test statistic is non-normal, i.e., it does 
not conform to the traditional bell curve. Our null hypothesis states 
that there is no difference between the mean percentage of this set of 
temporal lexemes in L and the mean percentage of those same temporal 
lexemes in all the other romances. If the confidence interval produced 
by the bootstrapping technique contains zero, then we cannot refute the 
null hypothesis.
68 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
To conduct this first analysis, the frequency of each lexeme was 
normalized by the total number of words in each romance. The mean 
normalized frequency of the lexemes in L was compared to their mean 
normalized frequency in the four other romances. Results revealed that 
there was no significant difference between the mean normalized fre-
quency of this lexeme subset in L as compared to the other romances 
(BCa [-0.2110, 0.0253]). This analysis addresses whether, overall, this 
subset of eight lexemes is elevated in L compared to the other romances; 
however, it does not address the possible discrepancy between the rela-
tive frequency of these lexemes in L and the relative frequency of these 
lexemes in each of the other romances.
(1.1.b) Here we address the relative frequencies of the subset of 
eight lexemes compared across the romances. We do so, again, by first 
normalizing the frequency of each lexeme by the total number of words 
in each romance. Then, Spearman’s Rho Correlations (non-parametric) 
were calculated to indicate the relationship between L and the other 
romances (E, C, Y, P). Correlations were also calculated for all pairwise 
combinations of E, C, Y, and P. Because these correlations were com-
puted using the normalized relative frequencies of each of the eight lex-
emes in the subset, they indicate the amount of similarity between L and 
the other romances reflected in this lexeme subset. Next, an Independent 
Samples T-Test was performed, comparing the mean correlation be-
tween L and each of the other romances to the mean of the pairwise 
correlations of the other works. Finally, a bootstrapping procedure with 
10,000 replications was carried out to determine the confidence interval 
for the difference between the means. We found no significant difference 
between the mean correlation of L to the other works and the mean 
correlation of all the pairwise combinations of the other works (BCa 
[-0.1948, 0.0056]).
(1.1.c) The methods outlined in 1.1.b were repeated testing L1 and 
L2 against the other romances, each in a separate analysis. Using this 
subset of eight lexemes, we found no significant difference between L1 
as compared to the other romances (E, C, Y, P; BCa [-0.2128, 0.0204]). 
Further, we found no significant difference between L2 as compared to 
the other romances (E, C, Y, P; BCa [-0.0520, 0.3164]).
The results from 1.1.a-c are difficult to interpret for two reasons. 
The first reason is the small sample size of the subset of temporal lex-
emes (n = 8). Selecting a small number of lexemes from the entire set 
of lexemes greatly reduces the statistical power of the analysis and the 
conclusions that can be drawn from its results. A more serious problem 
with this particular analysis is that in choosing 8 out of the 36 temporal 
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 69
lexemes, James-Raoul introduces a selection bias. If temporal lexemes, 
as a set, are descriptive of authorship style (as James-Raoul proposes), 
then the entire data set of temporal lexemes should be subject to analy-
sis, not simply those lexemes in the set that seem to support a given 
hypothesis. If it had been shown independently that only the lexemes 
ainçois, atant, des, lors, ore, orendroit, piece, and quant were valid mea-
sures of authorship style, then it would, in fact, make sense to address 
only these lexemes in the analysis. If, however, there was no reason to 
believe that any given temporal lexeme was more telling of authorship 
style than any other such lexeme, then all examples should be consid-
ered. James-Raoul gives us no independent reason to believe that the use 
of this subset of lexemes is a more valid measure of authorship style. 
Instead, in only offering the insight that these lexemes seem to support 
the hypothesis and the others do not, James-Raoul has introduced a seri-
ous selection bias.
(1.2.a) There were discrepancies between our frequency counts and 
those of James-Raoul for the entire set of temporal lexemes (as de-
scribed above). However, these differences did not affect the significance 
values for any of the following statistical tests, which were performed 
on the corrected counts.
To determine whether the use of lexemes in L2 closely resembles the 
use of lexemes in L1, we conducted an analysis similar to the analysis 
used in 1.1.b-c. Specifically, we first tested the difference in the relative 
distribution of temporal lexemes between L1 and the other romances 
(E, C, Y, P). Then we tested the difference in the relative distribution 
of temporal lexemes between L2 and the other romances (E, C, Y, P). 
Finally, motivated by our results from these first two steps, we examined 
the difference in the distributions of temporal lexemes between L2 and 
E, C, L1, Y, P. Evaluating the entire subset of temporal lexemes provides 
a larger sample size (n = 36) and avoids selection bias.
For each of the tests mentioned above, the frequency of each lex-
eme was normalized by dividing by the total number of words in each 
romance (see Fig. 1). Then, Spearman’s Rho Correlations (non-paramet-
ric) were calculated between the text in question (L1 or L2) and each of 
the other texts (as indicated above). Correlations were also calculated 
for all pairwise combinations of the other texts (see Fig. 2). Next, an 
Independent Samples T-Test was conducted comparing the value of the 
mean correlation between the text in question and each of the other 
works to the value of the mean of the pairwise correlations of the other 
works. Finally, a bootstrapping procedure with 10,000 replications 
was performed to determine the confidence interval for the difference 
Fig. 1: Normalized frequencies of all temporal lexemes.
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 71
between the means. We found no significant difference between the mean 
correlation of L1 to the other works and the mean correlation of all 
the pairwise combinations of the other works (BCa [-0.0421, 0.0448]). 
However, we did find a significant difference between the mean correla-
tion of L2 to the other works and the mean correlation of all the pair-
wise combinations of the other works (BCa [0.0362, 0.1009]).
Motivated by this result, we evaluated the normalized relative fre-
quencies of temporal lexemes of L2 against all of the other texts, includ-
ing L1. Here too we found a significant difference between the mean 
correlation of L2 to the other works and the mean correlation of all 
pairwise combinations of the other works (see Fig. 3; BCa [0.0123, 
0.0847]). This result indicates that L1 might group with the other texts 
in terms of relative frequencies of temporal lexemes while L2 might not.
(1.2.b) To further evaluate the idea that, in the use of temporal 
lexemes, E, C, L1, Y, and P form one coherent group of texts, while 
L2 seems best classified outside that group, we performed a reliability 
analysis. A reliability analysis provides a measure of the overall paral-
lelism, homogeneity, and consistency among a group of components in 
a composite.
If we form a composite of E, C, L1, L2, Y, and P based on the as-
sumption that they are homogenous in their use of temporal lexemes, 
then we can determine a numerical value, which describes how inter-
nally consistent that composite is. We used Cronbach’s Alpha as our 
numerical indicator, under the framework of Domain Sampling Theory. 
Cronbach’s Alpha can range from 0 to 1, where a value of 0 indicates 
that the components of the composite are not at all parallel or homog-
Fig. 2: Spearman Rho correlations between L2 and other works based on all tempo-
ral lexemes
72 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
enous and a value of 1 indicates that they are exactly parallel and ho-
mogenous. Convention predicates that any value of Cronbach’s Alpha 
above 0.7 is acceptably homogenous. Describing Cronbach’s Alpha in 
the framework of Domain Sampling Theory allows us to infer that the 
value achieved translates to the degree to which our composite, thus 
grouped, correlates with any randomly generated composite from the 
entire domain of composites definable by the components in this do-
main. The domain being considered here is the domain of temporal 
Fig. 3: The bootstrapping distribution for the difference in the mean correlation of 
L2 to the other texts compared to the mean correlation of all the pairwise combina-
tions of the other texts (E, C, L1, Y, P). The center line indicates the observed value 
of the difference. The outer lines represent the upper and lower bounds of the BCa 
confidence interval. Zero lies outside this confidence interval, indicating a significant 
difference between mean correlation of L2 to the other texts and the mean correla-
tion of all the pairwise combinations of the other texts.
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 73
lexeme usage in all of the Arthurian romances usually attributed to 
Chrétien de Troyes. We therefore evaluate how well this composite of 
works (E, C, L1, L2, Y, and P) would correlate with any random selec-
tion of Chrétien’s works, whatever they might be, on the basis of tem-
poral lexeme usage.
We obtained a value of 0.980 for Cronbach’s Alpha, indicating ex-
cellent internal consistency: based on temporal lexeme usage, E, C, Y, 
L1, L2, and P form a highly homogenous group. However, the question 
remains whether this group would be more or less internally consistent 
with the deletion of one of the six texts. We can address this question 
by calculating Cronbach’s Alpha for a new composite when one item 
is deleted. If the value of Cronbach’s Alpha decreases with the deletion 
of any one item, then the remaining group has become less internally 
consistent. If, however, the value of Cronbach’s alpha increases with the 
deletion of any one item, then the remaining group has become more 
internally consistent. Figure 4 shows that the internal consistency of the 
remaining composite decreases if E, C, L1, Y, or P is deleted; however, 
the internal consistency of the remaining composite increases if L2 is 
deleted. These results further point to the possibility that E, C, L1, Y, 
and P form a cohesive group, while L2 might belong outside this group.
Further work to determine the best grouping scheme for these texts 
might incorporate factor analyses, which would provide dimensions 
along which certain works would cluster. Effective factor analysis would 
require more data collection, including other measures of authorship 
style. That being said, we have shown on the basis of temporal lexeme 
usage that E, C, L1, Y, and P might be a more internally consistent 
group when L2 is excluded.
We still have not shown, however, that temporal lexeme usage in 
general is a valid measure of style to begin with. Fortunately, James-
Raoul, on the basis of expert stylistic analysis, has already made this 
claim. As a result, our statistical analyses, paired with James-Raoul’s ar-
gument about the measure’s validity, begin to indicate how the grouping 
of these texts might reflect the signatures of two different authors. Still, 
only after many critical stylistic markers, independently and theoreti-
cally determined, are submitted to statistical analysis, can we begin to 
build the framework for text classification and author attribution with 
any confidence.
The other six quantitative arguments concerning Godefroy de Lagny 
we found in James-Raoul’s study had less data to consider. We give a 
brief description of their content here since, with more data, the analy-
ses could prove informative.
74 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
2. Toponyms (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe d’un style, 
371–77)
James-Raoul suggests that toponyms provide a useful insight into Chré-
tien’s unique style, for he uses them “d’une manière relativement nou-
velle et personnelle” (“in a relatively new and individual manner”; 372). 
Moreover, if a toponym shows a certain degree of stability across the 
manuscript tradition, one could assume that the place, whether real or 
imaginary, was recognizable by the scribe; instability might instead indi-
cate an invented toponym (373).
3. Rhyme Assonances (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe 
d’un style, 496–500)
Rhyme assonances should be fairly resilient to scribal error, getting us as 
close as possible to an authorial signature: 
C’est le stylème d’un écrivain et non pas celui d’un simple co-
piste, parce qu’une rapide comparaison de nos édition de réfé-
rences [CFMA] avec celles qui ont été réalisées sous la direction 
de M. Zink [Lettres gothiques], par exemple, souligne que les 
trains d’assonances considérés ne subissent pas de modifications 
dans d’autres copies manuscrites […] 
Fig. 4: Cronbach’s Alpha if item deleted
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 75
It is the styleme of a writer and not that of a simple amanuensis, 
since a rapid comparison of our reference editions [CFMA] to 
those under the direction of M. Zink [Lettres gothiques], for 
example, highlights that the series of assonances considered do 
not undergo change in other manuscript copies. (497) 
It would be useful to do more than a “rapid comparison” to test this 
point. Moreover, while we agree that James-Raoul may have identified 
an important mark of style, the data provided only cover the first 500 
lines of each romance, plus the last 500 lines for the end of the Lancelot, 
and only give groupings of rhyme assonances that persist over at least 
two couplets. A more comprehensive data set should include all asso-
nances for the final 500 lines of the other four romances to ensure that 
normal intra-textual variation is not mistaken for a distinction between 
L1 and L2 (although the incomplete state of the Perceval makes the util-
ity of its inclusion questionable).20
4. Couplets brisés (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe d’un 
style, 518–23)
Although not the inventor of the couplet brisé (broken couplet), Chré-
tien used it extensively. James-Raoul gives us the percentage of bro-
ken couplets in the first 1500 lines of E, C, L1, Y, P, and Guillaume 
d’Angleterre, as well as the lines from L2 and Philomena. Perhaps be-
cause they are “difficult to interpret” (521), no interpretation is given 
for them. Three interesting arguments are advanced concerning the use 
of broken couplets, but again the necessary data are not given. James-
Raoul considers the instances in which a switch between speakers occurs 
within a broken couplet and finds it to be a mark of Chrétien’s growing 
maturity as an author. And from that inference from data mentioned but 
not shown, a case is put forward that: Philomena is more like Chrétien’s 
earlier works; Guillaume d’Angleterre is more like the later ones; and 
Godefroy de Lagny uses the broken couplet technique more often (522).
5. Ainsi (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe d’un style, 
529–35)
James-Raoul’s discussion of the connective ainsi shows a true mastery of 
traditional stylistic analyses. The paradoxical nature of this connective 
reveals a technique that blurs narrative sequences in a process of tuilage, 
“tiling” (529). James-Raoul provides counts for the total occurrences of 
76 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
ainsi, as well as for the number of lines begun by ainsi (534). From these 
data, James-Raoul makes the following claims (534–35):
(5.1) Chrétien’s debt to the author of the Roman de Thèbes is 
great. That is, the works of Chrétien best approximate, in 
their use of ainsi, the Roman de Thèbes.
(5.2) In the use of ainsi, E fits with the Roman de Thèbes, Éracle, 
and La prise d’Orange.
(5.3) From C on (which is to say, in C, L1, Y, and P), Chrétien uses 
ainsi “two to three times” more than his contemporaries 
(here represented only by Roman de Thèbes, Éracle, and 
La prise d’Orange).
(5.4) L2 behaves more like E, and so distinguishes itself from the 
expected use of ainsi from 5.3.
(5.5) Philomena can be situated between E and C in its use of ainsi. 
(This presumably is an argument for dating Philomena 
within Chrétien’s corpus.) 
(5.6) Guillaume d’Angleterre is most like L1. (Again, presumably 
an argument for the dating of this romance should it be 
attributed to Chrétien.) 
6. Equivocal Rhymes (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe 
d’un style, 666–67)
It is claimed that Chrétien uses equivocal rhymes rarely, whereas Go-
defroy uses them much more often (666–7). A total of 14 such rhymes 
are said to be found in L2, presumably the number of couplets, which 
would mean that 3% of Godefroy’s couplets employ this type of rhyme. 
Whether that is “much more” than Chrétien’s use cannot be determined 
since the data for E, C, L1, Y, and P are not given.
7. Homonym Rhymes (Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe 
d’un style, 669–75)
Homonym rhymes are considered to be particularly stable and informa-
tive, allowing us to “voir se dessiner les constantes proprement stylis-
tiques d’une écriture, d’un auteur ou d’une œuvre, d’une école ou d’un 
creuset littéraire” (“see being sketched out the specifically stylistic con-
stants of a writing style, of an author or a work, of a school or literary 
crucible”; 670). Ignoring ambiguous cases like or en droit / orendroit, 
James–Raoul makes the following arguments:
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 77
(7.1) The percentages of homonym rhymes are stable across manu-
scripts. (670)
(7.2) The five Arthurian romances attributed to Chrétien are stable 
in their use of homonym rhymes, which is quite restrained. 
(670)
(7.3) L is different from E, C, Y, and P, but only because of L2. 
(Thus Godefroy’s use of homonym rhymes is markedly 
different from Chrétien’s.) (670–1)
(7.4) Philomena is like E, C, L1, Y, and P. Indeed, it falls within 
“the [one?] standard deviation” (écart-type) of those five 
romances. (671)
(7.5) Guillaume d’Angleterre is unlike E, C, L1, Y, and P. (Does 
this then mean beyond one standard deviation from the 
mean? Or perhaps two?)
(7.6) The differences between manuscripts, though they are stable 
(7.1), allow us to see the taste of particular scribes for 
these rhymes. For example, the Berne 134 scribe for P 
shows the growth in taste for this rhyme by the fourteenth 
century.
Summary of Statistical Analyses Regarding Authorship 
Style and Attribution
When a subset of temporal lexemes was selected by James-Raoul with-
out independent theoretical reason, no difference was found between 
L2 and the other texts. However, in creating this subset, a selection bias 
was introduced, rendering the analysis inert to any meaningful conclu-
sions. The analysis of temporal lexemes as an entire set has the advan-
tage of (1) having a suitable sample size for good inferential statistics 
and (2) having theoretical validity as indicative of authorship style. Our 
statistical analysis of all given temporal lexemes revealed that there was 
a significant difference between the relative distributions of these lex-
emes in L2 compared to all other texts. A test of reliability lent further 
support to the idea that, in the realm of temporal lexemes, L2 might be 
more appropriately defined as distinct from the texts E, C, L1, Y, and P.
Conclusion: Virtuous Circles
Did two different authors write the Lancelot? Before we ponder the 
complexities of this belyingly simple question, let us be clear that our 
study provides no certain answer to it. But this is because, when faced 
with such a question, we must move away from certainties and toward 
78 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
probabilities. Our analysis of the use of temporal lexemes in the five Ar-
thurian romances usually attributed to Chrétien de Troyes does provide 
some evidence that a second author composed the end of the Lancelot. 
While that evidence is too exiguous to command assent, it is also suf-
ficiently suggestive to encourage further stylometric analyses. We note 
that our quantitative analyses are driven by so-called traditional meth-
ods of authorship attribution, which include non-stylistic data internal 
to the text. It is after all the text itself which tells us that it had two 
authors!
Although we allow the text to motivate the question, there is no 
reason to trust the text itself for an answer. And here we come to the 
profundities of the nature of authorship. What is an author? Stylometry 
does not force us to abandon the many nuances we can bring to our 
answers. Medieval authorship is particularly fraught with subtlety, for 
these reasons among others: medieval inventio, while not slavish repeti-
tion, created, perhaps, a higher degree of imitation than we come to 
expect today; medieval textual transmission almost ensures a degree of 
collaboration. When confronted with a medieval text, stylometry has its 
work cut out for it.21 But the corpus considered here has the advantages 
of being uniform in genre and scribal hand.22 It shows much promise as 
a subject for further study.
The “key unresolved problem” of stylometry noted by Banks is that 
of “variable selection.” For example, Kenny’s Stylometric Analysis of 
the New Testament used ninety-nine measures of style to study whether 
Luke wrote Acts, John wrote Apocalypse, and Paul wrote the Pauline 
letters (123–24). But, as Rudman reminds us in a different context, 
“that only scratches the surface—there are thousands of quantifiable 
style markers” (28c). The usual ways through this problem involve ei-
ther data-mining or a selective approach. The former can lead to cherry-
picking, as Banks explains: “Between any two bodies of text, some of 
the enormously many measurable variables will be consistently similar 
solely by chance, even if both texts are written by different people; 
conversely, some features will be consistently different, even though the 
works have common authorship.” And since the number of total pos-
sible measures is so large, we might be picking cherries without even 
knowing it. Still, there are statistical and editorial ways to guard against 
cherry picking. One can validly eliminate style markers that are intra-
corporeally inconsistent or those that are inter-corporeally indistinguish-
able (Rudman 31a). Moreover, one must verify the accuracy of the base 
text since inaccurate data will invalidate any subsequent analysis; we 
did so above in our corrective use of Ollier’s revised concordance.23
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 79
The selective approach is more obviously problematic: “Many re-
searchers proceed unautomatically; they use human intuition to notice 
unusual stylistic features in the uncertain text or the candidate authors, 
and then base their analyses solely on those. This is close to what human 
experts do, but it courts the danger of bias; people tend to notice things 
that conform to their prior hopes” (Banks). But here, we have perhaps 
found a third way to navigate between a cherry-picking Scylla and a 
Charybdian circularity.24 For we did not choose the measure of temporal 
lexemes; it was chosen as a measure for us by a specialist of Chrétien’s 
style. Had James-Raoul argued from the temporal lexeme data that 
there was a marked difference between Chrétien’s style and Godefroy’s 
style, then we would indeed be “court[ing] the danger of bias,” even 
if we were correct in our statistics. But our analyses do not “conform 
to [the] prior hopes” of James-Raoul, and yet they still show that, if 
the use of temporal lexemes is a valid marker of style for Chrétien de 
Troyes, it may be an etch (a griffe) of his—or Godefroy’s—signature, 
the trace of which is outlined by the numbers above. Not only did we 
not choose this style marker, but the scholar who chose it drew conclu-
sions from it contradicted by our results. We note here a gentle irony: 
any valid marker of style for Chrétien’s authorial signature supports 
James-Raoul’s overarching thesis that such markers exist and point to 
an historical author with a recognizable style.
It is said throughout the literature on stylometry that statistical 
approaches must mingle with traditional analyses. The latter not only 
make sure that the statistics are being brought to bear on validly ed-
ited objects, but also give meaning to the results. While statistically 
significant differences between texts might suggest different authors, we 
still have other interpretive escapes. For example, by coming to inter-
pret Chrétien as having performed a successful “obfuscation attack,” 
we might cling to Hult’s ingenious suggestion that Chrétien invented 
Godefroy: Chrétien deviously provided us with a false co-signature for 
his fictitious co-author! On the other hand, if the results of further sty-
lometric analyses show that the beginning and ending of the Lancelot 
are most likely by the same author, then we would be more justified in 
believing the Godefroy-as-fiction thesis. And yet, we might instead use 
the concept of an “imitation attack” as a metaphor for a medieval con-
tinuator having successfully made his text stylistically indistinguishable 
from his model: thus, although Godefroy signs his name at the end, he 
may have wished the transition to be as anonymous as possible, leaving 
us no trace in the text but his name. The differences among successful / 
unsuccessful imitations or successful / unsuccessful obfuscations will re-
80 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
main open to critical interpretation. Still, there is every reason to include 
the mathematics behind such interpretations when we seek to answer 
the question: just who let Lancelot out of the tower?
Notes
1. See Labbé and Labbé, or Forestier’s web-site devoted to the controversy.
2. More recently, Fish argues that the data-mining of texts (“text-mining”) 
is a method (“if it can be called that”) that “proceed[s] randomly or on a whim.” 
Liberman responds by calling attention to the “paradoxically semi-quantitative 
nature” of Fish’s own method of reading.
3. Consider M. Gardner’s Visitors from Oz. Gardner sought “to come 
close to [L. F.] Baum’s simple style, and to be faithful to the whimsical land and 
characters he created” (xv). But a stylometric analysis by Binongo found that 
Gardner’s “imitation attack,” as it were, failed. The later text still differentiates 
itself from Baum’s original texts. Indeed, it better imitates the style of Baum’s 
continuator, R. P. Thompson! (15)
4. “This senhal or nom de plume [“Chrétien Girls”] accompanied us 
throughout our collaboration, creating a disposable, collective, authorial per-
sona that made it possible to agree on the meanings, effects and affects of a 
collaboration” (Stahuljak et al. vii).
5. The “Chrétien Girls” appropriately treat their nom de plume as homolo-
gous to that of “Chrétien de Troyes”.
6. We counted seven quantitative arguments advanced by James-Raoul in 
support of this thesis; in all but one the data are insufficient to support the nec-
essary analysis.
7. We say “complement” to emphasize the interanimating roles of both 
traditional and non-traditional attribution measures, as well as of both internal 
and external evidence. All must cohere, and so any and all should be used to 
test any one argument for attribution. See Vickers for more helpful terminology 
(111).
8. We thus incorporate Stahuljak et al.: “In our view there is more to be 
gained by keeping these terms [‘authorship’ and ‘style’] open and potentially 
plural, admitting the possibility of multiple styles and taking into account the 
agency of copyists, compilers, and patrons” (5).
9. We quote from the reference editions used by James-Raoul: those in the 
Classiques français du Moyen Âge (CFMA) series, all of which are based on BnF 
794, the Guiot manuscript. The translation of the Lancelot is from the edition 
by Kibler.
10. It should be noted that Hult’s fictionality thesis is made given the pos-
sibility that “statistical studies” may show an unnoticed stylistic difference be-
tween the two parts (79). Still, those studies seem to be limited to the evidence 
from rhyme patterns presented by Shirt in “How Much of the Lion Can We Put 
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 81
Before the Cart?” Although “various features” of Chrétien’s style were exam-
ined (7), Shirt only gives data for the rhymes, a type of “cherry picking” warned 
against more recently by Rudman. Moreover, Shirt’s analysis is limited to a 
subjective evaluation of percentages: while one percentage may be objectively 
greater than another, the difference may not be statistically significant. Shirt’s 
earlier quantitative arguments were also given without rigorous analyses of vari-
ance (“Godefroi de Lagny et la composition de la ‘Charrete’” 37–39).
11. Walters argues against Kay over the historical reality of Godefroy: “The 
notion that Godefroi de Laigni was a pseudonym assumed by Chrétien (or vice 
versa) […] is placed in question by the presence in the Champagne library of 
texts by a certain ‘Magister Godefroi’” (41, n. 23). In the inventory from 1319 
of the Collegiate Church of Saint-Étienne in Troyes, there is an “Item magistri 
Godefridi” (Lalore 2: 270 item 2271). Stirnemann suggests that this text is by 
Geoffrey of Monmouth: “[N]ous espérons pouvoir identifier quelques derniers 
manuscrits de l’inventaire, notamment le « Magister Godefroi », sans doute un 
témoin de l’Historia regum Britannie de Geoffroy de Monmouth …” (“[W]
e hope to be able to identify the few remaining manuscripts of the inventory, 
notably the ‘Magister Godefroi’, without doubt a copy of the Historia regum 
Britannie by Geoffrey of Monmouth”; 38).
12. Indeed, it may be another pseudonym for Chrétien de Troyes if even 
this name is one too, the “Christian from Troy,” a pun calling our attention, 
perhaps, to his embodiment of the translatio studii and Christian fulfillment 
of pagan letters. But collaborative works can have a collective intentionality as 
stunningly complex as that of a strong poet, so why only see a single author as 
capable of “a highly nuanced, unlocalizable intentionality” (Hult 88)? 
13. Where the division occurs is a little vague in James-Raoul’s study. The 
editor of James-Raoul’s reference edition, Roques, had put the division “sans 
doute à partir du v. 6150” (“undoubtedly from v. 6150 on”; ix). In the introduc-
tion, v. 6150 (presumably of Roques’s and not W. Foerster’s edition) is given by 
James-Raoul for the division, although vaguely as “aux environs du vers 6150” 
(“around line 6150”; 19). The distinction might not be so exact, as James-Raoul 
later gives a less precise division: “[…] Godefroy de Lagny a repris la main après 
le vers 6139 qui narre la séquestration de Lancelot” (“Godefroy of Lagny took 
up the relay after line 6139 which narrates the imprisonment of Lancelot”; 
247, n. 186). Yet elsewhere, a sharp division is given at vv. 6146 and 6147 (507, 
n. 149). Ollier’s Lexique et concordance divides the text “à partir du vers 6150” 
(“from line 6150”; 1989 ed. xxviii). When quantitative data are given by James-
Raoul, it is sometimes clear that the 6149/6150 division is used, since the or at 
v. 6147 is given to Chrétien by Ollier in the Lexique et concordance, as well as 
by James-Raoul in the table at 507–08. But tables at 521 and 534 give v. 6147 
as the beginning. Others have argued for still different divisions. See Shirt, “Go-
defroi de Lagny et la composition de la Charrete,” esp. 34–37.
14. The on-line Dictionnaire électronique de Chrétien de Troyes is a work 
in progress that promises to offer such resources.
82 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
15. The total word and line counts for the five romances come from Ollier 
(1989 ed. 234). The couplet count is simply the line count divided by two. We 
provide all of our data at the following website: <http://www.brianjreilly.com> .
16. Unfortunately, Ollier only gives a word count for the whole of the 
Lancelot. Our count here for L1 is simply Ollier’s number for L minus a count 
for L2 (vv. 6150–7112) which we based on the DECT, which uses “semi-dip-
lomatic” transcriptions of the Guiot manuscript by P. Kunstmann. The total 
word count of the transcription is given as 43,637, a difference of 234 words, 
or 0.5%, from the CFMA edition as reported by Ollier, also based on the Guiot 
manuscript.
17. Since James-Raoul’s data involving line counts considers L2 to begin 
at v. 6147, we give that line count here and not the one for L2 beginning at 
v. 6150. To be clear, James-Raoul employs two different divisions between L1 
and L2: for word counts, following Ollier, L2 begins at v. 6150; for line counts, 
L2 begins at v. 6147.
18. We use the neutral L2 to refer to that section of the Lancelot possibly 
by a different author. Ollier uses G for that same section. James-Raoul’s data 
seem, with a few exceptions, to come from this concordance, but an error in 
that data suggests the use of the earlier, uncorrected edition. See below our dis-
cussion of the lexeme hui.
19. The DECT returns for occurrences of the lemma hui seven instances of 
huimés and two of hui where it means “cry” (L 407 and P 5836).
20. Kestemont provides a clear description of stylometry with specific ref-
erence to both medieval texts and rhyme in this journal’s inaugural edition. With 
specific reference to the Lancelot, Thorington, in two studies, uses statistical 
analyses of a typology of rhyme to argue for a difference between L1 and L2: 
“Indeed, the use of rhyme differs so significantly in these two parts of the poem 
that dual authorship of the Charrette is a virtual certainty” (“Rhyme, Reason, 
and Poetic Technique” 126). Moreover, in the epilogue to the Lancelot, Gode-
froy is said to have successfully mirrored Chrétien’s prologue, what we might 
call a successful imitation attack to maintain the text’s conjointure (“De conter 
un conte par rime” 143).
21. Considering the collaborative nature of Shakespeare’s dramatic texts, 
Rudman claims that “[t]here is no Shakespeare dramatic text valid for nontradi-
tional authorship attribution studies” (28a). The texts as we have them are sim-
ply too collaborative. While we take Rudman’s assertion as a caution, the field 
continues to advance at remarkable speed, incorporating the latest in statistics, 
neural networks, etc. While its progress is not inexorable, it has been impressive. 
For example, Kenny begins A Stylometric Study of the New Testament with 
the claim that “[a] necessary preliminary to stylometric comparisons between 
texts must be a thorough grammatical analysis of every word in the texts to be 
compared” (3). But some advances in stylometry have come to study aspects 
of the text unrelated to grammatical or semantic analyses, even to the point of 
using mere character n-grams. N-grams, a selection of characters, words, etc., of 
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 83
length n, might reflect some underlying implicit cognitive processes that struc-
tures an author’s style. For a description of this and other stylometric methods, 
see Stamatatos.
22. The Ollier concordance is based on editions of BnF fr. 794, the Guiot 
manuscript. However interventionist Guiot was as a scribe (from orthography 
to content), he gives us the earliest complete and consistent corpus we have.
23. We could not, however, check those data against the reference editions 
or the manuscript itself. The DECT, with its linking of text, manuscript image, 
and lemmatization, thereby promises to be a powerful tool for research. On 
the need to be both editor and statistician (or at least to create such a research 
team), see the section on “Selecting the Text” in Rudman (27b–28b).
24. Scylla, of course, picked sailors, not cherries, which leads us back to 
that other term for fallacious statistics: fishing.
Works Cited
Banks, David. “Questioning Authority.” Classification Society of North Amer-
ica Newsletter 44 (1996). Web. 9 Mar. 2012.
Binongo, José Nilo G. “Who Wrote the 15th Book of Oz? An Application 
of Multivariate Analysis to Authorship Attribution.” Chance 16.2 (2003): 
9–17. Print.
Brennan, Michael, and Rachel Greenstadt. “Practical Attacks Against Author-
ship Recognition Techniques.” Proceedings of the Twenty-First Innovative 
Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference (2009): 60–65. Web. 9 
Mar. 2012. 
Chrétien de Troyes. Lancelot, or The Knight of the Cart (Le Chevalier de la 
Charrete). Ed. and trans. William W. Kibler. New York: Garland, 1981. 
Print.
———. Les Romans de Chrétien de Troyes édités d’après la copie de Guiot 
(Bibl. nat. fr. 794) 3: Le Chevalier de la Charrete. Ed. Mario Roques. Paris: 
Honoré Champion, 1958. Print.
———. Romans, suivis des Chansons, avec, en appendice Philomena. Ed. Mi-
chel Zink. Paris: Le Livre de Poche, 1994. Print. 
Fish, Stanley. “Mind Your P’s and B’s: The Digital Humanities and Interpreta-
tion.” New York Times 23 Jan. 2012. Web. 23 Jan. 2012. 
Forestier, Georges, et al. Molière, auteur des œuvres de Molière. Web. 9 Mar. 
2012. <http://www.moliere-corneille.paris-sorbonne.fr>.
Gardner, Martin. Visitors from Oz: The Wild Adventures of Dorothy, the Scare-
crow, and the Tin Woodman. New York: St. Martin’s, 1998. Print.
Hult, David. “Author/Narrator/Speaker: The Voice of Authority in Chrétien’s 
Charrete.” Discourses of Authority in Medieval and Renaissance Litera-
ture. Ed. Kevin Brownlee and Walter Stevens. Hanover: UP of New Eng-
land, 1989. 76–96. Print.
84 Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures
James-Raoul, Danièle. Chrétien de Troyes, la griffe d’un style. Paris: Honoré 
Champion, 2007. Print.
Kay, Sarah. “Who Was Chrétien de Troyes?” Arthurian Literature 15 (1997): 
1–36. Print.
Kenny, Anthony. A Stylometric Study of the New Testament. Oxford: Claren-
don, 1986. Print.
Kestemont, Mike. “Stylometry for Medieval Authorship Studies: An Applica-
tion to Rhyme Words.” Digital Philology: A Journal of Medieval Cultures 
1.1 (2012): 42–72. Web. 9 Mar. 2012. <http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/digi-
tal_philology/v001/1.1.kestemont.html>
Kunstmann, Pierre, dir. Dictionnaire électronique de Chrétien de Troyes. LFA, U 
d’Ottawa ATILF, Nancy U. Web. 9 Mar. 2012.
Labbé, Cyril, and Dominique Labbé. “Inter–Textual Distance and Authorship 
Attribution: Corneille and Molière.” Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 
8.3 (2001): 213–31. Web. 9 Mar. 2012.
Lalore, Charles. Inventaire des principales églises de Troyes. 2 vols. Troyes: 
Société académique de l’Aube, 1893. Web. 9 Mar. 2012.
Liberman, Mark. “The ‘dance of the p’s and b’s’: truth or noise?” Language log. 
Web. 26 Jan. 2012. 
Love, Harold. Attributing Authorship: An Introduction. New York: Cambridge 
UP, 2002. Print.
Ollier, Marie-Louise. Lexique et concordance de Chrétien de Troyes d’après la 
copie Guiot. Ed. Serge Lusignan; Charles Doutrelepont; and Bernard Der-
val. Montreal: Institut d’Études Médiévales, 1986. Print.
———. Lexique et concordance de Chrétien de Troyes d’après la copie Guiot. 
Ed. Serge Lusignan; Charles Doutrelepont; and Bernard Derval. Rev. ed. 
Montreal: Institut d’Études Médiévales, 1989. Print.
Reilly, Brian J. Personal website. Web. 3 Mar. 2013. <brianjreilly.com>. 
Rudman, Joseph. “Cherry Picking in Nontraditional Authorship Attribution 
Studies.” Chance 16.2 (2003): 26–32. Print.
Shirt, David J. “Godefroi de Lagny et la composition de la ‘Charrete.’” Roma-
nia 96 (1975): 27–52. Print.
———. “How Much of the Lion Can We Put Before the Cart? Further Light 
on the Chronological Relationship of Chretien De Troyes’s Lancelot and 
Yvain.” French Studies 31.1 (1977): 1–17. Print.
Stahuljak, Zrinka, Virginie Greene, Sarah Kay, Sharon Kinoshita and Peggy Mc-
Cracken. Thinking Through Chrétien de Troyes. Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 
2011. Print.
Stamatatos, Efstathios. “A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Meth-
ods.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Tech-
nology 60.3 (2009): 538–56. Web. 9 Mar. 2012.
Stirnemann, Patricia. “Une bibliothèque princière au XIIe siècle.” Splendeurs de 
la Cour de Champagne au temps de Chrétien de Troyes. Spec. issue of La 
vie en Champagne (1999): 36–42. Print.
Reilly and Dillon 4Virtuous Circles of Authorship Attribution 85
Thorington, Ellen [M.] “« De conter un conte par rime »: rimes riches dans 
Le Chevalier de la Charrette (Lancelot).” Œuvres & critiques 27 (2002): 
132–54. Print.
———. “Rhyme, Reason, and Poetic Technique in Chrétien’s Chevalier de la 
Charrette (Lancelot).” Dame Philology’s Charrette: Approaching Medieval 
Textuality through Chrétien’s Lancelot. Essays in Memory of Karl D. Uitti. 
Eds. Gina L. Greco and Ellen M. Thorington. Tempe: ACMRS, 2012. 113–
26. Print.
Vickers, Brian. “Shakespeare and Authorship Studies in the Twenty-First Cen-
tury.” Rev. of Shakespeare’s Additions to Thomas Kyd’s “The Spanish 
Tragedy”: A Fresh Look at the Evidence Regarding the 1602 Additions, 
by Warren Stevenson; and Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of 
Authorship. Ed. Hugh Craig and Arthur F. Kinney. Shakespeare Quarterly 
62.1 (2011): 106–42. Print.
Walters, Lori. “Holy Adultery: The Charrette, Crusader Queens, and the Guiot 
Manuscript (Paris, BNF FR. 794).” Dame Philology’s Charrette: Approach-
ing Medieval Textuality through Chrétien’s Lancelot. Essays in Memory 
of Karl D. Uitti. Ed. Gina L. Greco and Ellen M. Thorington. Tempe: 
ACMRS, 2012. 37–75. Print.
