Who wrote Bacon? Assessing
the respective roles of Francis
Bacon and his secretaries in the
production of his English works
............................................................................................................................................................
Noel B. Reynolds
Brigham Young University, Political Science
G. Bruce Schaalje
Brigham Young University, Statistics
John L. Hilton (deceased)
Brigham Young University, Statistics
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
In an earlier study that identified previously unrecognized writings of the young
Thomas Hobbes, questions were raised about the authorship of some of Francis
Bacon’s published works. This article reports a follow-up study in which two
independent statistical analyses of Bacon’s English works both conclude that,
whereas Bacon’s autographic writings show clearly that they are authored by
the same person; almost none of his published works can be matched statistically
with the autographs. The most likely explanation for this dramatic finding is that
Bacon’s well-known reliance on secretaries may have been sufficiently extensive
that his writing patterns are obscured or replaced by theirs. This finding suggests
a far simpler explanation for a wide array of anomalies in Bacon’s works than
others have offered. The study further identifies some of Bacon’s works written
during a period when Thomas Hobbes was his secretary, which match Hobbes’s
writing pattern.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
In an earlier wordprinting study, we identified
Thomas Hobbes as the author of three discourses
published anonymously in 1620.1 At the same time
we reported ambiguous results in limited compari-
sons between Francis Bacon and the young Thomas
Hobbes—who was occasionally loaned to Bacon as a
secretary by the Cavendish family. Subsequently, we
have conducted an exhaustive study of Bacon’s
writings to investigate these lingering questions con-
cerning the authorship of some of Bacon’s writings.
Francis Bacon (1561–1626) is widely recognized
as one of the two or three most prolific and signifi-
cant writers of the late sixteenth and early seven-
teenth centuries. His contributions range from the
literary to the philosophical, political, legal, histor-
ical, and scientific. And even though his reputation
suffered considerably in the nineteenth and twenti-
eth centuries, the scholarship of recent decades has
Correspondence:
Noel B. Reynolds,
Brigham Young University,
Political Science.
E-mail: nbr@byu.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
409
doi:10.1093/llc/fqs020 Advance Access published on 31 July 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
restored a sense of his key importance in the ad-
vancement of modern science in his times
(Peltonen, 1996, pp. 1–2; Zittel et al., 2008,
pp. xx–xxiii). Today his writings on science are
often thought to be the most significant of their
period. He is usually the first ghost writer suggested
when the authorship of other materials from that
period is questioned.2
But Bacon’s writings have also puzzled scholars.
How could he possibly have produced so much
while maintaining such extensive political and
legal involvements? And why do his writings contra-
dict one another so frequently in both content and
style? Bacon’s interpreters have advanced a variety
of explanations for these anomalies over the years,
but none of these is entirely convincing. Bacon’s
career as a writer remains mysterious in these re-
spects and begs for more direct and simple
explanations.
Over the last three decades, scholars have de-
veloped a variety of techniques for performing stat-
istical wordprinting or stylometric analyses to assist
in author attribution for disputed texts (see Holmes,
1985; Peng and Hengartner, 2002; Juola, 2006;
Koppel et al., 2009; Stamatatos, 2009). Wordprint
studies have proven useful in assessing competing
theories about the authorship of such diverse texts
as The Federalist and the Pauline epistles. The em-
pirical discovery behind wordprinting is that just as
individuals have distinct fingerprints, so also their
writings reflect a tendency toward consistent pat-
terns in the usage of common noncontextual
terms (words and word patterns that are used at
similar rates regardless of context). These patterns
have been shown to be both idiosyncratic and stat-
istically detectable in the measurement of a single
author’s uninhibited prose writing.
The troubling result of the 1993 Hobbes word-
printing study was that we could detect no single
identifying pattern in the Bacon selections we were
using as controls (Hilton et al., 1997; Fortier,
1997).3 In fact, some of the later materials, possibly
written when Hobbes was his secretary, displayed
wordprint characteristics strikingly close to those
of Hobbes’s writings. We had to confront the pre-
viously unconsidered possibility that Bacon was
using extensive assistance in his writing. We found
ourselves in the unenviable, iconoclastic position of
questioning the authorship of the corpus published
originally under his own name. Both of our statis-
tical analyses demonstrate clearly that Bacon’s pub-
lished English works should not be thought of as
having been authored solely by him. Whereas our
methodology and available data do not allow us to
identify the extent of contribution by most of
Bacon’s secretaries, we did find a strong possibility
that Thomas Hobbes may have contributed signifi-
cantly to some of Bacon’s works.
In this article we first provide a very brief
description of our textual analyses, including
the wordprinting methodology, and the textual
selections used. We then discuss the results of
the statistical analyses. Finally, we provide nonsta-
tistical evidence of authorship and offer possible
historical implications of both the statistical and
nonstatistical results.
2 Wordprint Analysis Procedures
The ability of modern computers to manipulate
large texts has made it possible in recent years to
perform increasingly sophisticated and statistically
reliable wordprint analyses. Because there is no con-
sensus on a single best method for identifying and
measuring wordprints, we selected two classical
methods of statistical authorship analysis—
Hilton’s method (Hilton, 1993; Hilton and
Jenkins, 1987)4 and a method based on principal
components analysis (Joliffe, 1986).5 Hilton’s
method, also referred to as paired-block testing,
makes few statistical or mathematical assumptions
and has been shown to have a low risk of errone-
ously declaring two texts to be written by different
authors. Rules for declaring that two texts have dif-
ferent authors are empirically based on a control
study of known English authors, as are estimates
of error rates. The main steps in paired-block testing
are as follows:
(1) Blocks consisting of about 5,000 words of
single-authored prose text are selected—
exclusive of quotations and other elements
(such as poetry) that might skew the analysis.
N. B. Reynolds et al.
410 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(2) Each block is divided into several sub-blocks,
and each sub-block is measured for the sixty-
five noncontextual word–pattern ratios sug-
gested by Morton (1978).6 To enable testing
of a broad range of materials simultaneously,
Morton devised measures that would be influ-
enced minimally by variations in vocabulary
or style, or small shifts in genre or context.
(3) Using the distribution-free Mann–Whitney
test (Lehman, 1975) at the 5% level, the
sixty-five word–pattern ratios measured for
each text block are compared statistically
with the corresponding ratios of every other
block. For every pair of text blocks, this meas-
urement produces a distance score consisting
of the number of the sixty-five ratios that ex-
hibit a statistically significant difference.
(4) To ensure that the distance score is not influ-
enced by any particular division of the texts
into sub-blocks, steps two and three are re-
peated for forty-nine different divisions into
sub-blocks. The new sub-block divisions are
generated by increasing an initial word offset.
The final distance score for a pair of text
blocks is the median number (across repeated
sub-block divisions) of the sixty-five tests that
exhibit a statistically significant difference ac-
cording to the Mann–Whitney test.
(5) A decision is made as to whether each pair of
texts was written by the same author based on
information derived from the control-authors
study (Hilton and Jenkins, 1987). Using sev-
eral modern texts of known authorship,
Hilton determined that word blocks drawn
from the same author have an average dis-
tance score of around 3.2. Some pairs have 0
significantly different word–pattern ratios,
and very few have >6. On the other hand,
word blocks drawn from different authors,
when compared with each other, have dis-
tance scores between 1 and 17, with an aver-
age of about 8.1. Hence, while it is possible for
two writers to produce texts with small dis-
tance scores, a single author is unlikely to pro-
duce texts with large distance scores. Using
seven as a cutoff, we would make very few
false declarations of distinct authorship.
However, false declarations of single author-
ship (false positives) could occur with greater
risk. Thus, we would need additional nonsta-
tistical evidence to identify uncertain texts
with a particular author, even when the dis-
tance scores are very small.
To corroborate the results of paired-block test-
ing, we also used a second statistical authorship ana-
lysis method based on the multivariate procedure
‘principal components analysis’. Under this
method, the sixty-five word–pattern ratios are mea-
sured for the full text blocks. Whereas Hilton’s
method treats the sixty-five word-pattern ratios sep-
arately and equally, principal components analysis
uses the correlation structure of the measures to
generate a smaller set (often three or so) of com-
posite wordprint measures that incorporate as much
of the variability in the larger sixty-five word–pat-
tern set as possible. Values of these composite meas-
ures for the text blocks are plotted in two or three
dimensions using symbols labeled for the author or
other text identifier. Clustering patterns are usually
observed for texts written by the same author (SAS
Institute,). Examining the questionable texts’ pos-
itions relative to the clusters of known texts can
help determine who may or may not have written
the questionable texts.
3 Texts
This study includes text blocks attributed to five
Elizabethan-period prose writers. The focus is on
forty-three 5000-word blocks drawn from Francis
Bacon’s publications and letters, and twenty-one
blocks of text from Thomas Hobbes. To supplement
the standard control-author study that undergirds
wordprint analyses (see Hilton and Jenkins, 1987),
we have also included sixteen text blocks from three
other contemporaries of Bacon and Hobbes as add-
itional controls. These include six blocks of text by
Fulke Greville, five blocks of text by William (the
younger) Cornwallis, and five blocks of text by
Richard Tuvill.
From the voluminous published writings of Fran-
cis Bacon, we selected works of at least 5,000 words
that were originally written in English. We excluded
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 411
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Bacon’s Latin works because the wordprint methods
do not always work for translations.7 In order to
make this a comprehensive study of Bacon’s career,
the selected text blocks span Bacon’s adult life and
represent his favorite published genres. Many of
these are professional writings, some are philosoph-
ical; and even the religious and purely scientific were
included. All but one are generally agreed to be au-
thentic Bacon products, and all appear to reflect at
least marginally consistent editing (Bacon and Kier-
nan, 1985).8 The following chart (Table 1) gives the
title, best date, and source for the forty-three Bacon
text blocks.
Some of the works included in this list require
comment. The essays were selected because they are
some of the best known of Bacon’s writings. Of The
Colours of Good and Evil was added because it was
published with the essays and probably written
about the same time. We took two text blocks
from Bacon’s paper Certain Observations Made
Upon a Libel, and one from Mr. Bacon’s Discourse
in Praise of His Sovereign, because they display
different writing styles and belong to Bacon’s ear-
liest publications. A short and frequently doubted
work titled Notes on the Present State of Christendom
was also included in the study to test the usual as-
sumption that it was not written by Bacon. Bacon’s
Of The Advancement of Learning was especially im-
portant for the study because of its relevance to
Bacon’s political and scientific philosophy. Three
more blocks came from the 1612 edition of
Bacon’s essays. These blocks included only those
essays that had not been in the 1597 version.
Three texts from The Arguments of Law were se-
lected to represent Bacon’s professional work from
this time period. The study also included the work,
‘Sir Francis Bacon His Apology, in Certain
Imputations Concerning the Late Earl of Essex’, a
product of severe personal turmoil in Bacon’s pol-
itical life. We only used the portions of the 1625
essays that had not appeared in the earlier editions.
New Atlantis, an important philosophical and scien-
tific work, was the source of three more blocks.
Personal letters of Bacon were also included in
the study. Using The Letters and the Life of Francis
Bacon and William Rawley’s Resuscitatio, we ex-
tracted four word blocks from letters that survive
in Bacon’s own handwriting. We removed greetings,
closing comments, and sentences featuring Latin
words or phrases so that the texts contained only
free-flowing, English prose. With these additions,
the study was a comprehensive examination of all
of Francis Bacon’s English works.
As additional controls, the study also included
text blocks known to be written by several of
Bacon’s sixteenth and seventeenth century contem-
poraries: Thomas Hobbes, Fulke Greville, Daniel
Tuvill, and William Cornwallis. These texts were
used to confirm that the wordprinting methods
work as expected for Elizabethan English writing.
The Hobbes texts were also important in order to
investigate the possibility that some Bacon texts
were largely written by Hobbes.
Of Hobbes’s many works, we selected six text
blocks from his most influential political work,
Leviathan. We took one text block from Hobbes’s
On the Life and History of Thucydides, an important
historical work. Six more blocks were drawn from
On the Elements of Law, thus including some of
Hobbes’s main legal writings. Hobbes’s Behemoth
provided three additional text blocks. Last, we se-
lected five text blocks from Three Discourses, with
two blocks each coming from ‘A Discourse upon the
Beginning of Tacitus’ and ‘A Discourse of Rome’,
and one text block coming from the briefer ‘A
Discourse of Laws’.9
For Greville, Tuvill, and Cornwallis, we selected a
total of sixteen text blocks. Tuvill’s selections
included three political essays and two theological
tracts from his Essays Politic and Moral, and Essays
Moral and Theological. All six of Greville’s text blocks
were drawn from The Prose Works of Fulke Greville,
Lord Brooke. And last, we selected five text blocks
from William Cornwallis’s Essayes. With these add-
itions, we proceeded to our wordprint analyses.10
4 Wordprint Results:
Noncontroversial
Sixteenth–Seventeenth
Century Authors
Hilton’s original control-author study used noncon-
troversial English writings from the eighteenth,
N. B. Reynolds et al.
412 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Table 1 The English works of Francis Bacon used in this study
Block Source Title Date Referencea
Bacon 1 Autograph letters Various 117, 118, 237, 252, 256, 262,
263, 292, 293, 295, 304, 313
Bacon 2 Autograph letters Various I: 315, 320, 321, 323, 324,
347, 353, 357, 360; II: 28,
30, 32, 33, 36, 65, 66, 165,
190, 205, 370, 371
Bacon 3 Autograph letters Various III: 14, 57, 67, 217, 257, 258,
259, 277; IV: 105, 106, 128,
130, 131, 212, 217, 246,
281, 311, 324, 386
Bacon 4 Autograph letters Various I: 350, 351, 356, 361; II: 49,
50, 51, 55, 67, 101, 102,
104, 164
Bacon 5 The Collected Essaies 1597 VI: 525–534
Bacon 6, 7 Of the Colours of Good and Evil 1595–96 VII: 77–92
Bacon 8 Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel Published This Present Year,
1592
1592 VIII: 147–161
Bacon 9 Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel Published This Present Year,
1592
1592 VIII: 147–161, 182–199
Bacon 10 Mr. Bacon’s Discourse in the Praise of His Sovereign 1592 VIII: 126–143
Bacon 11 Notes on the Present State of Christendom 1582 VIII: 18–30
Bacon 12 The Maxims of the Law 1597 VII: 327–341
Bacon 13 Reading on the Statute of Uses 1600 VII: 416–429
Bacon 14, 15 Of the Proficience and Advancement of Learning, The First Book 1604–05 III: 261–286
Bacon 16, 17 Of the Proficience and Advancement of Learning, The Second Book 1604–05 III: 321–337
Bacon 18–20 The Collected Essaies (additions to 1597 edition only) 1612 VI: 543–591
Bacon 21 ‘The Case of Impeachment of Waste’ (from The Arguments of Law) 1613–16 VII: 527–544
Bacon 22–24 New Atlantis 1622 III: 129–166
Bacon 25 ‘Sir Francis Bacon, His Apology, in Certain Imputations Concerning the 1604 X: 141–157
Late Earl of Essex’
Bacon 26 A Confession of Faith, Before 1603 VII: 219–226
Christian Paradoxes Unknown VII: 292–297
Bacon 27 Valerius Terminus 1603 III: 217–231
Bacon 28 Of the True Greatness of Britain 1608 VII: 47–60
Bacon 29 ‘The Jurisdiction of the Marches’ (from The Arguments of Law) 1613–16 VII: 587–600
Bacon 30 ‘In the Case De Rege Inconsulto’ (from The Arguments of Law) 1613–16 VII: 687–700
Bacon 31a Fragment of Beginning of the History of Great Britain 1609–10 VI: 275–279
Bacon 31b Fragment of History of the Reign of King Henry VIII 1622 VI: 269–270
Bacon 31c History of the Reign of King Henry VII 1621–22 VI: 237–245
Bacon 32–34 The Collected Essaies (additions to 1612 edition only) 1625 Kiernan, 43–177
Bacon 35 Sylva Sylvarum: or, Natural History 1622–26 II: 339–359
Bacon 36 Sylva Sylvarum: or, Natural History 1622–26 II: 339–359, 528–547
Bacon 37 Considerations Touching a War With Spain: to the Prince 1624–25 XIV: 469–489
Bacon 38 History of the Reign of King Henry VII 1621–22 VI: 27–47
Bacon 39 History of the Reign of King Henry VII 1621–22 VI: 27–47, 200–225
Bacon 40 Advertisement Touching an Holy War 1622 VII: 18–34
Bacon 41 Physiological and Medical Remains Unknown III: 799–804, 808–809, 811,
814, 820–821, 827–829
Bacon 42 Ordinances in Chancery Unknown VII: 759–772
Bacon 43 The Use of the Law Unknown VII: 463–477
aReferences of the letters are to the Letters and the Life of Francis Bacon, and the other references are to The Works of Francis Bacon,
both edited by James Spedding—except where otherwise indicated. The dates listed refer to the approximate date that it is believed the
work was written. The dates for the individual hand-written letters can be found in the sources listed.
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 413
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. To verify that
the paired-block method is useful for Elizabethan
era English texts, 666 paired comparisons of the
thirty-seven noncontroversial text blocks attributed
to Hobbes, Greville, Tuvill, and Cornwallis were
carried out (Fig. 1). The results were very similar
to the original control-author study. The 245
within-author comparisons produced distance
scores ranging from 0 to 7, with a mean of 2.74
and a standard deviation of 1.34. The 421
between-author comparisons produced distance
scores ranging from 1 to 12, with a mean of 6.14
and a standard deviation of 2.10. Because only one
of the 245 true within-author comparisons (<0.5%)
had a distance score of 7, we continued Hilton’s
practice of declaring controversial text pairs with a
distance score of 7 as being of distinct authorship.
The error rate is again expected to be 0.5%.
The principal components analysis yielded simi-
lar results for the noncontroversial texts (Fig. 2).
Text blocks from the same author tended to cluster
in the principal components plots. The Hobbes
cluster is somewhat less compact than the others
in part because the number of Hobbes texts was
much higher than for the other authors.
5 Bacon Texts
Paired-block wordprint analysis of the forty-three
Bacon text blocks produced surprising results.
Distance scores for pairs of Bacon texts ranged
from 0 to the very high value of 16, with a mean
of 6.56 and a standard deviation of 3.18. The distri-
bution of distance scores for pairs of Bacon texts was
similar to that for Bacon texts paired with known
non-Bacon texts (Fig. 3), and was also similar to that
for differently authored non-Bacon Elizabethan texts
(Fig. 1). In principal components plots (Fig. 4), the
Bacon texts as a whole did not form anything like a
compact cluster, and there was a great deal of over-
lap with the cluster of Hobbes texts. Hence, the evi-
dence from both statistical analyses clearly indicates
that Bacon (at least alone) did not author all of the
texts historically attributed to him.
Using both paired-block analysis and principal
components analysis, we examined the Bacon text
blocks, hoping that a logical subset of the text blocks
with similar wordprints (small distance scores and
obvious clustering on the principal components
plot) could be identified. Such a subset could be
argued to have a clearly defined ‘pure Bacon’ word-
print. It turned out that the four blocks of Bacon’s
personal letters (autographs) comprised such a
subset. The six pairs of these texts had a
mean-distance score of 2.33, with a standard devi-
ation of 0.56. They also formed a fairly compact
cluster in the principal components plot (Fig. 4).
These observations suggest that Bacon did, in fact,
have a consistently measurable wordprint seemingly
in common with other writers.
Having learned that the autographs do success-
fully define Bacon’s wordprint, we compared all of
the other Bacon texts to the autographs (Fig. 5). The
156 pairs of texts, consisting of one of the autograph
texts and one of the other Bacon texts, had a mean
distance score of 8.30, with a standard deviation of
3.14. Over half (57%) of the text pairs had distance
scores of 7, strongly suggesting the extensive in-
volvement of other hands in the composition of
most of Bacon’s published texts.
Of the entire group of Bacon texts, only one
had consistently small distance scores when paired
with each of the Bacon autographs. The Apology
(Sir Francis Bacon His Apology . . . Concerning the
same author
different authors
1211109876543210
80
60
40
20
0
distance score
nu
m
be
r 
of
 p
ai
rs
Fig. 1 Distance score distributions for paired-block com-
parisons of thirty-seven noncontroversial texts of four
Elizabethan authors (Note that distributions for the two
types of comparisons have different heights simply be-
cause the numbers of pairs of texts differ for the two
types).
N. B. Reynolds et al.
414 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Late Earl of Essex), written by Bacon to save his
career in a complicated political crisis, revealed a
wordprint close to that of his letters. It had
a mean-distance score of 2.25 from the autographs,
and none of the distance scores were as large as 7. It
was located well within the cluster of the autographs
in the principal components plot (Fig. 4). All the
other published materials appeared to be either am-
biguous or clearly not written by Bacon alone. We
therefore expanded the subset of texts representing
the ‘pure Bacon’ wordprint to include the Apology
in addition to the four autograph text blocks.
Distance scores were computed for the remaining
thirty-eight Bacon texts paired with the Bacon auto-
graphs and the Apology (Table 2). The text with the
smallest mean distance from the autographs and the
Apology came from the first third of the New
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
0
100
200
distance score
nu
m
be
r 
of
 p
ai
rs
pairs of Bacon texts
Bacon texts versus
non-Bacon texts
Fig. 3 Distance-score distributions for paired-block com-
parisons of Bacon texts paired with other Bacon texts, and
Bacon texts paired with Cornwallis, Greville, Hobbes, and
Tuvill texts (Note that distributions for the two types of
comparisons have different heights simply because the
numbers of pairs of texts differ for the two types).
pairs of autographs
other Bacon texts
autographs versus
161514131211109876543210
20
10
0
distance score
nu
m
be
r 
of
 p
ai
rs
Fig. 5 Distance score distribution for paired-block com-
parisons of the Bacon autographs with each other and
with the other Bacon texts. (Note that distributions for
the two types of comparisons have different heights
simply because the numbers of pairs of texts differ for
the two types.)
B
H
T
50-5
5
0
-5
principal component 1
pr
in
ci
pa
l c
om
po
ne
nt
 2
B
B
B
B
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+A
+
+
++
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
++
+C
C
C
CC
G
G
G
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
H HH
HH
H
H
H
HH
H
HH
H
H
T
TT
T
T
Autographs
+ Bacon
C Cornwallis
G Greville
Hobbes
Tuvill
A 'Apology'
Fig. 4 Principal components plot for texts attributed to
Francis Bacon, as well as noncontroversial texts of four
other Elizabethan authors. Note that the Bacon auto-
graphs and the ‘Apology’ are denoted with different sym-
bols than the other Bacon texts.
50-5
-5
0
5
principal component 1
pr
in
ci
pa
l c
om
po
ne
nt
 2
C
C
C
C
C
GG
G
G
G
G
H
H H
H
H H
H
H
H
H H
H
H
H
H
HH
HH
H
TT T T
T
TuvillT
HobbesH
GrevilleG
CornwallisC
Fig. 2 Principal components plot for thirty-seven non-
controversial texts of four Elizabethan authors.
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 415
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Atlantis text. This text is not as precisely similar to
the Bacon handwritten texts as is the Apology, yet it
is well inside the extremes of the within-author dis-
tance score distribution for Elizabethan authors
(Fig. 1). It is thus possible that at least part of the
first New Atlantis block is Bacon’s writing. It is strik-
ing, however, that the second and third parts of the
full New Atlantis text both have very different word-
prints than the Bacon autographs and the Apology,
and do not appear to be Bacon’s writing.
Twenty-five of the remaining thirty-seven Bacon
texts had mean distance scores from the autographs
and the Apology exceeding 7, and therefore are
almost certainly not Bacon’s own writing. The
twelve texts with smaller mean distances had scores
ranging from 4.60 to 6.80. These distances are large
enough to raise questions about single authorship by
Bacon, but no firm conclusions can be drawn.
Hence, dramatically unlike all four of the Eliza-
bethan writers that we studied in the control-author
study, most of Bacon’s text blocks were apparently
not written by Bacon—at least not using the per-
sonal noncontextual word patterns that Bacon con-
sistently used in his handwritten letters. Apparently
he either co-authored most of his papers or com-
pletely used other writers’ words or works.
6 Comparison of Bacon Texts to
Thomas Hobbes’s Wordprint
When dealing with co-authored texts, the familiar
statistical properties of paired-block wordprint
comparisons are compromised because the control
author studies used only singly authored texts. It is
impossible to say in general how distributions of
distance scores are affected as larger portions of
the text blocks are co-authored by writers with
more or less dissimilar noncontextual word pat-
terns. Of course, if the text was essentially written
by one co-author with only minimal rewording
from another’s editing, then the noncontextual
word patterns should almost match those of the
principal author.11 Hence, we used paired-block
wordprint methods to investigate the possibility,
suggested by the principal components plot
(Fig. 4), that Thomas Hobbes was the principal
author of some of the texts historically attributed
to Bacon.
We note at the outset that the nature of
paired-block wordprint analysis, compounded by
the fact that many of the Bacon texts may have
been co-authored, makes the evidence that
paired-block wordprint analyses can provide far
from conclusive. Whereas we can show which of
Bacon’s works may have been authored by any par-
ticular secretary (such as Hobbes), scholars will need
to rely on other kinds of evidence before they con-
clusively attribute any particular work to that secre-
tary. Historical evidence, content analysis, and
stylistic analysis all have roles to play.
Nevertheless, to explore the possibility that some
of Bacon’s published work might have been written
primarily by Hobbes, we paired all thirty-nine of
Bacon’s nonautograph text blocks with the
twenty-one Hobbes texts. Seven or eight of these
texts have distance scores consistent with sole
authorship by Hobbes (Table 3), and seven or
eight more are similar enough to suggest significant
contributions by Hobbes to the writing. However,
we note that the Bacon texts in rows 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 12,
and 14 of Table 3 were probably written before
Hobbes was available to assist Bacon in the writing
of these texts. It is also interesting that, whereas the
first two blocks of text from New Atlantis have dis-
tance scores consistent with sole or partial author-
ship by Hobbes, the third New Atlantis block had a
mean distance score of 8.43 from the Hobbes texts
and is therefore almost certainly not authored by
Hobbes.
7 Interpretations of Bacon’s Style
Bacon scholars have offered a variety of explan-
ations for the ambiguities in Bacon’s writings, and
particularly the New Atlantis, with its obvious styl-
istic shift in the final section. Howard White
explains them by dividing Bacon’s thought into
‘provisional’ thinking and ‘definitive’ thinking, or
that of a provisional political science to maintain
an atmosphere in which to make and implement a
right interpretation of nature—the ship that would
take man to the New Atlantis. Until arrival at
N. B. Reynolds et al.
416 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
utopia, tension between the provisional and the
definitive could not be avoided, and so, White
explains, Bacon created inconsistencies either inten-
tionally or unconsciously as a matter of course. J. G.
Crowther also sees a division of thought in Bacon’s
mind, but into numerous ‘compartments’ rather
than only two, which caused the inconsistencies in
his political and intellectual activities, as well as sub-
sequent distrust by others. Mary Hesse offers a
similar account showing that Bacon was pragmatic,
settling for the best possible means and ends at a
given time.
Others see less of a problem with contradictions
in content. Jonathan Marwil accounts for inconsis-
tencies by defining Bacon’s work as a rhetorical
whole, resolving contradictions by simply interpret-
ing his prose into coherence. Peter Urbach agrees
with Marwil to some extent; he also sees Bacon’s
Table 2 Mean-distance scores for thirty-eight Bacon texts when paired with the four autographs and
Apology, ordered by mean distance.
Bacon text Mean distance
score
Number of
distance scores 7
New Atlantis, part A 3.60 0
Of the Colours of Good and Evil 4.60 0
Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel, part A 5.50 2
Of the Colours of Good and Evil, The Collected Essaies (1597) 5.40 1
The Collected Essaies, published in 1612, part B 5.40 0
Valerius Terminus 5.60 1
History of Great Britain, History of Henry VIII 5.60 2
Considerations Touching a Holy War With Spain 6.00 3
The Collected Essaies, published in 1625, part A 6.40 2
The Collected Essaies, published in 1597 6.40 2
Mr. Bacon’s Discourse In the Praise of His Sovereign 6.40 2
The Collected Essaies, published in 1612, part A 6.40 3
Of The Advancement of Learning, The First Book, part B 6.80 3
New Atlantis, part B 7.20 3
Of The Advancement of Learning, The First Book, part A 7.20 2
Advertisement Touching an Holy War 7.60 3
Of The Advancement of Learning, the Second Book, part A 7.80 4
Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel, part B 7.80 3
Of The Advancement of Learning, the Second Book, part B 8.00 4
The Use of the Law 8.60 5
The History of the Reign of King Henry VII, part A 8.60 4
‘Case De Non Procedendo Rege Inconsulto’ from Arg. of Law 8.80 5
Sylva Sylvarum, or Natural History, part B 8.80 5
A Confession of Faith, Christian Paradoxes 9.00 5
New Atlantis, part C 9.00 3
The Maxims of the Law 9.20 5
Of the True Greatness of Britain 9.20 5
History of the Reign of King Henry VII, part B 9.40 4
‘The Case of Impeachment’ from The Arguments of Law 10.00 5
The Collected Essaies, published in 1612, part C 10.40 4
‘Jurisdiction of the Marches’ from Arguments of Law 10.60 5
The Collected Essaies, published in 1625, part B 10.80 5
Physiological and Medical Remains 11.00 5
The Collected Essaies, published in 1625, part C 11.40 5
Reading on the Statute of Uses 11.80 5
Sylva Sylvarum, or Natural History, part A 12.00 5
Ordinances in Chancery 13.20 5
Notes on the Present State of Christendom 14.00 5
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 417
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
rhetoric as important, calling New Atlantis ‘a fable
which Bacon himself composed’. John Leary also
argues that Bacon’s political and philosophical
works are a kind of comprehensive whole. Mary
Hesse sees Bacon’s inconsistencies as a conflict be-
tween politics and philosophy but reduces his inter-
est in politics almost entirely to a means of funding
himself as ‘the prophet of a new science’. William
Smedley had argued a stronger version of this view,
saying that Bacon preferred an obscure philosoph-
ical life without credit even for his writings. Smedley
and others have argued that Bacon’s reliance on a
corps of secretaries lends support to their theory
that Bacon was responsible for Shakespeare’s writ-
ings as well (Smedley, 1912; Crowther, 1960; Hesse,
1964; White, 1968; Marwil, 1976; Urbach, 1987;
Leary, 1994).
Other scholars recognize the inconsistencies in
more stylistic terms. Michael Kiernan notes an
inconsistency in Bacon’s use of quotations. Some
of his works use many; others use none. Kate
Aughterson sees the same kind of inconsistency in
Bacon’s use of imagery. Robert Adolph offers an
account of Bacon’s contradictions by attributing
them to a utilitarian style of writing, which might
be extended to a ‘utilitarian passion’. Somewhat like
White and Hesse, Adolph argues that Bacon’s diver-
sity of styles defies influence-hunters because he
always wrote in pursuit of a particular end at a
particular time so that his form followed function.
It is true that Bacon even mentioned the utility of
using different styles (Adolph, 1968, pp. 38, 46–49,
74–76; Kiernan, 1985; Aughterson, 1992;).
These scholars offer plausible answers to the
question of puzzling inconsistencies in Bacon’s
thinking and writing style. On the question of the
volume of work he produced, however, they say
little.
8 Bacon’s Secretaries
Bacon’s publications not only gained him notoriety
as a thinker and writer, but earned him significant
public exposure in the political world and particu-
larly at court. Born into a family in royal service, he
inherited a thoroughly political life. But this did not
prevent him from claiming that all knowledge was
also his province. From this combination of politics
and philosophy came his commitment to a British
empire built on scientific knowledge—the pursuit of
a New Atlantis. But Bacon’s tumultuous political
career made it difficult for him to focus on his in-
tellectual interests. Consequently, many of his biog-
raphers have regarded him as a political man first
and foremost and a theorist second, recognizing
that he never constructed a systematic political
theory.
Table 3 The fifteen Bacon texts with the smallest mean-distance scores from Thomas Hobbes.
Bacon text Written while Hobbes could
reasonably have assisted
Mean-distance score
from Hobbes texts
Number of
distance scores 7
Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel, part A No 2.71 0
Of The Colours of Good and Evil No 2.76 0
The History of the Reign of King Henry VII, part A Yes 2.86 0
Certain Observations Made Upon a Libel, part B No 3.24 1
Valerius Terminus No 3.28 0
Mr. Bacon’s Discourse In Praise of His Sovereign No 3.33 1
New Atlantis, part A Yes 3.43 0
History of Great Britain, History of Henry VIII Yes 3.57 0
Use of the Law Yes 3.86 0
New Atlantis, part B Yes 3.90 1
Sylva Sylvarum, or Natural History, part B Yes 3.95 1
Maxims of the Law No 4.00 1
Advertisement Touching a Holy War Yes 4.10 0
Of the True Greatness of Britain No 4.19 1
The History of the Reign of King Henry VII, part B Yes 4.38 1
N. B. Reynolds et al.
418 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The results of our wordprint analysis lend sub-
stantial support to other scholarship which suggests
that Bacon relied on others to produce his philo-
sophical works by following his general instructions,
whereas his time and energies were consumed by
political life. Further support for this explanation
comes from the number of secretaries that Bacon
employed throughout his life. The extent of
Bacon’s household, especially at the height of his
political power, suggests he had ready access to
such assistance. In 1618, a list only half-extant re-
veals that his retinue included seventy-two staff
members. John Aubrey, a contemporary and
friend of Thomas Hobbes who wrote short biogra-
phies on many of his contemporaries, recorded that
Bacon ‘was wont to contemplate in his delicious
walkes at Gorhambery, and dictate to Mr. Thomas
Bushell, or some other of his Gentlemen, that at-
tended him with inke and paper ready to sett down
presently his Thoughts’. According to Aubrey (who
was probably relying on Hobbes as his source)
Thomas Hobbes was Bacon’s favorite secretary and
better at ‘taking his thoughts, then [than] any of the
other(s)’. Besides Bushell and Hobbes, William
Rawley, Thomas Meautys, John Young, and Peter
Boener, among others, served as secretaries
(Aubrey and Dick, 1957; Epstein, 1957, pp. 3–4;
Jardine and Stewart, 1999).
Bacon also consulted a wide range of contempor-
aries regarding his works and thoughts including
Toby Mathew, Thomas Bodley, Robert Cotton,
John Selden, Henry Savile, John Danvers, Ben
Jonson, Edward Sherburn, Fulke Greville, and
Bishop Lancelot Andrews; additionally, Bacon’s
brother Anthony and friend Nicholas Faunt may
have participated in some way in the development
of his thought and writings. Anthony sent sonnets,
official reports about European affairs, and his own
speculations on social life back to England from
France throughout the late 1500s; and he had con-
nections with the Earls of Essex and Southampton
and with Robert Sidney, who also wrote poetry.
Anthony or Faunt may have written Bacon’s Notes
on the State of Christendom. Bacon dedicated his first
editions of the Essays to Anthony, who may also have
played some part in producing them (Du Maurier,
1975, pp. 53–54, 180–181; Spedding et al., 1857–74).
Not only did Bacon employ assistance in publish-
ing, he offered it also. Bacon’s versatility as an
amanuensis has been clearly recognized and docu-
mented by his biographers. Not only did he help
write uncounted letters and other documents for
the Earl of Essex’s signature, he also wrote forged
letters from Essex to promote his own career, and he
wrote the declaration used by the queen to justify
her execution of Essex for treason (Jardine and
Stewart, 1999). He also assisted James I by writing
tracts on various subjects in his name. Political writ-
ing was often a collective effort, with Bacon on both
sides of the byline and seldom entirely represented
by it—a practice that is still common among public
officials.
Bacon got his own start in life working as a
ghostwriter in the 1580s and 1590s in the employ-
ment of the Earl of Essex with a team of writers who
produced correspondence and other writings for the
earl. While no one has been able to demonstrate that
Bacon wrote any particular item for Essex, Bacon’s
most recent biographers note that ‘the complex pro-
cedures of commissioning, drafting, revising, editing
and publishing in this sort of situation put the
‘‘authorship’’ of any given piece of writing beyond
recall’. But it was perfectly clear that Bacon went
away from this experience with ‘a true understand-
ing of how the intricacies of this system might be
exploited to his own advantage’. Given the length of
Bacon’s service to Essex and its formative role at the
beginning of his career, it may seem strange that his
own memoirs fail to mention ‘the country house,
with its coterie of writers, thinkers and experi-
menters, as a significant part of his own develop-
ment and the evolution of his Great Instauration’.
His biographers speculate that ‘the years of intimacy
with the Earl of Essex were in the end too painful for
him to wish to recall’ (Jardine and Stewart, 1999,
pp. 132, 139).
Bacon’s own sensitivity to the differences be-
tween the writing styles of different authors was re-
corded in an account of the queen’s efforts to
develop a case for treason out of John Hayward’s
book, Henry IV. When she suggested torture to get
Hayward to confess the true author, Bacon sug-
gested a less objectionable method. ‘Let him have
pen, ink, and paper, and help of books, and be
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 419
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
enjoined to continue the story where it breaketh
off; I will undertake, by collecting [i.e. collating
and comparing] the styles to judge whether he
were the author or no’ (Jardine and Stewart, 1999,
p. 211).
Rawley, certainly an admirer of his friend and
employer, wrote that Bacon was not one who in
conversation would appropriate the speech wholly
to himself, or delight to outdo others, but leave the
liberty to the co-assessors to take their turns.
‘Whereupon he would draw a man on and allure
him to speak upon such a subject, as wherein he
was peculiarly skillful, and would delight to speak’
(Du Maurier, 1975, p. 41). The evidence of the
wordprints suggests that Bacon may have played a
similar role in the production of his writings as he
did with conversation.
Bacon was not, however, entirely removed from
the publication of his works. Although he may have
assigned out much of the initial drafting, he may
have been more active in the editing and revision
process. Michael Kiernan analyzed each edition of
Bacon’s essays and found changes in spelling,
syntax, diction, and ideas themselves, and some-
times the replacement of words or entire phrases
in Bacon’s own handwriting. Bacon sometimes
interrupted the printing process so he could make
further changes. The concern for detail here may
have been motivated by his distance from the ori-
ginal production of the works.
Political life in early seventeenth-century Britain
was tumultuous, particularly for a man who was
defending the prerogatives of the Jacobean court
against increasing demands for parliamentary su-
premacy. Bacon’s interest in a stable polity for the
sake of science often put him at odds with both the
crown and commons, although his higher allegiance
was to the crown. He was born to the Lord Keeper
of the Seal under Elizabeth, groomed for a political
life, and motivated by family tradition to secure a
successful career and live the accordant lifestyle. But
his father failed to prepare financially for him,
which made court politics seem necessary for his
advancement. Under Queen Elizabeth he had little
success. Except for his uncle Lord Burghley’s assist-
ance in securing him a seat in Parliament in 1581
and Elizabeth’s pulling him ‘over the bar’ in 1582,
he failed to advance and remained relatively obscure
in Parliament, notwithstanding intense efforts to
gain a significant government post. A series of
gaffes and blunders during the 1580s and 1590s
postponed his success until he gained positions of
prominence in the Parliaments of 1597 and 1601.
He fared much better under James I, having learned
from his past failures in court politics. After obtain-
ing a knighthood in 1603, he ascended to the office
of Learned Council in 1604, Solicitor General in
1607, Attorney General in 1613, Privy Councillor
in 1616, Lord Keeper in 1617, Lord Chancellor in
1618, and was named Viscount of St Albans in 1621,
just before his prosecution, conviction, and expul-
sion for accepting bribes.
Bacon’s time during these 40 years was con-
sumed with political activity, court politics, and
intrigue. His attention was focused on gaining
the ‘great place’ that would make him a servant of
the state, and give him the fame, business, power,
literary renown, and opulent financial independence
he sought. Joel Epstein describes Bacon’s life as
one on a political ‘treadmill assuring him total
status as a ‘‘political man’’, which would, in
Bacon’s words, give him the ‘power to do good
[which] is the true and lawful end of aspiring’.
But after fighting his way to the top, he ‘lost his
zeal for carrying out reform’ (Epstein, 1977, pp.
180–181). Throughout the 1580s and 1590s he was
occupied with his struggle to gain government
office, and thereafter the struggle continued as he
moved toward the pinnacle of his career. These
continual demands on his time and energies
would necessarily require substantial assistance in
producing literary works.
Thus, many scholars agree that Bacon’s political
writings were provisional and that his intellectual
works were directed at least in part toward political
ends. He wrote flattering letters to Elizabeth to gain
favor and office. He wrote for Essex and James, who
were interested in intellectual innovation, and he
sought both their favors in hopes of sparking an
intellectual revolution at court so power could be
used for the advancement of learning. Rawley wrote
that Bacon intended his writings to increase his
fame at home to match that which he enjoyed
abroad. With expedience as the impetus, he
N. B. Reynolds et al.
420 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
published substantial works and advanced far
beyond his once obscure position in Parliament.
After his conviction and fall from power, during
his most intellectually productive years, he main-
tained an interest in the affairs of state and may
have written even then to revive his career. Epstein
argues that Bacon wrote the Advancement of
Learning and many other works to gain favor with
James and the History of Henry VII to regain it.
Kiernan, Marwil, and Peltonen agree that many, if
not most of his works, possibly even his reports on
his scientific experiments, were produced for the
purpose of gaining political place (Works, 1:53;
Epstein, 1977, pp. 78, 174, note 52; Cornwallis and
Allen, 1946, p. xxvi; Peltonen, 1992).
This account of political ambition is consistent
with Adolph’s description of Bacon’s utilitarian
method of writing. Utility was of utmost import-
ance to Bacon, at first in the pursuit of a truly
great Britain as a scientific utopia, and thereafter
in the pursuit of a great place, the power necessary
to serve the state and gain fame and financial inde-
pendence. In each case, the pursuit of power con-
sumed virtually all of Bacon’s time and attention.
The use of secretaries may have made his political
career and literary renown possible. Even though his
income eventually rose to high levels, his lavish
spending undermined his hopes for financial inde-
pendence, and he died deeply in debt.
9 Hobbes and Bacon
We have noted Hobbes’s position as a particularly
favored secretary during a vaguely defined period
near the end of Bacon’s life. Hobbes’s employer,
William Cavendish (the younger), possibly became
acquainted with Bacon at Parliament in 1614.
Cavendish wrote ten essays in Baconian style in
1615, corresponded with him by 1616, and received
Bacon’s assistance in his (or Hobbes’s) translation
of Bacon’s Essayes into Italian before its publication
in 1618. Clearly, Hobbes, who served as Cavendish’s
tutor and secretary, would have become acquainted
with Bacon during the same period. Cavendish’s
correspondence with Fulgentio Micanzio, secretary
to Paolo Sarpi (Venice’s state theologian), which
numbered some seventy-five letters between 1615
and 1628, also establishes his acquaintance with
Bacon. Micanzio frequently lauded Bacon’s essays,
worked to have Bacon translated in Italian, began
his own correspondence with Bacon, and often
asked Cavendish to give his regards to Bacon.
Financial records also indicate that Hobbes visited
Bacon on behalf of his employer in May 1619
and May 1620 (Malcolm, 1984, pp. 47–54;
Malcolm, 1996, p. 18; Martinich, 1999, pp. 28–29,
37–40, 54, 65).
As previously mentioned, Aubrey claimed that
Hobbes served as Bacon’s secretary, making two ex-
plicit references to their relationship. In his sketch of
Bacon, besides asserting that Hobbes was his source
of information regarding the cause of Bacon’s death,
he noted, ‘Mr Thomas Hobbes was beloved by his
Lordship, who was wont to have him walke with
him in his delicate groves where he did meditate:
and when a notion darted into his mind, Mr. Hobbs
was presently to write it downe, and his Lordship
was wont to say that he did it better than any one els
about him; for that many times, when he read their
notes, he scarce understood what they writt, because
they understood it not clearly themselves’. Likewise,
in his sketch of Hobbes, Aubrey noted Hobbes’s
dictation skills, as well as stating that ‘The Lord
Chancellour Bacon loved to converse with him.
He assisted his Lordship in translating severall of
his Essayes into Latin, one, I well remember, is
that Of the Greatnes of Cities’.12
A final indication of Hobbes’s service to Bacon
comes from a letter from Froncois de Verdus, a
French friend, to Hobbes in 1664. De Verdus
wrote of his plan to dedicate his translation of
Bacon’s De sapientia veterum, which was never pub-
lished, to Hobbes; ‘for that purpose’, he queried,
‘I should like to know precisely about something
which I think I was told a long time ago, namely,
that you were a secretary to this Chancellor
Bacon in his studies’ (Hobbes and Malcolm, 1994,
pp. 625–29).
Because our statistical analysis and the word-
printing model, it presumes, are much better at
showing us what someone did not write than what
they did, it cannot provide conclusive proof that any
particular secretary wrote any particular Bacon text.
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 421
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Only when historical and textual evidence confirms
the connection of a particular secretary with a text
are stronger conclusions justified. Our comparison
of Thomas Hobbes’s wordprint with the Bacon
corpus provides a good example of these issues.
From our baseline studies, it would seem quite pos-
sible that Hobbes authored some of the published
Bacon works. But the early dates of publication for
some text blocks so identified show that they were
written before Hobbes is known to have been avail-
able to Bacon for that kind of assistance, and thus at
least for these cases the pattern measurements give a
false positive. The most intriguing possible major
involvement by Hobbes is in the first and middle
sections of New Atlantis, which, if recent scholarly
opinion is correct, were composed in 1624, the most
likely period for Hobbes to have been working with
Bacon (Peltonen, 1996). The first two of the three
word blocks drawn from New Atlantis, whereas not
matching perfectly, fit quite comfortably with
Hobbes’s wordprint.
While a follow-up study focusing on the secre-
taries might possibly identify more clearly the au-
thors for some of the texts, it needs to be recognized
that in its present stage of development, wordprint-
ing is still a blunt instrument when working with
non-single-authored text blocks. Wordprinting de-
pends on collateral textual and historical studies for
many of its conclusions where text blocks are not
single-authored free-flow works. While it might be
possible to tease out further direct connections be-
tween specific secretaries and particular texts, the
main conclusion we can confidently defend at this
point is negative: most of Bacon’s works were not
likely written solely by Bacon. The actual extent of
his involvement in producing each of the works
attributed to him remains a question for further
interdisciplinary study.
10 Conclusions
Wordprinting analysis has provided important, new
information that can help Bacon scholars explain
the anomalies long observed in Bacon’s writings.
Through an analysis of his autographic writings,
we have disproved the possible claim that Bacon is
unique, writing with a different wordprint at will.
We are left with the following possibilities that scho-
lars may wish to consider as explanations on a
work-by-work basis:
(1) Some materials may have been written en-
tirely by someone besides Bacon. This would
seem to be the case, for example, with the
frequently doubted Notes on the Present State
of Christendom.
(2) Some materials may have been written with
the extensive use of assistants. As reported
above, Aubrey presents a convincing portrait
of Bacon as the savant who customarily dic-
tated his thoughts to his secretaries and other-
wise used their assistance in the writing
process. The widely divergent results of word-
printing analysis applied to his works suggest
that these secretaries were likely formulating
many phrases, sentences, and paragraphs to
convey what they understood Bacon to
intend to say. Word-for-word dictation
would never produce this range of variation
in the texts.
(3) In some writings, Bacon may have drawn so
heavily on source materials that the composite
measurable wordprint is a confusion of
Bacon’s (or some secretary’s assigned to the
task) with that of the underlying sources.
There is evidence for this particularly in the
histories, which draw heavily on the works of
other authors.13 We might expect that such
projects would be the easiest to delegate to
secretaries as they required little or no devel-
opment of an original intellectual argument.
And in particular, we note, Hobbes was
shown in Table 3 above to be a possible
author of each of the histories that were pub-
lished in Bacon’s name.
Regardless of which of these explanations scho-
lars will find most appropriate for each of Bacon’s
works, the overall conclusion may portray Francis
Bacon as a less original, independent, and prolific
writer than he has usually been understood to be.
And the importance of identifying and understand-
ing both his writing assistants and his sources will be
correspondingly increased. Future studies using
N. B. Reynolds et al.
422 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
recently developed statistical authorship analysis
methods coupled with authorship indicators other
than the sixty-five we considered here will be useful
in validating and extending these results.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank particularly Clark Asay,
Brooksany Barrows, and Matthew Grow for their
superb assistance on this project.
References
Anonymous. (1620). Horae Subsecivae: Observations and
Discourses. London: Edward Blount.
Adolph, R. (1968). The Rise of Modern Prose Style.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aubrey, J. and Dick, O. (eds), (1957). Aubrey’s Brief
Lives. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Aughterson, K. (1992). The waking vision: Reference in
the New Atlantis. Renaissance Quarterly, 95(Spring):
119–39.
Bacon, F. and Rawley, W. (eds), (1657). Resuscitatio.
London: William Lee.
Bacon, F. and Kiernan, M. (eds), (1985). The Essayes or
Counsels, Civill and Morall. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Busch, W. (1895).Todd, A. M. (1895). England Under the
Tudors: King Henry VIII. New York: Burt Franklin.
Cornwallis, W. and Allen, D. C. (eds), (1946). Essayes.
Baltimore: John Hopkins Press.
Crowther, J. G. (1960). Francis Bacon: The First Statesman
of Science. London: Cresset Press.
Du Maurier, D. (1975). Golden Lads: A Study of Anthony
Bacon, Francis, and their Friends. London: Victor
Gollancz, Ltd.
Elliott, W. E. and Valenza, R. J. (1996). And then there
were none: Winnowing the Shakespeare claimants.
Computers and the Humanities, 30(3): 191–245.
Epstein, J. (1977). Francis Bacon: A Political Biographer.
Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.
Fortier, J. (1997). Hobbes and the ‘Discourses of Laws’:
The perils of wordprint analysis. Review of Politics,
59(Fall): 861–87.
Greville, F. and Gouw, J. (eds), (1986). The Prose
Works of Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Hesse, M. (1964). Francis Bacon. In O’Connor, D. J.
(ed.), A Critical History of Western Philosophy. New
York: The Free Press.
Hilton, John L. and Jenkins, K. W. (1987). On maximiz-
ing author identification by measuring 5000 word texts.
Brigham Young University Department of Statistics
Technical Report Series SD-093–R. Provo, UT:
Brigham Young University.
Hilton, John L. (1993). Continuing development and test-
ing of a nonparametric procedure for objective author
identification on 5000 word texts. Brigham Young Uni-
versity Department of Statistics Technical Report Series
SD-094–R. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University.
Hilton, John L., Reynolds, N. B., and Saxonhouse, A. W.
(1997). Hobbes and ‘A Discourse of Laws’: Response to
Fortier. Review of Politics, 59(Fall): 889–903.
Hobbes, T. and Molesworth, W. (eds), (1966). The
English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, 11
vols. Germany: Scienta Verlag Aalen.
Hobbes, T. and Macpherson, C. B. (eds), (1968).
Leviathan. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Hobbes, T. and Schlatter, R. (eds), (1975). Thucydides.
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Hobbes, T. and Malcolm, N. (eds), (1994). The
Correspondence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, D. I. (1985). The analysis of literary style: A
review. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A,
148(part 4): 328–41.
Holmes, D. I. and Forsyth, R. S. (1995). The federalist
revisited: New directions in authorship attribution.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 10(2): 111–27.
Jardine, L. and Stewart, A. (1999). Hostage to Fortune:
The Troubled Life of Francis Bacon. New York: Hill and
Wong.
Joliffe, I. T. (1986). Principal Components Analysis. New
York: Springer.
Juola, P. (2006). Authorship attribution. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, 1(3): 233–334.
Kiernan, M. (1985). Sir Francis Bacon: The Essayes or
Counsels, Civill and Morall. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., and Argamon, S. (2009).
Computational methods in authorship attribution.
Journal of The American Society for Information
Science And Technology, 60: 9–26.
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 423
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Leary, J. E. (1994). Francis Bacon and the Politics of
Science. Ames, IO: Iowa State University Press.
Lehman, E. L. (1975). Nonparametrics: Statistical Methods
Based on Ranks. San Fransisco: Holden Day.
Malcolm, N. (1984). De Dominis, 1560–1624: Venetian,
Anglican, Ecumenist, and Relapsed Heretic. London:
Strickland and Scott Academic Publications.
Malcolm, N. (1996). A Summary Biography of Hobbes.
In Sorrell, T. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to
Hobbes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martinich, A. P. (1999). Hobbes: A Biography. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Marwil, J. (1976). The Trials of Counsel: Francis Bacon in
1621. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press.
Michell, J. (1996). Who Wrote Shakespeare?. London:
Thames & Hudson.
Morton, A. Q. (1978). Literary Detection: How to Prove
Authorship and Fraud in Literature and Documents.
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Peltonen, M. (1992). Politics and science: Francis Bacon
and the true greatness of states. The Historical Journal,
35(June): 284.
Peltonen, M. (ed.) (1996). The Cambridge Companion to
Bacon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peng, R. D. and Hengartner, N. W. (2002). Quantitative
analysis of literary styles. The American Statistician,
56(August): 171–85.
Reynolds, N. B. and Hilton, J. L. (1993). Thomas Hobbes
and the authorship of the Horae Subsecivae. History of
Political Thought, 14(Fall): 361–80.
Reynolds, N. B. and Saxonhouse, A. W. (1995). In
Reynolds, N. B. (ed.), Thomas Hobbes, Three
Discourses: A Critical Modern Edition of Newly
Identified Work of the Young Hobbes. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rogow, A. A. (1986). Thomas Hobbes: Radical in the
Service of Reaction. New York: W. W. Norton.
SAS institute. SAS Software 8.2 (2001). Cary, North
Carolina: SAS Institute.
Smedley, W. (1912). The Mystery of Francis Bacon.
London: Robert Banks & Son.
Spedding, J., Ellis, R., and Heath, D. (1857–74).
The Works of Francis Bacon, 14 vols. London:
Longman & Co.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship
attribution methods. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 60: 538–56.
Tuvill, D. and Lievsay, J. L. (eds), (1971). Essays Politic
and Moral, and Essays Moral and Theological.
Charlottesville, VA: The University Press of Virginia.
Urbach, P. (1987). Francis Bacon’s Philosophy of Science:
An Account and a Reappraisal. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
White, H. (1968). Peace Among the Willows: The Political
Philosophy of Francis Bacon. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Zittel, C., Engel, G., Nanni, R., and Karafyllis, Nicole C.
(eds), (2008). Philosophies of Technology: Francis Bacon
and his Contemporaries. Leiden: Brill.
Notes
1 These discourses were first published as part of the
Horae Subsecivae: Observations and Discourses
(Anonymous, 1620), and most recently with explana-
tory materials by Reynolds and Saxonhouse (1995). The
complete report of the statistical study was published
earlier by Reynolds and Hilton (1993).
2 Most famously, he has been vigorously proposed to be
the author of Shakespeare’s works by a long train of
‘Baconians’, as is documented and reviewed by John
Michell (1996, pp. 113–60).
3 John Fortier (1997) used those results to ground
his challenge to our conclusions about Hobbes.
The present study completely resolves the questions
in our first attempt to wordprint Bacon’s writings as
explained in detail in our reply, published with Fortier’s
piece.
4 The method is described in detail by Hilton and Jenkins
(1987). Applications of the method along with shorter
descriptions can be found in Reynolds and Hilton
(1993) and Elliott and Valenza (1996).
5 For a discussion of the use of principal components
analysis in wordprinting, see Peng and Hengartner
(2002) and Holmes and Forsyth (1995).
6 See the complete list in Reynolds and Saxonhouse
(1995), 166–69, as extracted from Morton (1978).
7 Yet if the translation into English had been done in a
completely free, nonliteral manner as in an English
paraphrase, so as to remove all of the original Latin,
non-English sentence structure, then a valid wordprint
comparison may be measured for the translator but
not for the original foreign language writing author.
However, if both compared texts come from academic
‘literal’ translations from the same original, non-
English language, then a wordprint measurement that
could identify the original author is sometimes
obtainable.
N. B. Reynolds et al.
424 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
8 Francis Bacon, The Works of Francis Bacon and The
Letters and the Life of Francis Bacon (Spedding et al.,
1857–74) were our sources for nearly all text blocks
(hereafter Works). The exceptions were the 1625 edi-
tion of the essays, which came from Francis Bacon,
The Essayes or Counsels, Civill and Morall, and one text
block from Francis Bacon’s Resuscitatio (Bacon and
Rawley, 1657).
9 The editions used for these text blocks are as follows:
The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury
(Hobbes and Molesworth, 1966); Leviathan (Hobbes
and Macpherson, 1968); Thucydides (Hobbes and
Schlatter, 1975); and Reynolds and Saxonhouse, 1995.
10 The editions used for these blocks are as follows:
Essays Politic and Moral, and Essays Moral and
Theological (Tuvill and Lievsay, 1971); The Prose
Works of Fulke Greville (Greville and Gouw, 1986);
Essayes (Cornwallis and Allen, 1946).
11 The expected result from using one co-authored text
against a single-authored work in our tests is an
increase in the variance along with an unpredictable
increase or decrease in the measured distance score,
depending on how dissimilar the co-author’s writing
habits are to those of the principal author’s. Of course,
with an increase in variance, the distance score be-
tween the pair of tests would decrease, and so the
lower end of the distance-score distribution where
the within-author distributions are measured will
become increasingly ambiguous.
12 Aubrey’s Brief Lives, 9. Arnold A. Rogow (1986),
explains that this essay is mistitled by Aubrey and is
in reality Of the True Greatnesse of Kingdomes
and Estates, which an authority on Bacon has
described as ‘one of the best translated of all’ of
Bacon’s essays.
13 Wilhelm Busch (1895) showed the scholarly world
that Bacon’s History of Henry VII was not an original
work, but was rather derived completely from Edward
Hall, who in turn had drawn heavily on Polydore
Vergil and to a lesser extent on Bernard Andre.
Assessing the English works of Bacon and his secretaries
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2012 425
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 at A
egean U
niversity on N
ovem
ber 29, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
