Adjectives and Adverbs as Indicators of Affective 
Language for Automatic Genre Detection
Robert Rittman and Nina Wacholder 
 
School of Communication, Information and Library Studies 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
New Brunswick, New Jersey 
 
Abstract. We report the results of a systematic study of 
the feasibility of automatically classifying documents by 
genre using adjectives and adverbs as indicators of affective 
language. In addition to the class of adjectives and adverbs, 
we focus on two specific subsets of adjectives and adverbs: 
(1) trait adjectives, used by psychologists to assess human 
personality traits, and (2) speaker-oriented adverbs, studied by 
linguists as markers of narrator attitude. We report the results 
of our machine learning experiments using Accuracy Gain, a 
measure more rigorous than the standard measure of 
Accuracy. We find that it is possible to classify documents 
automatically by genre using only these subsets of adjectives 
and adverbs as discriminating features. In many cases results 
are superior to using the count of (a) nouns, verbs, or 
punctuation, or (b) adjectives and adverbs in general. In 
addition, we find that relatively few speaker-oriented adverbs 
are needed in the discriminant models. We conclude that at 
least in these two cases, the psychological and linguistic 
literature leads to identification of features that are quite 
useful for genre detection and for other applications in which 
identification of style and other non-topical characteristics of 
documents is important.  
1 INTRODUCTION 
This paper reports on the use of adjectives and adverbs to 
discriminate text genres characterized by affective expressions 
(e.g., fiction) from genres in which affective expressions are 
typically inappropriate (e.g., academic writing).1 We adopt the 
definition of genre given by Lee [2].  
[G]enre is a document-level category assigned on the basis 
of external criteria such as intended audience, purpose, 
and activity type, that is, it refers to a conventional, 
culturally recognised grouping of texts based on properties 
other than lexical or grammatical (co-)occurrence features, 
which are, instead, the internal (linguistic) criteria forming 
the basis of text type categories. 
Thus, a news report is intended to inform, an editorial or 
opinion piece is intended to persuade, and a novel is intended 
to entertain.  
The paper is organized as follows. First, we review 
discriminating features selected in automatic genre 
 
1 These results are taken from a much larger study by Rittman [1] of 
automated classification of documents by genre using adjectives and 
adverbs as discriminating features. 
classification research. In Section 3, we summarize how 
adjectives and adverbs are generally indicative of affective 
language, and describe the characteristics of two small subsets 
of adjectives (trait adjectives) and adverbs (speaker-oriented 
adverbs). In Section 4, we describe our methodology for 
discriminating documents by genre using these features. In 
Section 5, we present our results. In Section 6, we discuss our 
conclusions and provide direction for future work.   
2 FEATURE SELECTION IN GENRE 
CLASSIFICATION RESEARCH 
In previous research in genre discrimination, researchers have 
focused on identifying any features that are useful in 
discriminating genres. Toward this end, they have identified  
discriminating features of four basic types: (a) syntactic (parts 
of speech, e.g., adverbs, nouns, verbs, and prepositions), (b) 
lexical (terms of address, e.g., Mr., Mrs., Ms.; content words; 
most frequent words in a corpus, e.g., the, of, and, a); (c) 
character-level (e.g., punctuation, character count, sentence 
count, word length in characters); and (d) derivative (ratio 
measures, e.g., average words per sentence, average 
characters per word, type/token ratio).  
They have applied these features to discriminate different 
sets of documents and different genres. Using a set of features 
that were relatively easy to identify automatically in 
combination with a machine learning method, and working 
with 500 documents from the Brown Corpus, Karlgren and 
Cutting [3] selected a set of 20 features, such as first person 
pronouns, adverbs, prepositions, and nouns; characters per 
document; average words per sentence; and type/token ratio. 
Similarly, Kessler at al. [4] classified 500 documents from the 
Brown Corpus with 55 features (lexical, character-level, and 
derivative features). Using 500 documents from the LIMAS 
German corpus, Wolters and Kirsten [5] took a hybrid 
approach, combining the traditional IR "bag of words" method 
with a natural language processing method they called, "bag 
of ‘tagged’ words." They represented documents as vectors of 
the frequency of content word lemmas and function words, 
and combined it with part of speech information. Inspired by 
research in author attribution, Stamatatos et al. [6] selected the 
50 most common words in the British National Corpus (e.g., 
the, of, a, and in), as well as eight of the most frequent 
punctuation symbols (period, comma, colon, semicolon, 
quotes, parenthesis, question mark, and hyphen). Using a 
subset of these features Ng et al. [7] selected four punctuation 
65
marks (comma, period, colon, and semicolon) to classify a 
collection of Wall Street Journal and Federal Register 
documents in an investigation of features independent of 
syntax and semantics. Subject-classified and genre-classified 
training data was used by Lee and Myaeng [8] to select 
features based on three criteria: (a) find terms that occur in 
many documents belonging to one genre which are distributed 
evenly among all subject classes; (b) eliminate terms that are 
specific to a particular subject; and (c) downgrade terms that 
are common to many genres. Web-based technology features 
based on HTML tags and URL information were selected by 
Lim et al. [9] in addition to features used by other researchers 
(e.g., part of speech, punctuation, average words per phrase, 
and frequency of content words). More than one-hundred 
features (including syntactic, lexical, and character-level 
features) were selected by Santini et al. [10] and Santini [11] 
to address the problem of emerging genres in the Web. The 
problem of Web genre detection was also addressed by zu 
Eissen and Stein [12] using thirty-five derivative features, 
such as average number of mail links, average number of help 
symbols, and average number of various parts of speech (e.g., 
nouns, verbs, prepositions, and adverbs). Finally, Finn and 
Kushmerick [13] classified two sets of Web-generated corpora 
representing documents as (a) a bag-of-words (vector 
indicating the presence or absence of a word), (b) part-of-
speech statistics (vector of 36 parts of speech features); and 
(c) text statistics (e.g., average sentence length, average word 
length, and frequency of punctuation).  
The approach to genre identification that characterizes 
these studies might be called a ‘bag of features’ approach: 
researchers applied machine learning techniques to any 
features that could be identified automatically. Since the focus 
of their research was genre identification, this approach was 
completely appropriate. But the use of bags of features, along 
with different sets of documents and genres, has made it 
difficult to systematically study the contribution of affective 
language to genre identification. Only one of the studies 
described above (Wolters and Kirsten [5]) specifically 
mentioned that adjectives and adverbs are useful for 
distinguishing genre, as opposed to a mix of many kinds of 
features they tested. Furthermore, the authors report their 
results using the standard measure of Accuracy; this measure 
does not take into consideration the impact of the percentage 
of documents that belong to each class on the outcome; this 
too makes it hard to compare results. 
In what follows, we discuss the characteristics of adjectives 
and adverbs that make them particularly useful for identifying 
expressions of affect and assess their contribution to 
automatic genre classification.  
3 ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS AS 
FEATURES OF AFFECTIVE LANGUAGE 
As a grammatical category, adjectives modulate the meaning 
of nouns by emphasizing important or surprising properties of 
the noun being modified (e.g., a safe / historical / unusual 
building). The properties that are highlighted frequently 
represent a judgment or opinion. The statement, She wrote a 
poem, is a statement of (presumed) fact. The statement, She 
wrote a beautiful / horrendous poem, mixes a statement of 
fact with human judgment. Research indicates a correlation 
between human perceptions of subjectivity and the occurrence 
of adjectives in (a) sentences (Bruce and Wiebe [14], Wiebe 
[15], and Wiebe et al. [16]) and (b) documents (Rittman et al. 
[17]). This relationship is expected because of the nature of 
adjectives themselves. Subjective expressions necessarily 
involve judgments and opinions about people and things, and 
we frequently use adjectives to express our judgments.  
In a similar way, adverbs modulate the meaning of verbs, 
adjectives, other adverbs, and noun phrases. This is especially 
true of the many adverbs derived from adjectives by adding 
the suffix –ly (beautiful => beautifully; horrendous => 
horrendously); adverbs typically inherit the subjective 
connotation of the adjectives from which they have been 
derived.  
Within the larger set of adjectives or adverbs in the context 
of a sentence, researchers in psychology and linguistics have 
each indicated a subset of words that appear to be particularly 
expressive of affect. Psychologists have identified trait 
adjectives and linguists have identified speaker-oriented 
adverbs.  
3.1 Trait Adjectives 
The significance of adjectives in description and judgment 
has long been noted in psychology. Psychologists use trait 
adjectives to describe human personality traits (e.g., nervous, 
energetic, accommodating, and careful). Trait adjectives are 
classified by the type of personality they indicate, based on 
theories of psychology. Using factor analysis on various lists 
of adjectives Goldberg [18] proposed five dimensions of 
personality that are generally accepted as the “Big Five”: I. 
Extraversion (active, assertive, bold), II. Agreeableness 
(agreeable, considerate, cooperative), III. Conscientiousness 
(careful, conscientious, efficient), IV. Emotional Stability 
(imperturbable, relaxed, undemanding), and V. Intellect 
(artistic, bright, complex). Some researches (e.g., Nowson et 
al. [19], Argamon et al. [20], and Mairesse et al. [21]  have 
studied the relationship between personality traits of 
experimental subjects and their use of language features in 
different genres.  
We turn the Big Five on its side and select adjectives that 
are used by psychologists as indicators of personality as 
features for genre detection. Although psychologists use these 
adjectives to scientifically characterize human personality in 
the context of written and spoken text, when these adjectives 
are used in non-scientific language, they represent expressions 
of judgment. What is virtuous to one person may be sinful to 
another. Furthermore, trait adjectives frequently have an 
affective connotation; for example, the adjectives perfidious 
and vulgar almost always represent a negative judgment while 
the adjectives loyal and intriguing almost always represent a 
positive one. These connotations are pertinent whether the 
adjectives are used to describe people or some other kind of 
entity.  The trait adjectives in Appendix A (a subset of 44 trait 
adjectives which we derive from the full list reported by 
Peabody and De Raad [22], along with the adverbs derived 
from them (Appendix B), are therefore particularly likely to 
express affect.  
3.2 Speaker Oriented Adverbs 
Adverbs that express sentiment typically serve three 
grammatical functions: disjuncts, adjuncts and subjuncts 
(Quirk et al. [23]). Disjuncts (1.3) are peripheral to the 
66
sentence and “express an evaluation of what is being said 
either with respect to the form of the communication or to its 
meaning … [And they express] the speaker’s authority for, or 
comment on, the accompanying clause” (Quirk et al. [23]) For 
example, in (1.3), frankly is a description of the speaker’s 
attitude about the statement, I am tired. In contrast, adjuncts 
(1.1) and subjuncts (1.2) are integrated within the structure of 
the clause. For example, in (1.1) and (1.2), slowly and kindly 
focus internally on the grammatical subject or verb phrase 
(i.e., they walked slowly, you wait kindly). This is quite 
different than the disjunctive use of frankly, which focuses 
externally on the speaker’s behavior. As Mittwoch [24] 
explains, disjuncts are a way to “refer to one’s own words.” 
For this reason, disjuncts are referred to as speaker-oriented 
adverbs (SOAs). 
 
(1.1) Slowly they walked back home. (Adjunct) 
(1.2) Would you kindly wait for me? (Subjunct) 
(1.3) Frankly, I’m tired. (Disjunct) 
 
The potential usefulness of SOAs in identifying 
expressions of affect is supported by Jackendoff [25] and 
Ernst [26], who indicate that (a) adverbs can refer to the 
speaker (narrator), the grammatical subject, or the manner in 
which an event occurs, (b) sentence position of adverbs 
affects meaning, (c) adverbs can occur in some positions and 
not in others, and that (d) adverb phrases can frequently be 
paraphrased using corresponding adjective phrases. SOAs 
refer to the speaker of the sentence, subject-oriented adverbs 
refer to the grammatical subject of the sentence, and manner 
adverbs refer to the main verb of the sentence. In summary, 
SOAs provide a grammatical mechanism by which a speaker 
can insert an indication of mood or attitude at the periphery of 
the sentence. We use a set of 30 SOAs derived from Ernst 
[26] (Appendix C). 
3.3 Adjectives and Adverbs in Relation to Genre 
Identification 
Since adjectives and adverbs frequently perform some 
degree of evaluation, it follows that the occurrence of a 
relatively high number of adjectives and adverbs should 
indicate the presence of expressions of judgment in a 
document. This characteristic makes the frequency of 
adjectives and adverbs in text a likely feature for 
discriminating genres that include expressions of sentiment 
and judgment.  
Trait adjectives and the adverbs inherited from them 
frequently have evaluative connotations, at least in context; 
we expect that they will be most frequent in genres that 
describe people’s behavior, such as fiction. SOAs characterize 
the narrator’s perspective, and are indicative of intent and 
behavior.  
Since genre is indicative of the author’s purpose, intended 
audience, and type of activity (Lee [2]), we explore the 
contribution of adjectives and adverbs in general, and trait 
adjectives and SOAs in particular, to the identification of 
genre.  
4 METHODOLOGY 
In the first part of this section, we describe the materials used 
in our study; these include the collection of documents, the 
genre labels and the features, and the classification problems 
that we used machine learning methods to solve. In the second 
part, we describe Accuracy Gain, a measure of the 
contribution of features to a classification task that is more 
rigorous than the standard measure of Accuracy used in most 
genre identification tasks. 
 
4.1 Experimental Materials 
To systematically study the relationship of adjectives and 
adverbs to genre, we needed a set of documents that had been 
classified by genre and tagged by part-of-speech. Fortunately, 
the freely available British National Corpus, World Edition 
(BNC2 [27]) satisfied these requirements. Lee [28, 29] 
originally assigned each of the 4,054 2 documents in BNC2 to 
one of 70 genres; 46 were written and 24 were spoken. 
However, the large number of genres meant that relatively 
few documents were assigned to each genre. Davies [30] 
therefore organized these 70 genres into six supergenres 
which he labeled academic, fiction, news, non-fiction, other,
and spoken. Our experimental task is to assess the 
contribution of adjectives and adverbs to automatic 
classification of these six genres. 
We consider two basic kinds of genre classification 
problems. The easier problem is one-against-one; the harder 
problem is one-against-many. One-against-one discriminates 
one genre from another (e.g., academic vs. fiction or fiction 
vs. news). One-against-many discriminates one genre from all 
other genres in a corpus (e.g., academic vs. fiction, news, non-
fiction, other, and spoken, or news vs. academic, fiction, non-
fiction, other, and spoken). One-against-one is easier because 
it considers one document subset of a corpus against another 
subset, and because only two genre categories are considered. 
One-against-many is harder because it treats one genre against 
the entire corpus; the latter consists of documents from 
multiple genres. 
For one-against-one, we chose three of Davies [30] 
supergenres that are mutually exclusive: academic, fiction and 
news. This presents three one-against-one classification 
problems: academic vs. fiction; academic vs. news; and news 
vs. fiction. For one-against-many, we used the same three 
supergenres, comparing the performance of classifiers on 
distinguishing the supergenres from documents consisting of 
all of the other genres in BNC2. Our one-against-many 
problems are (1) academic vs. not-academic (fiction, news, 
non-fiction, other, and spoken), (2) fiction vs. not-fiction 
(academic, news, non-fiction, other, spoken); and (3) news vs. 
not-news (academic, fiction, non-fiction, other, and spoken). 
We chose the supergenres of academic, fiction, and news 
for several reasons. First, they are based on Lee’s [2] criteria 
for genre (intended audience, purpose, and activity type). 
Second, Davies’ [30] organization is exclusive. For instance, 
the set of documents labeled fiction excludes academic, news, 
non-fiction, spoken and other (although non-fiction can be 
similar in content to other classes, such as academic for 
instance except it is intended for a different audience). What 
he calls spoken includes everything spoken, regardless of 
 
2 BNC2 includes 4,054 documents. We exclude one document 
because it is a duplicate (see Lee [2]). 
67
whether it is academic, fiction, news, non-fiction, or other. 
We do not use other because it is not a conceptually distinct 
class. Third, selecting only three supergenres directly 
(academic, fiction, and news) limits the number of 
discriminant tests to six problems (three one-against-one and 
three one-against-many), as opposed to 21 problems if we 
selected all six supergenres (15 one-against-one and six one-
against-many). Finally, the supergenres of non-fiction, other, 
and spoken are treated indirectly in our one-against-many 
classification problems.   
From the complete corpus (N=4,053), we randomly 
selected 50% of the documents for training (n=2,029) and 
50% for testing (n=2,024). Based on this selection, we broke 
out six document sets. Table 1 shows the number of 
documents in each set. 
 
Problem Doc Sets 
50% 
Training 
50% 
Testing Total 
2,029 2,024 4,053 
Acad vs. Fiction Acad 276 229 505 
Fict 218 246 464 
Total 494 475 969 
Acad vs. News Acad 276 229 505 
News 249 269 518 
Total 525 498 1,023 
Fict vs. News Fict 218 246 464 
News 249 269 518 
Total 467 515 982 
Acad vs. NotAcad Acad 276 229 505 
NotAcad 1,753 1,795 3,548 
Total 2,029 2,024 4,053 
Fict vs. NotFict Fict 218 246 464 
NotFict 1,811 1,778 3,589 
Total 2,029 2,024 4,053 
News vs. 
NotNews News 249 269 518 
NotNews 1,780 1,755 3,535 
Total 2,029 2,024 4,053 
Table 1: Training-Testing Document Sets 
In the larger study, Rittman [1] systematically tested the 
impact of a variety of adjective and adverb features on genre 
identification on these six problems. First, features were 
represented as types and tokens. Type indicates whether a 
word occurs in a document at least once; token indicates the 
frequency of a word in a document. These two measures give 
rise to two related representations of features: count and 
vector. Count is the aggregate of all members of a class in a 
document. For example, suppose that word_1, word_2 and 
word_3 all belong to the target class under discussion.  And 
suppose that word_1 occurs three times in a document, 
word_2 does not occur, and word_3 occurs 7 times. The count 
of types is 2 (1+0+1). The count of tokens is 10 (3+0+7). The 
vector approach also identifies types and tokens but represents 
them a different way. For example, if a word occurs in the 
document, then type=1; else type=0. If type=1, then 
token=frequency of the word in the document; else token=0. 
Thus, in the example above for the three hypothetical words, 
the vector for the document is (1, 3, 0, 0, 1, 7). 
In some cases, the sentence position of a word was marked, 
such as sentence-initial position and not sentence-initial 
position which conceptually is the union of any sentence 
position. Finally, each feature was represented as a 
normalized and a non-normalized variable. The normalized 
variable is calculated by dividing frequency by the total count 
of words in a document. 
 We call the various ways of representing features a 
method. Each method includes a unique set of features (such 
as speaker-oriented adverbs) and different ways of 
representing the features (such as sentence position, vector or 
count, or as normalized or non-normalized). The intersection 
of a method and a classification problem represents a model. 
Since there are 54 methods for six problems, we analyzed a 
total of 324 models. In what follows, we report only on a 
portion of the 324 models identified in the larger study, using 
only the results of the normalized variables for the adjective 
and adverb features that are most interesting. Table 2 lists 
these 17 sets of features  
 
Feature / 
Method 
 
Word Class 
Types in 
BNC2 * 
Vector 
or 
Count 
SOA1 
30 Speaker-Oriented 
Adverbs (Appendix C) in 
any sentence position 
using a vector length of 
60 
30 V 
SOA2 
SOA1 in sentence-
initial+not-sentence-initial 
position using a vector 
length of 120 
30 V 
SOA3 Count of SOA1 in any sentence position 30 C 
RB All words tagged in BNC2 as adverbs 9,324 C 
RB-ly All RB ending in ly 6,372 C 
JJ All words tagged in BNC2 as adjectives 147,038 C 
JJ1 
Subjective adjectives 
identified by [31] (in 
BNC2) 
1,322 C 
JJ2 
Trait Adjectives full list 
derived from [22] (in 
BNC2)   
732 C 
JJ3 
Subset of JJ2 (Appendix 
A) identified in pilot study 
as indicative of 
subjectivity 
44 V / C 
RB1 Trait Adverbs  derived from JJ2 by adding ly 539 C 
RB2 
Subset of RB1 (and JJ3) 
(Appendix B) using 
vector length of 72, also 
as a count 
36 V / C 
JJ3+RB2 Union of JJ3+RB2 using a vector length of 160 80 V 
68
SOA1+JJ3 
+RB2 
Union of 
SOA1+JJ3+RB2 
(Appendix A, B, C) using 
a vector length of 220 
110 V 
All-JJ&RB SOA3, JJ, JJ1, JJ2, JJ3, RB, RB-ly, RB1, RB2 165,437 C 
NN Nouns 430,415 C 
VB Verbs 60,083 C 
Punc Punctuation 71 C 
* For each feature we consider both types and tokens. Thus the 
number of variables for each feature is doubled. 
Table 2: Selected Features 
We include the count of all adjectives and adverbs that 
were tagged as such in BNC2, including all adverbs ending in 
–ly, and all adjectives identified by Wiebe [31] as subjective 
adjectives. For our vector experiments, we select the 30 
speaker-oriented adverbs derived from [26] (Appendix C), the 
subset of 44 trait adjectives derived from Peabody and De 
Raad [22] (Appendix A), and a list of 36 trait adverbs derived 
from Appendix A by adding -ly (Appendix B). We also 
combine these three lists of words in a union set of 110 
adjectives and adverbs (Appendix A, B, and C). We also 
included nouns, verbs and punctuation as a benchmark to 
compare the performance of models using our adjective and 
adverb features. 
Each set of features in Table 2 was used to build different 
models using tools for discriminant analysis provided by 
SPSS (version 11.0). The machine learning method of 
discriminant analysis is a widely used classification method of 
multivariate statistics used in genre classification work by 
Karlgren and Cutting [3], Stamatatos et al. [6], and Ng et al. 
[7]. For each classification problem, we test the performance 
of various sets of features and methods.  
4.2 Accuracy Gain 3
The standard measure of performance for classification 
problems is Accuracy [32]. Simply put, Accuracy is the 
fraction of correctly predicted cases. However, Accuracy does 
not consider the proportion of members of a particular class. 
As such, it does not take into account the most rigorous and 
expected baseline that a hypothetical classifier can achieve; 
this baseline is equal to proportionate size of the majority 
group. For example, if 88 of 100 documents are academic and 
12 are news, the best strategy for a classifier is to guess 
academic every time; this hypothetical classifier will have an 
accuracy performance of 88%. This is what we call a best 
guess classifier.  
The standard accuracy measure therefore under-rates the 
performance of a classifier that does better than the best guess 
and over-rates the performance of a classifier that does less 
well than best-guess. Suppose that one classifier identifies 
88% of 100 documents correctly and another identifiers 90% 
of 100 correctly. There is only a 2% difference in performance 
by the two classifiers.   
Accuracy gain (AG) achieves a more realistic measure of 
the performance of the classifiers by treating the baseline (or 
best-guess) performance as zero; the performance of a 
 
3 See Rittman [1].  
 
classifier that does better than best guess is represented with a 
positive number; the performance of a classifier that does less 
well than the baseline is represented as a negative number. 
Table 3 compares the measures of Accuracy and Accuracy 
Gain for a case where 88 documents belong to one class and 
12 belong to another.  
 
Classifier Performance (Baseline = 0.88) 
Accuracy (%) Accuracy Gain (%) 
86 -17 
88 0 
90 17 
91 25 
100 100 
Table 3: Accuracy Computed as Accuracy Gain 
 
With AG, a classifier that achieves only baseline Accuracy 
(88%) performs at 0%, i.e., no better or worse than it would 
have achieved with a best-guess strategy. But the classifier 
that achieves a two-point improvement (90%) over the 
baseline (88%) has a 17% Accuracy Gain. This more 
accurately reflects the performance of the classifier with the 
apparently small (2%) improvement. 
Figure 1 shows how we calculate AG by re-scaling (or 
normalizing) the rigorous baseline to zero. The resulting 
fraction (AG) represents the improvement over the best guess 
procedure compared to the maximum possible improvement 
(100%).  
 
AG=(Accuracy-Best Guess)/(100-Best Guess) 
AG=(90-88)/(100-88) 
Original Scale (Accuracy=90%) 
Best Guess <------Accuracy----------------------->Perfect 
88%                 90%                                 100% 
Re-Scale (Accuracy Gain=17%) 
Best Guess <-----Accuracy Gain ---------------->Perfect 
0%                  17%                                 100% 
Figure 1: Calculation of Accuracy Gain (AG) 
 
Another advantage of the AG measure is that it allows 
consistent comparison of results for studies that use classes 
with different populations.  All of the studies cited in Section 
2 use the standard Accuracy measure; only half report the 
proportionate size of genre categories (Karlgren and Cutting 
[3], Kessler et al. [4], Ng et al. [7], Lee and Myaeng [8], 
Santini et al [10] and Santini [11], and zu Eissen and Stein 
[12]).  
We therefore report our results using AG as the most 
rigorous performance measure and as a method that promotes 
comparability of future research.  
5 RESULTS  
Table 4 shows the impact of the different features (methods) 
for discriminating the three genres. As expected, the results 
for the one-against-one classification problems are better than 
one-against-many. Still, for both sets of problems, models 
69
using adjective and adverb features outperform models 
containing nouns, verbs, or punctuation. For example, for 
academic vs. fiction, NN achieves an AG of 81.4%, higher 
than VB or Punc. But four features (SOA1; SOA2; 
SOA1+JJ3+RB2; All-JJ&RB) do better than these standard 
categories. This shows that adjectives and adverbs should be 
used as discriminating features for genre identification. 
We also find that the highest AG for all six problems is 
achieved by the combination of many kinds of adjective and 
adverb features (All-JJ&RB); this row is highlighted in Table 
4. For example, distinguishing academic writing from fiction, 
using this feature achieves an astonishing 98.8% of the 
possible gain in accuracy (AG). The same method applied to 
fiction vs. news and academic vs. news scores the second and 
third highest AG of 93.0% and 90.8%, respectively. The same 
is true for the harder problems: news vs. not-news 
(AG=13.5%), academic vs. not-academic (AG=10.6%) and an 
impressive AG of 52.5% for fiction vs. not-fiction. 
 
Feature / 
Method Problem 
One-Against-One One-Against-Many 
Acad 
vs. 
Fict 
Acad 
vs. 
News 
Fict 
vs. 
News 
Acad 
vs. 
Not-
Acad 
Fict 
vs. 
Not-
Fict 
News 
vs. 
Not- 
News 
SOA1 91.6 75.6 69.8 -1.8 16.4 -1.5 
SOA2 89.4 73.0 72.0 1.8 13.9 0.8 
JJ 72.2 65.0 61.6 9.7 0.0 6.8 
RB 77.6 41.8 88.4 0.0 -4.9 -0.8 
SOA1+JJ3 
+RB2 88.6 79.6 70.4 -2.7 14.8 2.3 
All-JJ&RB 98.8 90.8 93.0 10.6 52.5 13.5 
NN 81.4 68.6 83.0 -2.7 0.0 3.8 
VB 72.2 69.0 76.0 -10.6 -8.2 0.0 
Punc 76.8 20.4 83.4 0.0 28.7 -1.5 
Table 4: Best Performing Models Using Adjectives and 
Adverbs Compared to Other Features 
 
Table 4 also shows that for five of the six problems, the 
next best performance is achieved by vector models using the 
30 SOAs (SOA1) (academic vs. fiction, AG=91.6%), the 110 
adjectives and adverbs (SOA1+JJ3+RB2) (academic vs. news, 
AG=79.6%), or models using the simple count of all 
adjectives (JJ) (academic vs. not-academic, AG=9.7%; news 
vs. not-news, AG=6.8%) or all adverbs (RB) (fiction vs. news, 
AG=88.4%). For fiction vs. not-fiction, a model using the 
simple count of all punctuation achieves the second best result 
(AG=28.7%), compared to using all adjective and adverb 
features (All-JJ&RB) (AG=52.5%).    
Another way to assess the performance of our methods is 
to see which choices of features produce an accuracy gain for 
all six classification problems. Table 4 shows that these 
methods include the count of all adjective and adverb features 
(All-JJ&RB), and the vector of the 30 SOAs (SOA2), 
although we see that AG for the hard problems of academic 
vs. not academic and news vs. not-news is only 1.8% and 
0.8% respectively. Nevertheless, benchmark models using 
nouns, verbs, and punctuation do not achieve a positive AG 
for all six problems.  
Furthermore, the model representing the 30 SOAs (SOA2) 
that yields a positive AG for all six problems contains only 11 
to 19 unique words in the final discriminant model (Table 5). 
Fewer than 20 unique SOAs (SOA2) can do the work of 
thousands of words (All-JJ&RB).   
 
Speaker-Oriented Adverbs (SOA2) 
Problem AG 
Unique Words in 
Model * 
Acad vs. Fict 89.4 17 
Acad vs. News 73.0 11 
Fict vs. News 72.0 13 
Acad vs. Not-Acad 1.8 13 
Fict vs. Not-Fict 13.9 19 
News vs. Not-News 0.8 16 
* A unique word in a discriminant model can be 
represented as both a type and a token variable, or 
only as a type or a token 
Table 5: Number of Unique SOAs in Models Yielding 
Accuracy Gain for All Problems 
We also assess classifier performance of vector models 
using combinations of the three sets of the 110 words 
(Appendix A, B, C). We find that models representing only 
the 30 SOAs are most effective for academic vs. fiction, 
fiction vs. news, and fiction vs. not-fiction (Table 6). When 
combined with trait adjectives and trait adverbs, performance 
improves slightly for academic vs. news and remains stable 
for fiction vs. not-fiction.  
 
Feature / 
Method Problem 
One-Against-One One-Against-Many 
Acad 
vs. 
Fict 
Acad 
vs. 
News 
Fict 
vs. 
News 
Acad 
vs. 
Not-
Acad 
Fict 
vs. 
Not-
Fict 
News 
vs. 
Not- 
News 
SOA1 91.6 73.8 71.2 -3.5 14.8 -0.8 
JJ3 68.4 48.6 46.0 -3.5 -5.7 1.5 
RB2 47.8 21.6 38.2 -2.7 -1.6 -2.3 
JJ3+RB2 71.8 51.8 48.8 -4.4 -0.8 2.3 
SOA1+JJ3 
+RB2 88.6 79.6 70.4 -2.7 14.8 2.3 
Table 6: Contribution of Speaker-Oriented Adverbs, Trait 
Adjectives, and Trait Adverbs to Models 
 
Classifier performance is slightly better than the best guess for 
news vs. not-news using trait adjectives and trait adverbs 
alone. However, performance is not effective for academic vs. 
not academic using any combination of the three sets of the 
70
110 words. This suggests that, as a class, SOAs contribute 
more to vector models than do trait adjectives and trait 
adverbs, and none of the 110 words are effective for 
distinguishing academic from not-academic documents.  
Finally, we assess the contribution of the 30 SOAs 
(Appendix C) as compared to the 44 trait adjectives 
(Appendix A) and the 36 trait adverbs (Appendix B) by 
ordering the relative contribution of these 110 words to our 
vector models. We rank the 110 words that we entered into 
the various models by assigning scores according to the 
contribution (weight) each word made to a model, and by 
giving credit for the number of models each word contributed 
to. This method evaluates the contribution of words to all 
possible models (though it does not show which words are 
best for discriminating between particular genres). We find 
that only 95 of the 110 words contributed to a vector model. 
These 95 words include the 30 SOAs, 40 of the 44 trait 
adjectives, and only 25 of the 36 trait adverbs (we indicate 
these words in Appendix A, B, and C). On average, SOAs 
made the greatest contribution to vector models, generally 
ranking higher than trait adjectives and trait adverbs. For 
example, half of the 30 SOAs (e.g., maybe, generally, surely, 
necessarily, clearly, specifically, strangely, and seriously)
rank in the top 25% of most effective words, whereas only 
small numbers of the other classes occur above the same 
cutpoint (9 of 40 trait adjectives; e.g., bad, moral, natural, 
characterless, and honest), and only 3 of 25 trait adverbs: 
fairly, badly, and naturally). Clearly, SOAs contributed most 
significantly to our genre classification models. 
This may be indicative of a relationship between narrator 
behavior (marked by the use of SOAs in text) and author 
intent (one of several distinguishing criteria of genre). It also 
shows that the use of a linguistically defined construct guides 
us directly to the essential feature of the statistical models. 
Indeed, a model representing only 30 SOAs (SOA1) is 
comparable to the best-performing model (All-JJ&RB) for 
academic vs. fiction (AG=91.6%) (Table 4). It is most 
difficult to distinguish the three genres from all other genres 
in the corpus as expected, although fiction vs. not-fiction is 
relatively distinct using this feature (SOA1) (AG=16.4%).  
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Motivated by research in psychology and linguistics, we 
demonstrate that using adjective and adverb features in 
discriminant models is generally superior to benchmark 
models containing nouns, verbs, or punctuation features. In 
particular, vector models representing only 110 words (SOAs, 
trait adjectives and trait adverbs) are comparable to models 
using the count of thousands of words. As a class, the 30 
SOAs are generally more effective than the class of 44 trait 
adjectives and 36 trait adverbs for the classification 
experiments we conducted.   
But in the long term, our specific results are less important 
than the evidence that our approach to systematically studying 
the contribution of adjectives and adverbs to genre 
identification provides useful clues about how expressions of 
affect can be recognized by computer systems and how this 
information can be used for any application that depends on 
accurate identification of characteristics of affective language. 
Accuracy Gain rigorously measures the contribution of 
features to classification problems.  
We recommend that our principles and methods be applied 
to (a) solving problems in other applications, (b) using other 
corpora, and (c) finding other features. Other applications 
include author identification, detection of subjectivity versus 
objectivity, classification of texts for question-answering, 
natural language generation, detection of customer review 
opinions in business environments, detection of personality 
traits in text, and detection of people who might be susceptible 
to certain beliefs. Other corpora include weblogs, email logs, 
and chat room logs. Possible sources of features include the 
domains of stylistics, communication, journalism, content 
analysis, and political discourse.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Rittman. Automatic Discrimination of Genres: The Role of 
Adjectives and Adverbs as Suggested by Linguistics and 
Psychology. Ph.D. Dissertation, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ. (2007). 
https://www.scils.rutgers.edu/~rritt/Rittman_dissertation_2007042
7.pdf 
[2] D. Lee. Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains and Styles: 
Clarifying the Concepts and Navigating a Path Through the BNC 
Jungle. Language, Learning, and Technology, 5(3):37-72 (2001).  
[3] J. Karlgren and D. Cutting. Recognizing Text Genres with Simple 
Metrics Using Discriminant Analysis. Proceedings of the 15th. 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Coling 
94, Kyoto. 1071-1075. (1994). 
[4] B. Kessler, G. Nunberg, and H. Schutze. Automatic Detection of 
Text Genre. Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 32 - 38. (1997). 
[5] M. Wolters and M. Kirsten. Exploring the Use of Linguistic 
Features in Domain and Genre Classification. 9th Conference of 
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Bergen, Norway, 142-149.  (1999). 
[6] E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis. Text Genre 
Detection Using Common Word Frequencies. 18th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2000), 
Luxembourg, Vol. 2, 808-814. (2000). 
[7] K.B. Ng, S. Rieh, and P. Kantor. Signal Detection Methods and 
Discriminant Analysis Applied to Categorization of Newspaper 
and Government Documents: A Preliminary Study. In 
Proceedings of Annual Conference of American Society for 
Information Science, pp. 227-236. (2000). 
[8] Y. Lee and S. Myaeng. Text Genre Classification with Genre-
Revealing and Subject-Revealing Features. Proceedings of the 25th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR, 145-150. (2002). 
[9] C. Lim, K. Lee and G. Kim. Multiple Sets of Features for 
Automatic Genre Classification of Web Documents. Information 
Processing and Management, 41, 1263–1276. (2005).     
[10] M. Santini, R. Power and R. Evans. Implementing a 
Characterization of Genre for Automatic Identification of Web 
Pages. Proceedings of 21st International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 699-706. (2006). 
[11] M. Santini. Some Issues in Automatic Genre Classification of 
Web Pages. Proceedings of JADT 2006: 8es Journées 
Internationales d’Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles.
(2006). 
[12] S. M. zu Eissen and B. Stein. Genre Classification of Web Pages: 
User Study and Feasibility Analysis. Proceedings of the 27th 
Annual German Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI 04),
256-269. (2004). 
71
[13] A. Finn and N. Kushmerick. Learning to Classify Documents 
According to Genre. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 57 (11), 1506-1518. (2006). 
[14] R. Bruce and J. Wiebe. Recognizing Subjectivity: A Case Study 
in Manual Tagging. Natural Language Engineering 5(2):187-205. 
(1999). 
[15] J. Wiebe. Learning Subjective Adjectives from Corpora. 
Proceedings of the 17th National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI-2000), Austin. (2000). 
[16] J. Wiebe, R. Bruce, and T. O'Hara. Development and Use of a 
Gold Standard Data Set for Subjectivity Classifications. 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, College Park: University of Maryland, 
246-253. (1999). 
[17] R. Rittman, N. Wacholder, P. Kantor, K.B. Ng, T. Strzalkowski, 
B. Bai, et al. Adjectives as Indicators of Subjectivity in 
Documents. Proceedings of the 67th Annual Meeting of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 349-
359. (2004). 
[18] L. Goldberg. The Development of Markers for the Big-Five 
Factor Structure. Psychological Assessment, 4:26-42. (1992). 
[19] S. Nowson, J. Oberlander, and A. Gill. Weblogs, Genres and 
Individual Differences. Proceedings of the 27th Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Stresa, Italy. (2005). 
[20] S. Argamon, S. Dhawle, M. Koppel, and J.W. Pennebaker. 
Lexical Predictors of Personality Type. Proceedings of the 
Classification Society of North America, St. Louis. (2005). 
[21] F. Mairesse, M.A. Walker, M.R. Mehl, R.K. Moore. Using 
Linguistic Cues for the Automatic Recognition of Personality in 
Conversation and Text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
30, 457-500. (2007). 
[22] D. Peabody and B. De Raad. The Substantive Nature of 
Psycholexical Personality Factors: A Comparison Across 
Languages. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83(4):983-997. (2002). 
[23] R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik. A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. London: 
Longman. (1985). 
[24] A. Mittwoch. How to Refer to One's Own Words: Speech Act 
Modifying Adverbials and the Performative Analysis. Journal of 
Linguistics, 13:177-189. (1977). 
[25] R. Jackendoff. Adverbs. In R. Jackendoff. Semantic 
Interpretation in Generative Grammar (pp. 47-107). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. (1972). 
[26] T. Ernst. The Semantics of Predicational Adverbs, and The 
Scopal Basis of Adverb Licensing. In T. Ernst. The Syntax of 
Adjuncts (pp. 41-91, 92-148). New York: Cambridge University 
Press. (2002). 
[27] BNC2. British National Corpus, World Edition. 
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/ (2001). 
[28] D. Lee. BNC World Index. 
http://personal.cityu.edu.hk/~davidlee/devotedtocorpora/home/BN
C_WORLD_INDEX.ZIP (2003). 
[29] D. Lee. David Lee's Genre Classification Scheme. 
http://homepage.mac.com/bncweb/manual/genres.html (n.d.). 
[30] M. Davies. VIEW: Variation in English Words and Phrases. 
http://view.byu.edu/ (n.d.). 
[31] J. Wiebe. [Learning Subjective Adjectives from Corpora]. 
Unpublished list of subjective adjectives. 
http://www.cs.pitt.edu/~wiebe/pubs/aaai00/adjsMPQA (2000). 
[32] I. Witten and E. Frank. Data Mining. San Diego: Academic 
Press. (2000).  
 
APPENDIX A: 44 Trait Adjectives (JJ3) 
avaricious * bad * biased * calculating * characterless * 
decent * deceptive * dishonest * disloyal * ethical * 
fair * faithful * frank * honest * hypocritical * 
insincere * intriguing * just * loyal * lustful * 
lying * malicious * materialistic * mercenary * moral * 
natural * noble * perfidious pharisaical principled * 
rapacious * righteous * sincere * trustworthy * truthful * 
underhanded unfaithful * unreliable * unscrupulous * untruthful * 
upright * venal virtuous * vulgar *  
* Indicates 40 words that contributed to a vector model 
APPENDIX B: 36 Trait Adverbs (RB2) 
avariciously badly * calculatingly * decently * deceptively * 
dishonestly * disloyally * ethically * fairly * faithfully 
hypocritically * insincerely * intriguingly * justly * loyally * 
lustfully * maliciously * materialistically * morally * naturally * 
nobly * perfidiously * pharisaically rapaciously righteously * 
sincerely * truthfully * underhandedly unfaithfully unreliably * 
unscrupulously untruthfully uprightly valiantly virtuously * 
vulgarly     
* Indicates 25 words that contributed to a vector model 
APPENDIX C: 30Speaker-Oriented Adverbs (SOAs) 
amazingly briefly candidly certainly clearly 
confidently curiously definitely frankly generally 
honestly ideally luckily maybe necessarily 
normally obviously oddly possibly predictably 
preferably probably roughly seriously simply 
specifically strangely surely surprisingly unfortunately 
Note: All SOAs contributed to a vector model 
72
