Statistical Analysis of Personality and Identity in Chats
Using a Keylogging Platform
Giorgio Roffo1
giorgio.roffo@univr.it
Cinzia Giorgetta2
cinzia.giorgetta@loa.istc.cnr.it
Roberta Ferrario2
roberta.ferrario@loa.istc.cnr.it
Walter Riviera1
walter.riviera@univr.it
Marco Cristani1
marco.cristani@univr.it
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 15, 37134 Verona, Italy
2 ISTC–CNR, via alla Cascata 56/C, I-38123 Povo (Trento), Italy
ABSTRACT
Interacting via text chats can be considered as a hybrid
type of communication, in which textual information de-
livery follows turn-taking dynamics, resembling spoken in-
teractions. An interesting research question is whether per-
sonality can be observed in chats, similarly as happening
in face-to-face exchanges. After an encouraging preliminary
work on Skype, in this study we have set up our own chat ser-
vice in which key-logging functionalities have been activated,
so that the timings of each key pressing can be measured.
Using this framework, we organized semi-structured chats
between 50 subjects, whose personality traits have been an-
alyzed through psychometric tests, and a single operator,
for a total of 16 hours of conversation. On this data, we
have observed that some personality traits are linked with
the way we are chatting (measured by stylometric cues), by
means of statistically significant correlations and regression
studies. Finally, we have assessed that some of the stylomet-
ric cues are very discriminative for the recognition of a user
in a identification scenario. These facts taken together could
underlie that some personality traits drive us in chatting in a
particular fashion, which turns out to be very recognizable.
Keywords
chat analysis, personality, authorship attribution
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.3 [Group and Organization Interfaces]: Synchronous
interaction
1. INTRODUCTION
Text chatting is probably one of the most typical commu-
nication phenomena of the last 20 years, characterized by a
massive worldwide diffusion1. The peculiarity of text chats
1http://goo.gl/2NrKFG
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICMI’14, November 12–16, 2014, Istanbul, Turkey.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2885-2/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663204.2663272.
stands in the fact that they show both aspects of literary
text and of spoken conversation, due to the turn-taking dy-
namics that characterize text delivery. Therefore, it is inter-
esting to investigate which aspects of these two communica-
tion means are intertwined in chat exchanges. In particular,
we will try to discover how personality comes into play in
chats: in fact, though connections of personality traits both
with speech [8, 6] and with text [12, 11, 4, 7]have been long
studied, a computational analysis of the role of personality
in chats is missing. At the same time, we are also interested
in discovering whether the manifestation of very particular,
that is, recognizable chatting styles may correspond to dis-
tinguishable personality profiles. If this is the case, we may
single out personality traits that are the most evident via
chat, and individuate new means for chats to bring about
meaning in addition to literary content. While so far many
studies have been published on the recognition of writing
style in literary texts (commonly known as authorship attri-
bution) [1, 16], when it comes to chats the research is still
moving its early steps [15].
A first direction towards these goals has been presented
in [14], where a corpus of spontaneous Skype conversations
between 45 different couples have been recorded during a
period of 3 months and analyzed. From the corpus a pool of
“stylometric” chat features have been extracted, which have
been shown to codify the chatting style of users [15], to-
gether with some personality traits (Barratt Impulsiveness
Scale [10], Interpersonal Reactivity Index [5]). A first cor-
relation study has been conducted, which highlighted some
weak but significant links among stylistic features and per-
sonality cues.
In this paper, we move a step ahead, providing a more
solid study on the subject, changing radically the analysis
protocol. In this case, we build a chat service, embedded
into the Klimble social network2, with key logging capabil-
ities; this in practice allows us to retain the timing of each
single hit of a key, recording at the finest level the behavior
of users while they chat. In the [14] paper, timing informa-
tion was limited to the recording of each return key pressure,
introducing some evident approximations and limitations in
the information that could be gathered. Conversely, here a
novel set of stylometric features can be extracted, captur-
ing a set of cues so far impossible to get, as the number of
2http://www.klimble.com/
224
backspace hits, the speed of digitation of words, and so on;
in particular, we design 11 novel features that are much more
fine-grained than in the previous work. Take speed as an in-
stance: if the style of an individual is characterized by slow
turns, this may be caused by long pauses between a word
and the other, or by the fact that the individual often erases
what he/she has just written. On this chatting platform, we
collect a new dataset in Italian containing data of 50 different
subjects, collected within a two months period. All subjects
(18-27 years old university students) are asked to chat with
an operator barely known by them3, for an average duration
of 20 minutes. The operator performs semi-structured con-
versations, in order to reach a certain degree of homogeneity
in the verbal content of the conversations and highlighting
possible differences in the non-verbal behavior. To get infor-
mation on some psychological traits of the subjects, we have
used three well-known self-administered questionnaires: 1)
the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale [10], focused on 3 different
impulsiveness factors (attentional, motor and non-planning
impulsiveness) [10], 2) BIS-BAS [2], decoding human moti-
vations to behavioral inhibition (BIS) and activation (BAS),
and 3) PANAS [17], analyzing positive and negative affec-
tivity traits. Contrarily to the Big Five [13], these traits
have shown to be more effective in capturing basic person-
ality aspects [3]. In this study we have abandoned the In-
terpersonal Reactivity Index because, differently from the
previous study, chats were all performed with the same (not
well-acquainted with the subjects) operator, posing the same
questions to everyone, and therefore features investigated by
the IRI [5] , such as those related to the ability to take into
account other’s perspective or empathic concerns were not
so relevant here.
The first analysis was aimed at investigating the relation
between stylometric cues and personality traits. To this
sake, correlations have been calculated, showing that 6 psy-
chological factors correlate with 10 out of 28 total stylomet-
ric features, in a statistically significant way (p-value< 0.05);
for example, our data show that subjects with higher pos-
itive affectivity tend to use to write slowly and to use a
smaller number of long words. In addition, we perform re-
gression on the personality traits using the features, show-
ing that it is possible to generate predictions which correlate
significantly with the original score for 4 personality traits,
namely non planning impulsiveness, BIS punishment avoid-
ance, negative affectivity and anxious personality.
The second analysis is aimed at verifying how discrimi-
native is the chatting style of a person when compared to
that of other subjects. To this aim, a detailed study is con-
ducted analyzing the contribute of each stylometric feature
in terms of recognition capability. Highly discriminative fea-
tures have been found, some of them correlating with per-
sonality traits. Connecting these two analyses allows to hy-
pothesize that possibly some personality traits lead people
to chat in a particular style, which makes them very rec-
ognizable. For example, in the example above, the use of
short words is a discriminative characteristic in chats, and
is significantly correlated with higher non planning impul-
siveness, highlighting that people who score higher in this
3Such choice is motivated by the fact that we want on the
one hand to prevent the style of the subjects to be influ-
enced by that of different interlocutors and, on the other, to
avoid styles that are peculiar to specific kinds of long term
interactions.
factor of impulsiveness use also a greater number of short
words, that is, the more subjects are impulsive, the shorter
the time they stop on each single word while writing.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we
present the literature review, focusing on the computational
approaches of chat analysis and on the psychological theo-
ries on the relation between interaction and personality. In
Sec. 3 we present our dataset, detailing also the performed
psychological questionnaires. Our novel stylometric features
are presented in Sec. 4. The results of correlation between
personality traits and stylometric features are reported in
Sec. 5, while the results on the prediction of the personality
traits given the stylometric features are reported in Sec. 6.
Results on identity recognition are presented in Sec. 7, and
the discussion on how discriminative features are linked to
personality traits is reported in Sec. 8. Finally, conclusions
are drawn and future perspectives are envisaged in Sec. 9.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Computational Approaches
Most computational approaches on inferring personality
traits from text depend strongly on a semantic analysis of
the content: usually, psychologists individuate semantic fea-
tures that are then validated through computational ap-
proaches. One of the first studies on the subject dates back
to 1999 [12], while the most cited studies concerning the de-
sign of features are about the Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC) features [11]: these include both syntactic
(e.g. past tense verbs) and semantic cues (e.g. anger words,
reference to family members), all validated by experts. An-
other important source of cues is the MRC Psycholinguistic
database [4], containing statistics for over 150K words, and
defininig features like “syllables per words” and “concrete-
ness”. A study that pools together all these features is [7],
which is focused on finding relations with the Big Five per-
sonality traits, and where it is shown that MRC features
are useful for models of emotional stability, while LIWC
features are applicable to all traits. In this study, we ne-
glect semantic analysis of the text, for privacy issues, and
we deal with chat conversations corpora, which have never
been considered before. Regarding the author recognition is-
sue, the most related field is that of Authorship Attribution
(AA), which introduced the term “stylometric feature”. In
this case, the related literature agrees essentially in consid-
ering the taxonomy of [1], which partitions features into five
major groups: lexical, syntactic, structural, content-specific
and idiosyncratic. The typical workflow of an AA approach
is that of extracting from a set of training texts (related to
some gallery subjects) a set of features, feeding them into
discriminative classifiers, and proceeding with the testing on
some unseen texts. The application of AA to chat conver-
sations is quite recent, see [16] for a survey. Notably, the
taxonomy of stylometric features has been enlarged in [15]
with turn-taking based features, which explicitly account for
the dynamics of the turns of text delivery in chats. The same
paper also contains a summary table of the most important
stylometric features.
2.2 Psychological Literature
On the other hand, the psychological literature has shown
that people tend to use rapid judgements on personality
traits as a guide during interaction. In conversation this
occurs in a significant way. Indeed, several studies showed
225
that individuals tend to believe that speakers’ speech char-
acteristics are indicative of their personality traits [6]. Other
researches have effectively demonstrated that speakers’ voice
type (loud-slow, loud-fast, soft-slow, soft-fast) is related with
speakers’ personality traits [8]. As shown by several stud-
ies, text analysis has proven to be a useful aid for measur-
ing personality traits. For example, [12] showed correlation
between lexical expressions and basic personality measures
assessed by the Big Five questionnaire. Positive correla-
tion between neuroticism and the use of emotional words
with a negative valency, and between extroversion and emo-
tional words with a positive valency were reported. Similar
results were also found in [9]; however, in this study the
content of the verbal material was not taken into consider-
ation. A more recent study, [3], instead, analyzed to which
degree basic elements of personality can be measured by us-
ing lexical analysis of verbal expression of autobiographical
and personally relevant material. Two well-validated models
of personality aimed at investigating, respectively, positive
and negative affectivity traits (PANAS) and human moti-
vations to behavioral inhibition (BIS) and activation (BAS)
were used. Findings showed that individuals with high lev-
els of positive affectivity and behavioral activation tended
to express more positive emotions in their natural speech,
whereas those with high levels of negative affectivity and be-
havioral inhibition tended to show more negative emotions.
3. THE DATASET
The data collection has been based on a public social net-
work, where the text chatting interface has been equipped
with keylogging functionalities. At the moment of the sub-
scription, users have been informed that text chatting would
have triggered a key logging application, but that the pro-
duced keylogs would have been kept private. The data col-
lection has been realized on this platform by setting up a
campaign of chats; the subscribers meeting certain require-
ments have been invited to participate to an experiment on
personality, involving a text chat session plus the filling of
three personality questionnaires. The explanation of the ex-
periment was given in general terms, and the involvement of
timings was not specified. The selected subjects should be
in the age interval of 18-30 years, and be Master or PhD stu-
dents. The chats were conducted by a single operator, not
having friendship ties with the subjects. The chats were at
least 20 minutes long, and the generic arguments suggested
by the operator were “holidays” and “friends”. The visual
interface employed in the dialogs mirrors common instant-
messaging platforms like Facebook and Skype. Thanks to
the implementation of the chat software, the key logging
mechanism allows to get the timings of each button hit with
a precision of milliseconds, synchronized with the timing of
the other participant.
A total of 50 subjects participated to the experiment, with
an average age of 24 years, standard deviation ρ = 1.5. At
the end of the text chat, the participants were asked to fill
the following three well-known self-administered question-
naires, aimed at evaluating psychological factors:
1. The Barratt Impulsiveness Scale, version 11 (BIS-11)
[10], to measure three categories of impulsiveness, and
specifically the “attentional impulsiveness”, indicating
a lack of attention and cognitive instability, the “mo-
tor impulsiveness”, indicating a lack of control in mo-
tor behavior, and the “non-planning impulsiveness”,
indicating a deficit in planning their own behavior.
The test for these traits is composed by the same
items (30), answered on a 4-points scale, ranging from
“never” to “always”. Combining opportunely the an-
swers allows to get scores for the three traits, whose
range is (8,32), (11,44), (11,44), respectively, where a
high score indicates a strong lack in the related kind
of impulsiveness.
2. The Behavioral Inhibition and the Behavioral Activa-
tion Scales (BIS/BAS; [2]) were used to analyze par-
ticipants’ likelihood of approaching rewards (BAS) or
avoiding punishments (BIS) when making a choice.
There are 20 items, answered on a 5-points scale, from
“very true for me” to “very false for me”. The diverse
combinations of the answers give the scores for BIS
(min = 7, max = 13) and BAS (min = 13, max =
65), where a high score indicates compulsive will in
approaching rewards, and strong will in avoiding pun-
ishment, respectively.
3. The Positive Affect and Negative Affect Scales (PANAS
[17]) were used in order to analyze positive (PA) and
negative (NA) affectivity. There are 20 items in to-
tal, inquiring “to which extent subjects feel this way”
(indicated by each affective word) and answered on a
5-point scale, from “very slightly or not at all” to “ex-
tremely”. Even in this case, combining opportunely
the answers provides the scores for PA (min = 10,
max = 50) and NA (min = 10, max = 50), where high
scores indicate higher positive (for PA) and negative
(for NA) experienced affectivity, lower scores indicate
instead lower positive (for PA) and negative (for NA)
experienced affectivity.
In total the tests provide a quantitative indication for 7
personality traits, whose cumulative statistics over the 50
subjects are reported in Fig. 1.
Notice that, differently from the mainstream in existing
literature, we do not use the Big Five to test personal-
ity traits. Big Five are focused on complex personality
traits (for example agreeableness and openness to experi-
ence): here we are interested in more basic measures, such as
the affectivity (positive or negative), behavioral motivations
(that is, tendency to behavioral inhibition or activation) and
impulsiveness traits, as we are more concerned with possi-
ble interrelations between traits and cues rather than on the
traits themselves. This is similar in spirit to [12, 2], where
personality traits are correlated with text writing style [12]
and natural speech [2] respectively.
4. STYLOMETRIC FEATURES
In the design of stylometric features we follow the idea
of [15, 14], that is, of using the turn length, and not simply
the entire conversation, as fundamental unity for computing
stylometric statistics. The big limitation of such works was
that timings were calculated by considering the duration
of each turn, as given by the Skype APIs; this introduced
some approximations, like the ones needed for evaluating
the writing speed (number of characters/turn duration) and
limited the design of the features (for example, it was not
possible to calculate the effective speed in writing words,
excluding the spaces).
All these limitations have been overcome with our frame-
work. Since our system has been designed to work on social
226
12 14 16 18 20 22
0
2
4
6
8
10
ATTENTIONAL 
IMPULSIVENESS
(BIS−11)
Values
(Lilliefors Test 
  H=1 p=0.021)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
15 20 25 30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
MOTOR 
IMPULSIVENESS
(BIS−11)
Values
(Lilliefors Test H=0)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
15 20 25 30 35
0
5
10
15
NON PLANNING 
IMPULSIVENESS
(BIS−11)
Values
(Lilliefors Test H=0)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
17 21 25 29 33
0
2
4
6
8
10
BIS
(BIS−BAS)
Values
(Lilliefors Test H=0)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
30 40 50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
BAS
(BIS−BAS)
Values
(Lilliefors Test H=0)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
25 30 35 40 45
0
2
6
10
14
18
PA
(PANAS)
Values
(Lilliefors Test 
  H=1 p=0.019)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
20 30 40
0
2
4
6
8
10
NA
(PANAS)
Values
(Lilliefors Test 
  H=1 p=0.011)
O
cc
ur
re
nc
es
Figure 1: Traits distribution. On the bottom, the output of the Lilliefors test for distribution normality (H=0 indicates data
normally distributed). Underlined, those personality traits which correlate with at least one stylometric feature.
networks, we have paid much attention to privacy issues: the
idea is to neglect the content of the conversation, accounting
only for the way it is performed. Our features follow this
guideline, avoiding any kind of natural language processing,
while other features, as length of words, punctuation, emoti-
cons etc. are preserved and analyzed.
For each person involved in a conversation, we analyze
his/her stream of turns (suppose T ), ignoring the content
of the input from the other subject. This means that we
assume that the chat style (as modeled by our features) is
independent from the interlocutor (hereafter called opera-
tor) – who in this case was the same for all participants,
and was barely known by the subjects analyzed.
From each turn, a stylometric feature is extracted, gen-
erating a number; therefore, with T turns we obtain T fea-
ture values. Depending on the kind of feature and task to
perform (measuring correlations or doing person identifica-
tion), an histogram or the mean/median is computed, and
the resulting measure becomes a part of the signature which
characterizes a given individual. In the following, the list of
the features together with their explanation is presented.
For convenience, and whereas possible, we have kept the
name of the features proposed in the literature, with the
substantial difference that in this case the feature extraction
was performed using a key-logging framework, ensuring a
more precise and capillary temporization. Specifically, all
the turn-taking features are brand new. How features have
been treated to calculate correlations with personality traits
or similarities for the sake of recognition will be discussed in
the following. In the list below, the numbers in parenthesis
indicate the feature ID.
Lexical Features.
(1) Number of words (#W): number of words per turn.
With “word” we intend a string of characters (see be-
low);
(2) Number of chars (#C): number of characters per
turn. With “character”, we intend every normal key
on the QWERTY keyboard, ignoring special keys like
the SPACE, CTRL, etc.;
(3) Number of uppercase chars (#Uppercase): num-
ber of uppercase characters in a turn;
(4) Number of uppercase chars / number of chars
(#Uppercase/#C): usually, entire words written in
capital letters indicate a strong emotional message.
This feature accounts for such communicative tendency;
(5) Mean word length: average length of the words in
a turn;
(6-7) 1(2)-order length transitions (1oLT,2oLT): these
features resemble the n-grams of [16]; the strong dif-
ference here is in the fact that we consider solely the
length of the words, and not their content. See [15] for
further details.
Syntactic Features.
(8) Number of ? and ! marks (#?!): we keep
the “?” and the “!” marks in the same feature,
since taken separately their relevance is very low;
(9) Number of suspension points (#...);
(10) Number of generic marks (#Marks): a high
number of generic marks (”,.:*;) usually indicates
a more accurate writing style;
(11,12,13) Number of positive, negative and uncate-
gorized emoticons (# Emo+, # Emo-, #
Emo=, respectively): features related to emoti-
cons aim at individuating a particular mood ex-
pressed in a turn. In particular, 101 diverse
emoticons have been divided in three classes, por-
traying positive emotions (happiness, love, inti-
macy, etc. − 20 emot.), negative emotions (fear,
anger, etc. − 19 emot.) and other emoticons
(portraying actions, objects etc. − 62 emot.);
(14) Number of emoticons (#Emo): Number of
emoticons in a turn, independently from their
type;
(15-16) Number of emoticons / number of words
(chars) (#Emo/#W, #Emo/#C, respecti-
vely): it considers how often pictorial symbols
are used in a sentence considering the number of
words (chars) typed;
(17) Number of deletions (#Back); it models the
number of hits of the backspace key during a
turn.
Turn-taking Features.
For these novel features, the temporization of the key hits
is crucial. In the following, we indicate with tn the instant
when the n−th hit of the button bn occurs during a turn.
(18) Turn time: We indicate with T the length of the
period in which a turn is kept (before pressing the
“return” key);
227
(19) Typing time: thanks to the exact timings of key
presses, this feature approximates the time spent in
writing words, as the pauses and the time spent in de-
ciding what to say and in reading what the other has
written is not included in the counting. A word is as-
sumed to be a string of consecutive alphanumeric char-
acters, which is anticipated and followed by a blank
space. Formally, let us define Ik, the interval of time
spent in writing the k−th word; we have
Ik = tn − tm (1)
such that n > m, bm−1, bn+1 are space keys and bm,
bm+1, . . . , bn are not space keys. In these cases,
Typing time =
K∑
k
Ik (2)
assuming to have K words in the turn under analy-
sis. Calculating this feature is different than simply
computing the time spent in a turn, as it allows for
instance to distinguish a person who is very fast in
typing words but uses long pauses between a word and
another (he/she thinks a lot what to write) from an in-
dividual whose typing speed is slower, but knows what
to say and takes fewer and shorter breaks while writing
a sentence;
(20) Mean typing time: it divides the total typing time
in a conversation of a subject by the number of turns;
(21) Mean writing speed: it measures the typing time
divided by the number #C of written chars in a turn;
(22) Deviation writing speed; the standard deviation of
the timings required for typing a character. Assuming
t̃n = tn − tn−1 and tn is the time when a char button
is hit, we have
Dev.writ.speed =
1
#C − 1
#C∑
n=1
(
t̃n − Mean writ.sp.
)2
(3)
(23) Silence time (ST ): the time spent in pressing the
space bar, which is collected by summing all those in-
tervals of the form
Sk = tn − tm (4)
such that n > m, bm, bn are not space keys and bm,
bm+1, . . . , bn are space keys. Therefore
Silence time =
K∑
k
Sk (5)
This feature models the pauses that are taken between
a word and another, which could be thought as the
counterpart of the silence in spoken interactions;
(24) Speech ratio: the ratio between the time spent typ-
ing words and typing spaces. It gives an idea of the
balance between being inactive (because one is wait-
ing for the other’s reply, or because he/she is thinking
what to write) and being actively typing;
(25-26) Imitation per word, per char (#W imit, #C
imit): ratio between number of chars -or words- in
the current turn and number of chars -or words- in the
previous turn of the interlocutor; this feature models
the tendency of a subject to imitate the conversation
style of the interlocutor (at least for what concerns the
length of the turns);
(27) Answer time: this feature is the time spent to an-
swer a question presented in the previous turn of the
interlocutor. We assume the presence of a question
whenever there is a question mark;
(28) Typing time length n (Typing time n)> it mod-
els the average time needed for writing a word of a
given length L (L = 1, . . . , 15), where the averaging
operation here is built on the entire conversation, and
not solely on a single turn.
Since these features are collected for each turn (except the
Typing time n, 1oLT and 2oLT features), and assuming
there are T turns in a conversation, we end up with T num-
bers for each feature.
These features are subsequently used for two applications:
correlation with psychological traits and user recognition.
Depending on the task at hand, the feature values are treated
differently, as discussed in the following.
5. CORRELATIONS TRAITS-FEATURES
In order to inquire whether a connection holds between
psychological traits and features, we consider the cues ex-
tracted from the chat of each single subject and the scores
of his/her questionnaires. In particular, for each feature we
calculate the mean or the median number over all the turns
of the conversation, obtaining one value per feature, per
user. As notable exception, for the 1oLT and 2oLT we keep
the maximum values contained within. The reason is simple
(take as example the 1oLT): having a high entry at the po-
sition i, j of the matrix means that a word of i characters,
followed immediately by a word of j characters have been
written many times by a subject; this indicates a certain
stylistic pattern that, if high, indicates a sort of blueprint
for that user.
For the estimation of the correlation, we calculate the
Pearson correlation coefficient (where both the distribution
of features values and traits are normal), the Spearman coef-
ficient otherwise. The test for normality is the Lilliefors test.
Results are shown in Table 1, showing 17 significant correla-
tions (p-value< 0.05). Note that Attentional Impulsiveness
and BAS did not show any correlation.
Our findings suggest that subjects who scored higher in
motor and non-planning impulsiveness used shorter words
(low mean word length), indicating that they were taking
less time to provide their answer. Moreover, subjects who
referred higher deficit in planning their own behavior (non-
planning impulsiveness) tended to imitate to a larger extent
what the other interlocutor did (high imitation rate) and
used a lower number of emoticons in relation to the used
words/chars, as suggesting that they were, again, available
neither to loose time in chatting nor in thinking about what
and how to write.
Relatively to traits involved in human motivation to act
and write in a way rather than in another, our findings
are also of interest. Specifically, subjects with higher lev-
els of behavioral inhibition (that is, punishment avoidance)
showed a lower tendency to imitate the other interlocutor’s
style in chatting. This result is not clearly intuitive as, usu-
ally, in order to avoid punishment, people tend to be ac-
commodating and in this framework one would expect them
228
Motor
impulsiveness
Non planning
impulsiveness
BIS
punishment
avoidance
PA
Positive
affectivity
NA
Negative
affectivity
#Emo (n14) [66.4%] / / -0.31 / /
#Emo/#W (n15)
[60.7%]
/ -0.28 -0.29 / -0.30
#Emo/#C (n16) [61.0%] / -0.28 -0.29 / -0.31
#Emo+ (n11) [/] / / / / /
#W (n1) [60.4%] / / / -0.29 /
Mean word length (5)
[63.5%]
-0.41 -0.38 / +0.38 /
Mean writing speed (20)
[65.9%]
/ / / -0.36 /
1oLT (n6) [69.9%] / / / -0.34 /
#C imit (n26) [57.1%] / +0.36 -0.29 / -0.31
#W imit (n25) [55.9%] / +0.30 / / /
Table 1: Correlations between stylometric features. In brackets, the ID of the features. In squared brackets the nAUC score,
witnessing how effective the feature is in distinguishing people (the higher the more effective, see Sec. 7). Numerical values in
the table indicate statistically significant correlations (p-value< 0.05). Attentional Impulsiveness and BAS did not show any
correlation, so they are not reported here.
to imitate the interlocutor’s style. Nonetheless, it has to
be noticed that the specific task did not imply any pun-
ishment, therefore subjects could feel free to write sponta-
neously, without imitating the interlocutor. Interestingly,
they used a lower number of emoticons, not only in abso-
lute terms, but also relatively to the number of words or
chars used in writing (low #Emo/#W and #Emo/#C ).
Also the latter chatting style can be the manifestation of
a tendency to avoid to show emotions, be they positive or
negative, and might be driven by a behavior of punishment
avoidance, represented by high scores in BIS scale.
The same negative correlation with the number of emoti-
cons used has been found in connection with higher levels
of negative affectivity, showing again a higher tendency to
avoid to express emotions while chatting. These findings
seem to be related to those found by [3], where subjects
with behavioral inhibition and negative affectivity tended to
show more negative emotions in their natural speech. Also,
subjects with higher negative affectivity showed a lower ten-
dency to imitate the interlocutor’s chatting style. Subjects
with higher positive affectivity showed a higher tendency to
use long words and to write slowly, to use a smaller num-
ber of words, and to have a higher tendency to change their
chatting style (low 1oLT ). These findings, taken together,
seem to suggest that positive affectivity leads to emphasize
the specific words used, preferring the length rather than
the quantity of words, writing them slowly, and feeling free
to change their chatting style.
It is worth noting that the 28x7 correlation tests cannot be
taken together and compared with the number of significant
correlation values, since they refer to highly different cues
and diverse personality markers; instead, the 17 correlations
found are meaningful, since they concentrate on few stylo-
metric features (10), which represent few distinct aspects of
chatting. Even if the correlations are somewhat weak, they
resemble numerical results obtained by analogue studies on
personality and writing style, see [12] as an example.
6. PREDICTION BY REGRESSION
To assess the reliability of the correlations, we investigate
how well an automatic system can predict the personality
traits of a person given a portion of his/her chat. To this
sake, for each trait we select all the features which show sig-
nificant correlations with it, and we train a separate multi-
variate Epsilon Support Vector Regressor (-SVR) with RBF
kernel, in a Leave One Out sense (learning on N-1 people,
testing on the Nth one, for all the people). We use -SVRs
after having tried linear regression, which gave worst per-
formances. As for the parameter selection, we set a single
-SVR parameterization, which work reasonably well on all
the traits, that is C = 220, γ = 1.6,  = 1. As evaluation
metrics we use the standard R2 measure and we also per-
form correlation between the predicted values and the origi-
nal ones, to show if, apart from bias, there is some regularity
in the prediction of the regressor. The results are shown in
Table 2. As visible, we obtain significant correlations with
3 out of 5 traits, even if the R2 score is very weak. Any-
way, our aim is not to promote a product which performs
such kind of prediction, but only to assess the influence of
personality traits in the way a chat is performed.
7. PERSON RECOGNITION BY STYLE
Here the aim is to analyze to which extent stylometric
features can distinguish a person among many others. For
every subject we collect one conversation and extract the
related features. Then, a similarity score is calculated be-
tween each subject and all the others, first by accounting
for each single feature separately, then using all the features
together. In the former case, the similarity score is obtained
by taking the T values of the feature, organizing them into
an 8-bin histogram, where the range of the quantization val-
ues had been fixed by considering the whole dataset. The
match between any two histograms is calculated using the
Bhattacharyya distance. This process is applied to all kinds
of features, except for the 1oLT and 2oLT features, where
the diffusion distance [15] is employed, and for the Typing
time n, where Euclidean distance is adopted.
The turns of each subject are split into probe and gallery
set, so that the probe samples can be given as test and the
recognizer can evaluate the matches with the gallery ele-
ments. Probe and gallery set contain snaps of 10 turns of
conversation each in order to avoid biases due to quanti-
tatively different available material. Whenever possible, we
have selected different turns (maintaining their chronological
order) in order to generate different probe/gallery partitions.
For each feature the re-identification has been repeated 30
times, varying probe and gallery partitions.
229
Motor
impulsiveness
Non planning
impulsiveness
BIS
punishment
avoidance
PA
Positive
affectivity
NA
Negative
affectivity
ρ 0.31 0.43 0.23 -0.16 0.44
p 0.03 0.001 0.09 0.27 0.002
R2 0.09 0.06 <0 <0 0.15
Table 2: Regression results: for each trait, we report the Pearson correlation coefficient ρ calculated between the predicted
and the original personality traits, its associated p-value and the R2 metrics.
Then, for each subject we extract a particular feature from
the probe set and calculate the distance with the gallery of
the corresponding feature for all subjects. If we take N sub-
jects, we obtain a N × N distance matrix. At this point
we have ranked the N distances for each probe element in
ascending order and thus we have computed the Cumulative
Match Characteristic (CMC) curve, i.e., the expectation of
finding the correct match in the top n positions of the rank-
ing. The CMC has been recognized as an effective perfor-
mance measure for authorship attribution [15], and we have
then used it to evaluate the task of identity recognition, i.e.
the ability to discover the identity of a subject among a set
of N other subjects. In particular, the value of the CMC
curve at position 1 is the probability that the probe ID sig-
nature of a subject is closer to the gallery ID signature of
the same subject than to any other gallery ID signature; the
value of the CMC curve at position n is the probability of
finding the correct match in the first n ranked positions.
Given the CMC curve for each feature (obtained by av-
eraging on 30 trials), the normalized Area Under Curve
(nAUC) is calculated as a measure of accuracy. The re-
sults are shown in Fig. 2, where the features are listed in
decreasing order of accuracy. The cues which correlate with
at least one personality trait are portrayed in red. We have
not reported the features producing an nAUC lower than
0.52.
As visible, all the CMC curves related to the different fea-
tures are similar in expressivity, but not strongly effective;
the probability of guessing the right people with only one
attempt (corresponding to analyzing the performance of the
CMC curve at rank 1) is below the 10%. Anyway, if we
combine all features, mediating the related distances com-
puted among the probe and the gallery subject, we obtain
a much more informative curve (see Fig. 2, All features). In
this case, getting the correct guess after the first attempt
is around the 30%, and with the 80% of probability we can
individuate the correct subject among the first 10 ranked
subjects.
8. LINKING PERSONALITY TO RECOG-
NIZABILITY: DISCUSSION
Looking jointly at Fig. 2 and Table 1, one can immedi-
ately notice that positive affectivity is the trait which is
most strongly related with the style of a person (it corre-
lates with 4 stylometric features), making it recognizable
with the highest probability (if we use only its correlated fea-
tures, with the approach detailed in Sec. 7, we obtain 72.1%
of nAUC). This result is intuitive, since positive affectivity
may favor the tendency of writing following a well defined
structure (the 1oLT feature, capturing the fact that short
words follow short words, short words follow long words etc.)
and of using few long words, slowly written.
A second important personality trait is the non planning
impulsiveness (how much a person refers higher deficit in
planning his/her own behavior), whose 5 correlated features,
if combined, give 69.4% of nAUC. The same nAUC score
is given by the 4 features correlated with the punishment
avoidance (people with higher levels of behavioral inhibi-
tion). Negative affectivity has 3 correlated features (65.9%
nAUC). The less indicative trait, among the ones which cor-
relate, is the motor impulsiveness, with only one feature
(63.5% nAUC).
These findings are very interesting as, congruently with
the aim of this study, they clearly suggest that specific psy-
chological factors related with impulsivity and involved in
human interaction can be predictive of peculiar writing styles
people use in writing chat texts.
9. CONCLUSIONS
The analysis of the relations between personality and writ-
ing style has been an hot topic in both computational lin-
guistics and psychology fields; recently, the topic has been
renowned with the massive diffusion of the chats, where tex-
tual artifacts and elements of the spoken interaction coexist.
In this scenario, our long term goal is to evaluate whether
the influence of personality on chatting style is stronger than
in standard text, and in which measure this is manifested
by non verbal signals, that is, aspects that go beyond the
semantics of the content. This way, algorithms that recog-
nize personality profiles of the speakers may be employed
in a privacy respectful manner, facilitating the conversation
with diverse chatting layouts, or encouraging contacts be-
tween “compatible” subjects. At the same time, we are in-
terested in discovering whether the manifestation of a very
particular chatting style, that is, very recognizable, may cor-
respond to having also a distinguishable personality profile.
In this way we may understand which are the personality
traits that are more evident via chat, and in which measure
chats can be considered a transparent means of communica-
tion. This study goes in this direction, showing that positive
affectivity is connected with the usage few long words, slowly
written by following a particular rhythm and this turns out
to be the most recognizable trait, followed by non planning
impulsiveness, behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity and
planning impulsiveness.
10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
C. Giorgetta and R. Ferrario are supported by the VisCoSo
project grant, financed by the Autonomous Province of Trento
through the “Team 2011” funding programme.
230
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
 
 
 All Features     88.4%
 3 - #Uppercase              75.0%
 4 - #Uppercase / #C          72.4%
 6 - 1oLT                                69.9%
 20 - Mean Typing Time       69.8%
 28 - Typing Time N        69.7%
 10 - #Marks                 69.4%
 9 - #...               67.4%
 14 - #Emo            66.4%
 21 - Mean Writing Speed   65.9%
 17 - #Back        65.2%
 5 - Mean Word Length  63.5%
 12 - #Emo -                   62.8%
 22 - Deviation Writing Speed    62.4%
 23 - Silence Time                   62.1%
 7 - 2oLT                            61.9%
 19 - Typing Time              61.4%
 16 - #Emo / #C     61.0%
 15 - #Emo / #W      60.7%
 1 - #W                   60.4%
 8 - #?!                    59.1%
 24 - Speech Ratio                   58.2%
 2 - #C                        57.5%
 26 - #C imit                    57.1%
 25 - #W imit                    55.9%
 27 - Answer Time                    52.5%
 FEATURES    nAUC
* 
* * 
* 
* * * 
* * 
 Rank
 R
ec
og
ni
tio
n 
R
at
e
Figure 2: CMC curves for each feature. After each feature, their ID and the value of the correspondent nAUC. With an
asterisk, in red, we specify those features which correlate at least with a personality trait. The All features CMC indicates
the performance of averaging the distance of all the features and calculating the ranking.
11. REFERENCES
[1] A. Abbasi and H. Chen. Writeprints: A stylometric
approach to identity-level identification and similarity
detection in cyberspace. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 26(2):1–29, 2008.
[2] C. Carver and T. White. Behavioral Inhibition,
Behavioral Activation, and Affective Responses to
Impending Reward and Punishment: The BIS/BAS
Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67:319–333, 1994.
[3] A. S. Cohen, K. S. Minor, L. E. Baillie, and A. M.
Dahir. Clarifying the Linguistic Signature: Measuring
Personality from Natural Speech. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 90(6):559–563, 2008.
[4] M. Coltheart. The MRC Psycholinguistic database.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
33(4):497–505, 1981.
[5] M. H. Davis. Measuring Individual Differences in
Empathy: Evidence for a Multidimensional Approach.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
44(1):113–126, 1983.
[6] R. Hassin and Y. Trope. Facing faces: Studies on the
Cognitive Aspects of Physiognomy . Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78:837–852, 2000.
[7] F. Mairesse, M. A. Walker, M. R. Mehl, and R. K.
Moore. Using Linguistic Cues for the Automatic
Recognition of Personality in Conversation and Text.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 30:457–500,
2007.
[8] N. Markel, J. Phillis, R. Vargas, and K. Howard.
Personality Traits Associated with Voice Types.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Results, 1:249–255, 1972.
[9] M. R. Mehl, S. D. Gosling, and J. W. Pennebaker.
Personality in Its Natural Habitat: Manifestations and
Implicit Folk Theories of Personality in Daily Life.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90(5):862–877, 2006.
[10] J. H. Patton, M. S. Stanford, and E. S. Barratt.
Factor structure of the barratt impulsiveness scale.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51:768–774, 1995.
[11] J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth.
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC 2001.
Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 71:2001, 2001.
[12] J. W. Pennebaker and L. A. King. Linguistic Styles:
Language Use as an Individual Difference. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6):1296, 1999.
[13] B. Rammstedt and O. P. John. Measuring Personality
in One Minute or Less: A 10-item Short Version of the
Big Five Inventory in English and German. in Journal
of Research in Personality, 41:203–212, 2007.
[14] G. Roffo, C. Giorgetta, R. Ferrario, and M. Cristani.
Just The Way You Chat: Linking Personality, Style
and Recognizability in Chats. In 5th International
Workshop on Human Behaviour Understanding
(associated to ECCV), 2014.
[15] G. Roffo, C. Segalin, V. Murino, and M. Cristani.
Reading Between the Turns: Statistical Modeling for
Identity Recognition and Verification in Chats. In
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video
and Signal-Based Surveillance (AVSS 2013), 2013.
[16] E. Stamatatos. A Survey of Modern Authorship
Attribution Methods. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology,
60(3):538–556, 2009.
[17] D. Watson, L. Clark, and A. Tellegen. Development
and Validation of Brief Measures of Positive and
Negative Affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54:1063–1070,
1988.
231
