[Rubini et al., 3(4): April, 2014]   ISSN: 2277-9655 
   Impact Factor: 1.852   
http: // www.ijesrt.com(C)International Journal of Engineering Sciences & Research Technology 
[1872-1874] 
 
IJESRT 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING SCIENCES & RESEARCH 
TECHNOLOGY 
Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection for Text Based Features Pattern 
P.Rubini*1, Ms. S.Leela2 
*1Post-Graduate Student, 2Assistant professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Karunya University, India 
rubijesus1@gmail.com 
Abstract 
Plagiarism detection means detecting the document whether copied or stealing from the other document. 
The main goal is to detect the word by analyzing the writing style using technique intrinsic plagiarism detection. 
Text mining is used to extract the useful information from the text. Intrinsic plagiarism detection is used to take the 
few words from the document and then it compared to the original document whether it’s plagiarized or not. In 
addition, it performs the modern method in intrinsic plagiarism detection such as Recall, Precision, F-measure and 
Granularity. stylometric frequent pattern of authors can be extracted and mined along with lexical character features, 
lexical word features and syntactical features. The proposed work detects the plagiarism for documents based on 
collecting author profiles of documents. 
 
Keywords: Intrinsic plagiarism detection, Plagiarism detection, copied document, style modeling. 
 
     Introduction 
Plagiarism is occurring in everyday topics, 
for example: in research, academics, empirical 
studies, literature, etc. To reduce this plagiarism 
detection educate the people not do it, encourage to 
think in his way and help people not to do the 
mistake. These prevention method is not reduce, thus 
the solution is not trivial. The different kinds of 
plagiarism is, 
1. Exact copy: it copy and paste the entire 
document without any change in the document. 
2. Idea: it copies only their idea and the 
content are different from others. 
3. Paraphrasing: it copies the entire 
document with small changes in the content by 
giving in active and passive words. 
Text mining is used to extract the useful information 
from the text. Those texts are used to collect in a 
cluster format. Each and every segment is in a form 
of cluster. This segment will detect the deviations in 
the writing style. 
 
Related Works 
Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection 
Intrinsic plagiarism detection is used to refer 
the intrinsic algorithm that compares the duplicate 
document against the original document. It relies 
only on the use of words not on the language specific. 
Intrinsic Plagiarism is almost similar to the 
authorship attribution. Intrinsic Plagiarism detection 
uses the ‘n-gram profiles’ to compare with the whole 
document. First, it removes the numbers and also the 
unwanted letter except the a-z word. Second, it 
removes all the stop-words and then converts all 
words into lowercase. Next, using a word frequency 
based algorithm a vector v is built for all the words in 
the document. Then the complete document will 
collected as a cluster c. For each segment or group a 
frequency vector is computed. Let V be a vector of 
words that defines word w, as a basic unit of discrete 
data, indexed by {1. . . |V|}. A document d is a 
sequence of S words (|d| = S) defined by w= (w1, . . . 
,wS), where ws is the sth word in the message. 
Finally, a corpus is defined by a collection of D 
documents denoted by C = (w1, . . . ,w|D|).These 
method segments documents according to stylistic 
inconsistencies and decide whether or not a document 
is plagiarism-free. A set of heuristic rules is 
introduced that attempt to detect plagiarism on either 
the document level or the text passage level as well 
as to reduce the effect of irrelevant stylistic changes 
within a document. 
 
External Plagiarism Detection: 
External Plagiarism detection is used to 
compare all the words with the original document. 
The comparison between the document is made 
quickly, effective whether the document is 
plagiarized or not. The comparing documents and 
[Rubini et al., 3(4): April, 2014]   ISSN: 2277-9655 
   Impact Factor: 1.852   
http: // www.ijesrt.com(C)International Journal of Engineering Sciences & Research Technology 
[1872-1874] 
 
their outputs are not given in detailed information 
from which the document is copied. Next, the same 
document is compared again then the detail 
information will be given and also it tells from which 
paragraph it’s copied. Sometimes it uses the n-gram 
profiles or string-matching algorithm to give some 
flexibility to the detection. 
External plagiarism detection is used to 
execute the search space reduction method and also 
to find plagiarism passage. The search space method 
aims at quickly identify those pair of documents that 
potentially have some text in common, possibly one 
of them having plagiarized from the other. 
 
Authorship Attribution 
Authorship attribution is similar to the 
intrinsic plagiarism detection but only few 
differences in the styles. It’s the task of 
characterizing the writing style of a document. 
Whenever problem arises regarding documents and 
there must be clarification. Linguistic feature as been 
selected for the writing style of a document. 
Sometimes it includes the syntactical and lexical 
analysis   for the character, word and sentence. 
Authorship attribution is used in the large data set 
and also in small data set in some of the verification 
task. 
 
Working 
The preprocessing, where the document is 
preprocessed by removing numbers and all other 
characters that do not belong to the a–z group. All 
characters are considered lowercase. The method 
uses word unigrams and considers all words; stop-
words are not removed. Next, a word-frequency-
based algorithm to test the self-similarity of a 
document is proposed. Then, the complete document 
is clustered creating groups C. Secondly the term 
frequency, in this every segment is compared against 
the whole document only in terms of the words 
present in the segment. Finally, all segments are 
classified according to their distance with respect to 
the document’s style. 
Third module describe about the stylometric 
frequent pattern that  can be extracted and mined 
along with lexical character features, lexical word 
features and syntactical features. The proposed work 
detects the plagiarism for documents based on 
collecting author profiles of documents. Different 
documents of same author in the various domains can 
be taken. To be able to distinguish different authors 
within the same document, writing style present in 
the text are characterized. Then the features from 
these documents such as stylometric frequent pattern 
are extracted. Stylometric is a form of authorship 
recognition that relies on the linguistic information 
found in a document. The extracted frequent pattern 
of features identifies the author of the source 
document in which the document under test is being 
plagiarized. 
 Fourth module describe about the extracted 
features can be classified by using Machine learning 
algorithm called Support Vector Machines method 
(SVM). The Support Vector Machines method 
(SVM) achieves predominantly the best results in 
comparisons of machine learning approaches to the 
authorship recognition problem. Finally the proposed 
method uses combined approach of text or word of 
synonyms and stylometric feature can be done to 
estimate the plagiarism of document in terms of 
frequency of words. The above mentioned process 
efficiently detects plagiarism rather than existing 
work. 
Fifth module describe about the naïve bayes 
classifier and the decision tree learning algorithm. 
Using these two algorithms it tells about the time and 
accuracy of the extracted features. Decision tree is 
the best algorithm where it reduces the time and 
accuracy. 
 
Conclusion 
Intrinsic plagiarism detection and External 
plagiarism detection can be used for plagiarism 
detection by comparing the documents. For doing 
plagiarism detection not all the possible source is 
available. The idea to analyze the document looking 
for variations in the writing style. The proposed 
method uses combined approach of text or word of 
synonyms and stylometric feature can be done to 
estimate the plagiarism of document in terms of 
frequency of words. Decision tree is to reduce the 
time and to improve the accuracy. 
 
References 
[1] Kasprzak, J., & Brandejs, M. (2010). 
Improving the reliability of the plagiarism 
detection system – lab report for pan at clef 
2010. In M. Braschler, D. Harman, & E. 
Pianta, (Eds.), CLEF 2010 labs and 
workshops, notebook papers. 22–23 
September 2010, Padua, Italy. 
[2] Stamatatos, E. (2009). Intrinsic plagiarism 
detection using character n-gram profiles. 
In B. Stein, P. Rosso, E. Stamatatos, M. 
Koppel, & E. Agirre (Eds.), SEPLN 2009 
workshop on uncovering plagiarism, 
authorship, and social software misuse 
(PAN 09) (pp. 38–46). CEUR-WS.org. 
[3] Seaward, L., & Matwin, S. (2009). Intrinsic 
plagiarism detection using complexity 
[Rubini et al., 3(4): April, 2014]   ISSN: 2277-9655 
   Impact Factor: 1.852   
http: // www.ijesrt.com(C)International Journal of Engineering Sciences & Research Technology 
[1872-1874] 
 
analysis. In B. Stein, P. Rosso, E. 
Stamatatos, M. Koppel, & E. Agirre (Eds.), 
SEPLN 2009 workshop on uncovering 
plagiarism, authorship, and social software 
misuse (PAN 09) (pp. 56–61). CEUR-
WS.org. 
[4] Stein, B., Lipka, N., & Prettenhofer, P. 
(2011). Intrinsic plagiarism analysis. 
Language Resources and Evaluation, 45, 
63–82 
[5] Baayen, H., van Halteren, H., & Tweedie, F. 
(1996). Outside the cave of shadows:Using 
syntactic annotation to enhance authorship 
attribution. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing, 11, 121–132. 
 
