Digital Humanities 2010
1
The State of Non-
Traditional Authorship
Attribution Studies –
2010: Some Problems and
Solutions
Rudman, Joseph
jr20@heps.phys.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
In 1997, at the ACH-ALLC'97 conference
at Queen's University, there was a session
presented by R. Harald Baayen, David I.
Holmes, Joe Rudman, and Fiona J. Tweedie,
"The State of Authorship Attribution Studies: (1)
The History and the Scope; (2) The Problems
– Towards Credibility and Validity." Thirteen
years have passed and well over 600 studies and
papers dealing with non-traditional authorship
attribution have been promulgated since that
session.
This paper looks back at that session, a
subsequent article published by Rudman in
Computers and the Humanities, "The State of
Authorship Attribution Studies: Some Problems
and Solutions," and the more than 600 new
publications. There are still major problems
in the “science” on non-traditional authorship
attribution. This paper goes on to assess the
present state of the field – its successes, failures,
and prospects.
1. Successes
It has been an exciting thirteen years with many
advances. Each of the following (not a complete
list) will be discussed:
1. Arguably, the most significant development in
the field is the large contingent of computer
scientists that have brought their perspectives
to the table – led by Shlomo Argamon, Moshe
Kopple, and a host of others.
2. The Dimacs Working Group on Developing
Community.
3. Sir Brian Vickers' London Authorship Forum.
4. John Burrows' Busa Award.
5. Forensic Linguistics.
6. Successful studies such as Foster's  Primary
Colors work.
7. The continuing advances of practitioners such
as John Burrows, David Hoover, Matthew
Jockers, David Holmes, and others.
8. John Nerbonne's reissue of Mosteller and
Wallace's Applied Bayesian and Classical
Inference: The Case of "The Federalist
Papers."
9. Patrick Juola's "Ad Hoc Authorship
Attribution Competition." and his NSF funded
JGAAP project.
10.The PAN Workshops. Uncovering Plagiarism,
Authorship, and Social Software Misuse.
2. Acceptance
Contrary to what many practitioners of the non-
traditional proclaim, there is not wide-spread
acceptance of the field.
There have been many high profile problems
with the concomitant negative publicity, e.g.:
1. Foster's misattribution of A Funerall Elegie
2. Foster's misattribution of the Jon Benét
ransom note
3. Burrows' attribution then de-attribution of “A
Vision”
4. The continuing bashing of Morton's CUSUM
Burrows' shift is something that every
good scientist should do – search for
errors or improvements in their experimental
methodology and self correct.
3. Failures and Shortcomings
After thirteen years of increasing activity, there
is still no consensus as to correct methodology
or technique. Most authorship studies are still
governed by expediency, e.g.:
- The texts are not the correct ones but they
were available
- The controls are not complete but it would
have taken too long to obtain the correct ones
The “umbrella” problem remains – most non-
traditional authorship practitioners do not
understand what constitutes a valid study.
Digital Humanities 2010
2
Problems in the following areas will be
explicated and solutions proposed:
- Knowledge of the Field (i.e. the Bibliography)
– The fact that there have been so many
authorship studies is good -- the fact that
they have been published in over 90 different
journals makes a complete literature search
time consuming and difficult which is not
good. To make things even more difficult,
add to this the more than 14 books, 22
chapters in books, the 80 conference papers,
the 10 reports, 22 dissertations, 9 newspaper
articles, the 10 on-line self published papers,
4 encyclopedia entries.
- Reproducibility – verification
- The Experimental Plan
- The Primary Data – This is a major problem
that is almost universally side-stepped.
- Style markers – Function words, n-grams, etc.
- Cross Validation – necessary but not sufficient
- The Control Groups – Genre, gender, time
frame, etc.
- The Statistics – A range of techniques will be
discussed – e.g. Neural Nets, SVM's, Sequence
Kernals, Nave Bayes
- The Presentation – visualization
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, there is a discussion of our role as
gatekeepers:
- Rudman's caution that attribution studies
on the Historia Augusta are an exercise in
futility.
- Hoover and Argamon's modification and
clarification of Burrows' Delta.
- Rudman's “Ripost” of Burrows' “History of
Ophelia.”
- Should we oppose patents such as Chaski's?
- The Daubert triangle.
References
Argamon, Shlomo, et al. (2003). 'Gender,
Genre, and Writing Style in Formal Written
Texts'. Text.  23.3: 321-346.
Baayen, Harald, Hans van Halteren,
Anneke Neijt, and Fiona Tweedie.  (2002).
'An Experiment in Authorship Attribution'.
JADT 2002:6es Journées Internationales
d'Analyse Statistique des Données Textuelles.
Brennan, Michael, and Rachel
Greenstadt. Practical Attacks Against
Authorship Attribution Techniques.  http://ww
w.cs.drexel.edu/greenie/brennan-paper.pdf
(accessed July 14, 2009).
Burrows, John (2007). 'Sarah and Henry
Fielding and the Authorship of The History of
Ophelia: A Computational Analysis'. Script &
Print.  30.2: 69-92.
Chung, Cindy, and James PenneBaker
(2007). 'The Psychological Functions of
Function Words'. Social Communication.  K.
Fiedler (ed.). New York: Psychology Press, pp.
343-359.
Feiguina, Ol'ga, and Graeme Hirst (2007).
'Authorship Attribution for Small Texts: Literary
and Forensic Experiments'. Proceedings of
SIGIR '07 Workshop on Plagiarism Analysis,
Authorship Identification, and Near-Duplicate
Detection.  Amsterdam.
Foster, Donald W. (February 26, 1996).
Primary Culprit: An Analysis of a Novel of
Politics. New York, pp. 50-57.
Khosmood, Foaad, and Robert Levinson
(2006). 'Toward Unification of Source
Attribution Processes and Techniques'.
Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Machine Learning and
Cybernetics.  Dalian, pp. 4551-4556.
Love, Harold (2002). Attributing Authorship:
An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Niederkorn, William S. (20 June 2002). The
New York Times, B1, B5.
Ramyaa, Congzhou, and Khaled Rasheed
(2004). 'Using Machine Learning Techniques
for Stylometry'.  International Conference on
Machine Learning (MLMTA'2004).  Las Vegas.
Rudman, Joseph (2007). 'Sarah and Henry
Fielding and the Authorship of "The History
of Ophelia": A Ripost'. Script & Print.  31.3:
147-163.
Digital Humanities 2010
3
Solon, Lawrence M., and Peter M.
Tiersma (2005). Speaking of Crime. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Stamatatos, Efstathios, Nikos Fakotakis,
and George Kokkinakis (2001). 'Automatic
Text Categorization in Terms of Genre and
Author'. Computational Linguistics.  26.4:
471-495.
Stein, Benno, et al. (eds.)  (2009). PAN'09.
Tambouratzis, George (2001). 'Assessing
the Effectiveness of Feature Groups in Author
Recognition Tasks with the SOM Model'.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics – Part C: Applications and
Reviews.  36.2: 249-259.
Van Halteren, Hans (2004). 'Linguistic
Profiling for Authorship Recognition and
Verification'. 42nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Barcelona.
