On Determining a Valid Text for Non-Traditional
Authorship Attribution Studies: Editing, Unediting, and
De-Editing
JOSEPH RUDMAN
Carnegie Mellon
jr20@andrew.cmu.edu
INTRODUCTION:
The work’s material history since its inception, the vast and largely uncharted alterations imposed by the
history and by the mediation of generation upon generation of printers, editors, publishers—this is a
relativism we are prone to ignore, but ignore at our peril. (Marcus 1996)
The literary texts often are not homogenous since they may comprise dialogues, narrative parts, etc. An
integrated approach, therefore, would require the development of text sampling tools for selecting the parts of
the text that best illustrate an author’s style. (Stamatatos et al. 2001)
Most non-traditional authorship attribution studies place too much emphasis on statistics, stylistics,
and the computer and not enough focus is given to the integrity and validity of the primary data— the text
itself.
It is intuitively obvious and easily shown empirically that if you are conducting a study of the patterns
of an author’s stylistic usage (e.g. Daniel Defoe), the study will be systematically denigrated by each
interpolation of non-Defoe text and even by each interpolation of Defoe text of a different genre or
significantly different time period.
The crux of this paper is about one important element in the empirical methodology of a valid
non-traditional authorship attribution study—the preparation of the text for stylistic and statistical analysis:
unediting, de-editing, and editing.
The general emphasis of this presentation is on prose analysis with some peripheral treatment of
drama and poetry.
I. BACKGROUND AND DEFINITIONS
A. Why a valid text is necessary should not even be asked. No valid experiment can be
done if the input data is flawed—garbage in, garbage out!
Too many practitioners simply grab a text from any available
source—without any thought to its pedigree. (e.g. Khmelev and Tweedie’s “Using
Markov Chains for the Identification of Writers.”)
Are undertakings such as Project Gutenberg or the Oxford Text Archive with
their easily available machine readable texts a boon or a bane to non-traditional
authorship atudies? This question is explored in some detail.
B. Selecting a starting text
The validity of using texts from the oral tradition and the scribal tradition is
discussed.
Before any manipulation and analysis of a text is carried out, a valid starting
text must be acquired that fulfills many necessary requirements. This selection is
primarily bibliographically driven. If a practitioner is not savvy in the bibliographical
arts, a collaborator who is should be recruited.
Examples of bad starting texts causing problems are given (e.g. Peng and
Hengartner’s “Quantitative Analysis of Literary Styles.”)
If you cannot obtain a valid text, do not do the study.
C. Unediting—getting back to the state of “not yet edited”
De-editing—removing selected text
Editing—changing (preparing) a text for statistical analysis
II. EXPLICATION
The statement, “each age, each author, each study demands a different mixture of the
following particulars,” is discussed.
A. Unediting
18
As a rule, the closest text to the holograph should be found and used.
1. Editorial interpolation
a. Filled in lacunae
b. Marginal notation
c. ‘Changes’ in the text
d. Critical editions
2. Printer interpolation
For the Printer is a beast, and understands nothing I can say to him of
correcting the press. Dryden (Ward p. 97)
a. Catchwords (the first word of the next leaf or gathering)
b. Signatures (combinations of letters and numerals used something
like catchwords)
c. Removing obvious typesetting mistakes (a slippery slope)
i. ‘f’ for the long ‘s’
ii. Double words (e.g. ‘the the’ ‘was was’
B. De-editing
1. Quotes
a. Factual, unattributed
b. Factual, attributed
c. Self quotes from earlier writings
2. Plagiarism
a. Direct copy
b. Paraphrasing
c. Imitation
3. Collaboration
a. Sectional
b. Phrasal
c. Word level
d. Ghostwriting
4. Genre
a. Poetry, prose, drama, letters, etc.
b. Mixture (e.g. verse drama)
5. Graphs and Numbers
a. Tables
b. Lists
c. Arabic and Roman numerals
6. Guide words
a. Titles—chapter headings—the end word ‘Finis’
b. Marginal annotation
7. Foreign Languages
a. Sentence level and greater
b. Phrase or word level
8. Translations
a. Verbatim
b. Concepts
9. Examples of items de-edited (or not de-edited) incorrectly by practitioners
a. Biblical quotes
b. Titles in direct apposition
c. Numbers that are spelled out
d. Words with an initial capital
De-editing
C. Editing
1. Encoding the text
a. Why (e.g. homographic forms)
b. TEI
2. Regularizing
a. Spelling
b. Contracted forms (simple, compound)
c. Hyphenation
d. Masked words (e.g. ‘D_ _ _ e’ for ‘Defoe’)
19
3. Lemmatizing
a. Pro
b. Con
D. Special Problems in Drama and Poetry
1. Stage directions
2. The ‘age’ dependency of transmission and technique.
III. SOME EXAMPLES
Studies that are compromised by mistakes of commission and/or omission in editing,
unediting, or de-editing.
A. Historia Augusta
1. Twelve individual studies
B. Shakespeare
1. Eliott and Valenza
2. Foster
3. Horton
C. Defoe
1. Hargevik
2. Rothman
IV. CONCLUSION
1. Some items that are de-edited are valid style markers in their own right (e.g. latin
phrases, different genre) and should be treated as such in a parallel study.
2. No matter which text is selected, the practitioner must disclose which text was used
and everything that was done to it.
3. The same care must be taken with every text in the study—the anonymous text, the
suspected author’s text, and all of the control texts.
4. If valid texts cannot be located and correctly edited, unedited, and de-edited, do not
do the study
5. A valid text does not guarantee a valid study. However, a non-valid text guarantees a
non-valid study.
REFERENCES
Altick, Richard D., and Fenstermaker, John J. The Art of Literary Research (Fourth Edition). New York:
W.W. Norton & Company, 1993.
Burrows, John. “Questions of Authorship: Attribution and Beyond. A Lecture Delivered on the Occasion of
the Roberto Busa Award.” ACH-ALLC01 Conference. New York University, New York, June 14,
2001.
Eliott, Ward E.Y., and Robert J.Valenza. “So Many Hardballs, So Few Over the Plate: Conclusions From Our
‘Debate’ With Donald Foster.” Computers and the Humanities 36 (2002): 455–460.
Foster, Don. Author Unknown: On the Trail of Anonymous. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2000.
Goldgar, Bertrand A. “Imitation and Plagiarism: The Lauder Affair and Its Critical Aftermath.” Studies in
Literary Imagination 34.1 (2001): 1–16.
Geetham, D. C. Textual Scholarship: An Introduction. New York: Garland, 1992.
Grefenstette, Gregory, and Pasi Tapanainen. “What is a Word, What is a Sentence? Problems of
Tokenization.” In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Computational Lexicography.
Budapest: Research Institute for Linguistics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1994. pp. 79–87.
Hargevik, Steig. The Disputed Assignment of “Memoirs of an English Officer to Daniel Defoe”. (Part I and
Part II) Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1974.
Holmes, David I., et al. “A Widow and Her Soldier: Stylometry and the American Civil War.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing 16.4 (2001): 403–420.
Horton, Thomas B. The Effectiveness of the Stylometry of Function Words in Discriminating between
Shakespeare and Fletcher. Thesis. university of Edinburg, 1987.
Khmelev, Dmitri V., and Fiona J. Tweedie. “Using Markov Chains for Identification of Writers.” Literary
and Linguistic Computing 16.3 (2001): 299–307.
Lindey, Alexander. Plagiarism and Originality. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1952.
Marcus, Leah S. “Afterword: Confessions of a Reformed Uneditor.“ In The Renaissance Text: Theory,
Editing, Textuality. Ed. Andrew Murphy. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2000. pp.
211–216.
Marcus, Leah S. Unediting the Renaissance: Shakespeare, Marlow, Milton. London: Routledge, 1996.
Novak, Maximillian E. “The Defoe Canon: Attribution and De-attribution.” Huntington Library Quarterly
59.1 (1997): 83–104
20
Peng, Roger D., and Nicolas W. Hengartner. “Quantitative Analysis of Literary Styles.” The American
Statistician 56.3 (2002): 175–185.
Project Gutenberg. URL: http://promo.net/pg/
Rogers, Pat. The Text of Great Britain: Theme and Design in Defoe's ‘Tour.’ Cranbury, NJ, 1998.
Rothman, Irving N. “Defoe De-Attributions Scrutinized Under Hargevik Criteria: Applying Stylometrics to
the Canon.” Papers of the Bibliographic Society of America, 94.3 (2000): 375–398.
Rudman, Joseph. “The State of Authorship Attribution Studies: Some Problems and Solutions.” Computers
and the Humanities, 31 (1998), 351-365.
Rudman, Joseph. “Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies in the Historia Augusta: Some Caveats.”
Literary and Linguistic Computing 13.3 (1998): 151–157.
Slater, Eliot. The Problem of “The Reign of King Edward III:” A Statistical Approach. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Stamatatos, E., et al. “Computer-Based Authorship Attribution Without Lexical Measures.” Computers and
the Humanities 35 (2001): 193–214.
Text Encoding Initiative. URL: http://www.tei-c.org
Thorp, James. Watching the Ps & Qs: Editorial Treatment of Accidentals. Lawrence, Kansas: University of
Kansas Printing Service, 1971.
Ward, Charles E. (Collector and Editor). The Letters of John Dryden: With Letters Addressed to Him.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1942.
Williams, David S. Stylometric Authorship Studies in Flavius Josephus and Related Literature. Lewistown,
New York: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1992.
Collocations, Authorship Attribution, and Authorial
Style
DAVID HOOVER
New York University
david.hoover@nyu.edu
Authorship attribution typically seeks a small number of textual characteristics that distinguish the texts of
authors effectively from each other (see Morton, 1978 for a classic discussion). With small groups of texts,
these features can be found by examining frequency lists manually, but statistical tests such as the t-test can
also be used (see Binongo and Smith, 1999). For the purposes of authorship attribution, a few items occurring
at consistent and consistently different frequencies in all of the known texts by all of the claimants may be
sufficient for confident attribution.
Most multivariate authorship work focuses on frequent words, following the lead of Burrows (1987,
1988, 1989, 1992a, 1992b, 1994). Much persuasive recent work continues this tradition (Craig, 1999a, 1999b,
1999c, 1999d; Forsyth et al., 1999; Holmes et al., 2001a, 2001b; McKenna and Antonia, 2001; Tweedie et al.,
1998). In two recent studies, however, I have shown that cluster analyses based on frequent words often fail
to attribute known texts to their authors, and that analyses based on word sequences are sometimes more
effective (Hoover, 2001, 2002). Continuing along these lines, I will test the accuracy of analyses based on
collocations, while simultaneously examining the effects of using much larger numbers of items than are
typically used. Large numbers of words, sequences, and collocations provide more information for potential
stylistic analyses, assure that the results take into account a large proportion of the texts under consideration,
and, as we will see, usually produce more accurate results. The results of my investigation also show that
analyses based on collocations are often more accurate than those based on frequent words or sequences.
For this investigation I will define collocations simply as any two words that appear repeatedly within
a certain span of words. Preliminary tests show that, perhaps contrary to intuition, meaningful collocations
like house...yard, or car...highway, are not very effective for authorship attribution. They do not occur very
frequently, and their occurrence depends too much on the content of the text. Many multivariate analyses
have been based on function words alone, in the belief that such frequent and relatively insignificant words
are most likely to reflect unconscious and regular authorial habits. This suggests the use of collocations of
function words, but preliminary tests show that these are also not very effective. The most effective
collocations are simply those that occur at the highest frequencies, with the exception of collocations of
personal pronouns, which, like collocations of meaningful words, seem too much conditioned by content
(especially the characters) of the texts. I omit personal pronouns and any items for which a single text
21
