3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4 
10.1007/3DRes.03(2013)4  
 
 
3DR REVIEW                                                                 w                                                                                          
Semantic Analysis Based Forms Information Retrieval and 
Classification 
 
 
Tanzila Saba • Fatimah Ayidh Alqahtani 
 
 
 
 
Received: 04 March 2013 / Revised: 08 May 2013 / Accepted: 15 July 2013 
© 3D Research Center, Kwangwoon University and Springer 2013 
 
Abstract* Data entry forms are employed in all types of 
enterprises to collect hundreds of customer’s information on 
daily basis. The information is filled manually by the 
customers. Hence, it is laborious and time consuming to use 
human operator to transfer these customers information into 
computers manually. Additionally, it is expensive and 
human errors might cause serious flaws. The automatic 
interpretation of scanned forms has facilitated many real 
applications from speed and accuracy point of view such as 
keywords spotting, sorting of postal addresses, script 
matching and writer identification. This research deals with 
different strategies to extract customer’s information from 
these scanned forms, interpretation and classification. 
Accordingly, extracted information is segmented into 
characters for their classification and finally stored in the 
forms of records in databases for their further processing. 
This paper presents a detailed discussion of these semantic 
based analysis strategies for forms processing. Finally, new 
directions are also recommended for future research. 
 
Keywords Form processing, Data interpretations, Pre-
processing, Validation strategies, Semantic analysis, Post-
processing. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Despite the wide use of electronic communication, paper 
document such as data entry forms, postal envelopes, and 
checks have central importance in our daily lives. As paper 
documents are cheap, reliable, secure for future reference, 
easily available and flexible in filling. Consequently, paper 
                                            
Tanzila Saba1 (  ) • Fatimah Ayidh Alqahtani1 
1College of Engineering and Computer Sciences, Salman bin 
Abdul Aziz University Alkharj KSA, Saudi Arabia 
E-mail: drstanzila@gmail.com 
forms/documents are being produced more than ever 
before1. Additionally, most of the governments and private 
organizations use paper based documents to collect 
information. However, it is laborious, time consuming to 
transfer handwritten information from forms to machine 
manually. Whereas, electronically processed documents are 
easy to process for searching, updating and for further 
processing. So digitizing the paper documents is worth. 
Accordingly, automation of this procedure has attracted 
intensive research work in this field1. Unfortunately, even 
after decades of intensive research efforts in this domain, 
capabilities of the current OCR systems are still quite 
limited for printed text only and a small fraction of the data 
are entered into the computers automatically. A complete 
solution to the automatic cursive script extraction and its 
recognition from documents has not yet been well matured2. 
General scenario of the business form analysis and 
recognition is exhibited in Fig. 1 that simply shows that 
following a form acquisition via scanner or camera it is pre-
processed to remove unnecessary detail such as noise, skew, 
slant etc. Latter, layout analysis of form image is carried out 
to discriminate signatures, logos and script entries. The 
script entries are composed of handwritten entries that are 
further processed for their classification and direct storage 
into database. A typical form processing systems is 
composed of two main stages, form image analysis and 
OCR as exhibitted in Fig. 1. In the first stage form’s image 
is decomposed into several components such as signatures, 
logos, printed text and handwritten entries. The handwritten 
entries are further transfered to OCR system for their 
classification in second stage. The overall accuracy of OCR 
is dependent on the first stage. This paper, focuses on the 
second stage as first stage is out of scope of this research 
currently. The further paper is decomposed into five 
sections. Section 2 describes word segmentation, section 3 
presents character segmentation and section 4 presents 
classification strategies, section 5 deals with features 
2                                                                                                                                                                                       3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4 
 
 
selection and finally section 6 draws conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Research frame layout for form’s image processing 
 
 
Figure 2 Word segmentation4 
 
 
2. Word Segmentation  
 
Following text lines extraction as the result of form image 
analysis, next stage is word segmentation. Most of the word 
segmentation approaches either for printed or handwritten 
entries are based on heuristics and consider the gap between 
words termed as inter-word gap which is normally bigger 
gap inside the characters of words (intra-word gap). 
Accordingly, a threshold is computed to identify real gap 
between two words. Consequently, text lines are divided 
individual components/words. Figure 2 exhibits 
identification of threshold for dividing handwritten text 
lines into separated words3, 4. 
 
 
3. Character Segmentation Approaches 
 
Following words segmentation, next step is character 
segmentation. Accordingly, there are three main strategies 
for script word classification. 
i.   Character segmentation 
ii.  Holistic word recognition 
iii. Integrated segmentation and recognition 
 
3.1 Character Segmentation 
 
This is the most popular strategy for character segmentation, 
where the letter boundaries are found without recognizing 
them. This strategy includes both over-segmentation and 
dissection approaches5. 
To allow efficient post-processing, a grapheme is 
required to satisfy certain criteria. A character should be 
defined by no more than two graphemes, and a grapheme 
should represent no more than two or three characters. 
Following pre-segmentation, a contextual post-processing 
stage may be used to merge or split the graphemes to yield 
accurate match. In the system proposed by Sayre in 19736, 
words were segmented into graphemes based on specific 
characteristics or features located in word images. A 
tentative classifier was used to group the graphemes into 
one of seventeen non-exclusive categories that 
corresponded to letters or groups of letters. Finally, 
statistical decision tree is employed for classification 
purpose.  In fact, Sayre’s proposed the pioneer system to be 
based on features that were not dependent on stroke 
sequence (information inherently available in on-line script 
recognizers. Sayre’s research was the first that pointed out 
distinction between offline and online cursive script 
recognition rules. Sayre claimed 79% script recognition rate 
for eighty four script words. The segmentation of cursive 
writing into primitives followed by some sort of contextual 
processing has been quite popular amongst researchers7, 8. 
The next system to be discussed was one of the first to 
employ dissection via “pre-segmentation". Pre-
segmentation is an idea of dissecting script in those areas 
where chances of actual characters boundaries are high. An 
example of a character that may be divided could be a ’u’, 
as its contour is comprised of a valley that may be 
interpreted as a ligature (a connection between characters in 
3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4                                                                                                                                                                                       3 
                                                                                               
 
cursive writing). The shapes that remain as a result of pre-
segmentation are sometimes called "graphemes" or 
"pseudo-characters" or “junks” 9, 10. 
 
3.2. Holistic Word Recognition 
This type of recognition, classify the whole segmented 
word without going through character segmentation process. 
This scheme is fast and yields accurate results yet is suitable 
for small lexicon purposes only such as check’s amount 
recognition, medicine names recognition, cities names 
classification in a country and so forth42.  
 
3.3. Integrated Segmentation and Recognition 
Approaches 
 
In this section, the strategies described are a mix of the two 
previously discussed (dissection-based and recognition-
based). This category also uses pre-segmentation, however 
differs from the grapheme approach in that the requirements 
of the definition of a primitive are not as strict. Therefore 
dissection is employed to word images, and the objective is 
that the word should be over-segmented enough to ensure 
that all possible character boundaries are included. Latter 
these boundaries are merged to form a character after 
validation by the recognition process. This over-
segmentation and merged concept is observed in several 
researches11. Some researchers also incorporated lexical 
information as part of the process. Despite a certain level of 
maturity has been reached; there is still an urgent need to 
further improve the available segmentation and recognition 
technology5. The detailed analysis could be found12, 9.  
In order to avoid prior segmentation of characters in 
script image, researchers came out with implicit 
segmentation concept that integrated segmentation and 
recognition processes. Hence, segmentation and recognition 
of letters are performed at the same time. Senior and 
Fallside13 designed a recurrent neural network that to 
recognize the letters of slant-corrected cursive words. 
Similarly, Martin and Rashid14 performed segmentation and 
recognition of hand printed digits simultaneously by 
training neural network. Promising recognized results of 
99% for all digit strings were reported along with 36 % 
rejection rate. Hidden Markov Models (HMM) based 
classification approaches were initially developed for 
speech recognition14 and produced fruitful results. Latter, 
this model was successfully applied to recognize printed 
words12. Likewise, Procter et al.16 updated Elms et al.17 
approach based on HMM for handwritten numeric script 
recognition. Latter, Zimmermann and Bunke18 exhibited 
that HMM could be a good alternative for script word 
recognition. Consequently, HMM based approaches 
emerged as a promising way of integrating segmentation 
and recognition to handle complexities encountered in 
processing both off line cursive script words and 
handwritten numeral strings as shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3 Four state right to left HMM 
 
 
On the other hand, Britto et al.19 highlighted drawback of 
this integration as loss in recognition performance. Britto et 
al.20 employed hyper-graph theory to perform pre-
processing tasks of natural image segmentation. 
Kavallieratou et al.21 proposed an enhancement in 
transformation based learning algorithm to extract rules 
automatically in order to detect character boundaries in 
cursive script. It composed of two steps, a pre-segmentation 
stage provides a first estimation of the character boundaries, 
latter machine learning algorithm is applied to refine the 
estimated character boundaries and confirms or reject these 
boundaries. Accuracy rate up to 82 % are claimed.  
Cavalin et al.22 proposed two-stage HMM based implicit 
segmentation approach to segment the cursive script. For 
the lexicon of size 3771, 88.2% recognition rate reported 
after two stage process. Hamamura et al.23 proposed an 
analytic word recognition algorithm using posteriori 
probability ratio. Accordingly, 9.1% enhancement in 
classification accuracy was reported. To conclude, real 
challenge is to come out with minimum pre-processing 
errors as these errors contribute significantly to post-
processing errors24. 
 
 
4. Discriminative Feature Selection 
 
Following character segmentation, next step is to classify 
handwritten character into its equivalent ASCII code. 
Accordingly, discriminative feature set is extracted and 
selected for the classification of segmented characters25. 
Problem of feature selection refers to identify and extract 
most discriminative features for unique classification of an 
object. Therefore, discriminative feature set selection is 
considered the most important factor in achieving high 
accurate recognition performance. Based on the 
discriminative feature set, classifier classifies the 
character/word into its relevant class24. Furthermore, Trier26 
has a good attempt about feature extraction strategies for 
offline recognition of isolated characters. Likewise, review 
of the shape analysis techniques can be found27. In last few 
decades, considerable numbers of feature extraction and 
selection techniques are proposed for character 
segmentation, character recognition and word recognition.  
Indeed, feature extraction for numerical recognition has 
almost been mature and competent results are reported in 
the literature. However, it is clear from the recent studies 
that the same accuracy measure could not be achieved for 
cursive character recognition. It is mainly due to the 
problems inherited in the cursive characters such as broken 
characters, overlapped/ merged/ touching characters and 
ambiguous characters due to segmentation errors in cursive 
script as well writer style, mood and speed. Therefore, 
research communities have handled these problems by 
investigating a variety of new and hybrid features for the 
classification/ recognition of cursive characters28. Despite 
the continuous efforts of the last two decades, still the 
importance of a single feature in recognizing a character has 
not been fully explored29, 30. Because, there might be only 
one or two values, which are significant to recognize a 
particular segmented character/primitive. Hence, selection 
of discriminative feature set for character recognition is still 
debatable. Because, too much features creates ambiguity for 
4                                                                                                                                                                                       3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4 
 
 
the classifier and leads to a worse rather than better 
performance, moreover, make classifier slow. Whereas, if 
few features are extracted in order to speed up the process, 
insufficient information may be passed to classifier and 
therefore error rate is enhanced.  However, each single 
feature might have one of the following roles in the 
classification process31. 
(i) Positive impact on classification process. 
(ii) Negative impact on classification process. 
(iii) Neutral role. 
An interesting solution to this paradox is automatic 
designing of classifiers in order to identify and select an 
effective feature set.  To conclude, features selection for 
pattern recognition problem is associated with several 
factors such as accuracy, avoid redundant/ irrelevant 
features, high learning time, and enough samples size. 
Moreover, good feature selection techniques also reduce 
classifiers complexity and enhance performance32. 
In general, the feature extraction techniques are widely 
divided into two types of feature: statistical and structural24. 
The statistical features are derived from statistical 
distributions of points such as grid, moments, projection 
profile (horizontal/vertical). The structure features are 
obtained from geometrical and topological properties of the 
character such as strokes and their directions, end points, 
loops, ascenders and descenders, overall shape of the word. 
Few researchers also integrated these two types of 
complementary features to improve character/ word 
recognition rates33, 1. 
 
 
5. Offline Cursive Script word Classification 
 
Finally, classified segmented characters are joined to 
recognize script word.  Mainly, statistical and intelligent 
classifications techniques are adopted by the research 
community for pattern recognition in the state of art34. 
Actually, statistical classifiers employ statistical decision 
function to come out with the decision. Several successful 
classification techniques are based on statistical criteria 
such as template matching, Fuzzy logic/rules, Bayesian 
classifier, k-Nearest–Neighbor (K-NN), Polynomial 
discriminate classifier35. It has been found to be impractical 
in real-world applications.  Currently, neural network 
classifiers are successful for script recognition applications 
30. Nevertheless, these approaches demand significant 
iterations, heavy computations, long learning algorithms 
and processor time demanding. Therefore, with the increase 
of classification accuracy learning time will also increase. 
Consequently, it is emerged as drawback of neural based 
approaches36. On the other hand, HMM-based classifiers 
are also proved to be successful for numeric recognition22, 37. 
At the same time, HMMs based techniques are also popular 
for script recognition38, 39. 
Currently, support vector machines for numeral/Roman 
alphabets classification are proved successful with 
encouraging results above 99% are reported35. Additionally, 
SVM also have been used successfully for recognition of 
script words in recent studies40, 1.  
 
5.1 Post-processing 
 
Script recognition accuracy could be improved with the 
involvement of post-processing stage.  It is comparatively a 
new trend being observed in research community for script 
recognition. It is claimed that post-processing enhances 
classification accuracy41. Few authors in the literature 
adopted post-processing strategies on the bargaining of 
speed to enhance classification accuracy42, 43. 
To avoid long training duration and huge data, few 
researchers introduced synthetic data for artificially 
intelligent techniques training. Mori44 employed synthetic 
generation for isolated characters classification. The process 
of synthetic generation of script words and sentences are 
presented45. Varga and Bunke46 exhibited HMM-based 
classifiers with enhanced classification rate using synthetic 
data for training purpose.  
 
 
6. Conclusion and Future work 
 
This paper has presented entire picture to process data entry 
form. First, it was required to discriminate printed and 
handwritten entries in forms as pre-processing to post 
processing techniques of printed, handwritten entries are 
different. Several pre-processing techniques with focus to 
word segmentation and character segmentation are 
elaborated. Additionally, post processing stage of 
classification and verification is also highlighted.  
Despite of the fact, that research is well matured for 
numeral and printed text, yet cursive script pre-processing 
and post-processing areas are still fresh. The problems of 
offline cursive script pre-processing and post-processing are 
open problems and invite researchers to come out with 
novel techniques to solve these challenges. Extraction of 
handwritten entries from these data entry forms is also a 
challenging problem. 
For the problem of whole word recognition, it seems that 
results are encouraging for small and static lexicons, yet 
accuracy is discouraging for large and dynamic lexicons. 
Hence, analytical approaches are good options. However, 
analytical approaches still are facing three challenges; first, 
incorrect segmentation, second, missed segmentation and 
finally, over-segmentation of a character, that contributes 
significant errors in the script recognition process. 
Therefore, it is desired by the research community to come 
out with novel strategies for segmentation and recognition 
accuracy for offline cursive script. Finally, speed of 
processing is also an important issue that is continually 
ignored in all current researches.  
 
 
References 
  
1. T. Saba, S Alzorani, A. Rehman (2012) Expert System for 
Offline Clinical Guidance and Treatment, Life Science 
Journal, 9(4): 2639 -2658. 
2. A. Rehman, F. Kurniawan, and T. Saba (2011) An 
Automatic Approach for Line detection and Removal 
without Characters Smash-up, Imaging Science Journal, 59:  
171-182. 
3. A. Vinciarelli (2002) A survey on offline cursive word 
recognition, Pattern Recognition, 35(7), 1433–1446. 
4. F. Kurniawan, A. Rehman and D. Mohamad (2009) Contour 
Vs Non-Contour based Word Segmentation from 
Handwritten Text Lines. An Experimental Analysis, 
3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4                                                                                                                                                                                       5 
                                                                                               
 
International Journal of Digital Content Technology and its 
Applications, 3(2): 127-131. 
5. B. Gatos, A. Antonacopoulos, N. Stamatopoulos (2007) 
ICDAR 2007 Script Segmentation Context, Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Document Analysis and 
Recognition, 1284-1288. 
6. K. M Sayre (1973) Machine Recognition of Handwritten 
Words: A Project Report,  Pattern Recognition, 5: 213-228. 
7. F. Kurniawan, M.S.M. Rahim, D. Daman, A. Rehman, D. 
Mohamad and S. Mariyam (2011) Region-based Touched 
Character Segmentation in Handwritten Words, International 
Journal of Innovative Computing, Information and Control, 
7(6): 3107-3120. 
8. A. Rehman and D. Mohamad (2008) A Simple Segmentation 
Approach for Unconstrained Cursive Handwritten Words in 
Conjunction of Neural Network, International Journal of 
Image Processing, 2(3): 29-35. 
9. A.E. Rad, M.S.M. Rahim, A. Rehman, A. Altameem, and T. 
Saba (2013) Evaluation of Current Dental Radiographs 
Segmentation Approaches in Computer-aided Applications, 
IETE Technical Review, 30 (3): 210-222. 
10. Y. H. Tay (2002) Offline Script Recognition using Artificial 
Neural Network and Hidden Morkov Model, PhD thesis, 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering, 78. 
11. G. Sulong, T. Saba, and A. Rehman (2010) Dynamic 
Programming Based Hybrid Strategy for Offline Cursive 
Script Recognition. IEEE Second International Conference 
on Computer and Engineering, 2: 580-584. 
12. MSM Rahim, A.  Rehman, N. Sholihah, F. Kurniawan and 
T. Saba (2012) Region-based Features Extraction in Ear 
Biometrics, International Journal of Academic Research, 
4(1): 37-42. 
13. W. Senior, and A. J. Robinson (2002) An offline cursive 
script recognition system, IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 20(3): 309-321. 
14. G. L. Martin and M. Rashid (1991) Recognizing overlapping 
hand-printed characters by centered-object integrated 
segmentation and recognition, Technical Report, 
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation. 
15. L. Rabiner (1989) A Tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and 
Selected Applications in Speech Recognition, Proceedings of 
the IEEE, 77(2): 257-286. 
16. S. Procter, A. J. Elms (1998) The Recognition of 
Handwritten Digit Strings of Unknown Length using Hidden 
Markov Models, Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR'98), 
1515-1517. 
17. A. J. Elms, S. Procter, J. Illingworth (1989) The Advantage 
of using an HMM-based Approach for Faxed Word 
Recognition, International Journal on Document Analysis 
and Recognition, 18-36. 
18. M. Zimmermann and H. Bunke (2002) Hidden Markov 
Model Length Optimization for Script Recognition Systems, 
International Workshop on Frontiers in Script Recognition, 
Niagara-on-the-Lakes, 369-374. 
19. Jr. A. Britto, R. Sabourin, F. Bortolozzi, and C. Y. Suen 
(2001) A two-stage HMM-based system for recognizing 
handwritten numeral strings, Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Document Analysis and 
Recognition, Seattle, USA, 396-400. 
20. Jr. A. Britto, R. Sabourin, F. Bortolozzi, C. Y. Suen (2002) A 
string length predictor to control the level building of HMMs 
for handwritten numeral recognition, Proceedings of 16th 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 4: 31-34. 
21. E. Kavallieratou, E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis and G. 
Kokkinakis (2000) Handwritten Character Segmentation 
Using Transformation-Based Learning,  Proceedings of 15th 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2: 634-
637. 
22. P. R. Cavalin, A. S. Britto, F. Bortolozzi, R. Sabourin and L. 
S. Oliveira (2006) An Implicit Segmentation based Method 
for Recognition of Handwritten Strings of Characters, 
Proceedings of ACM symposium on applied computing, 836-
840. 
23. T. Hamamura, T. Akagi and B. Irie (2007) An Analytic 
Word Recognition Algorithm Using a Posteriori Probability,  
Proceedings of International Conference on Document 
Analysis and Recognition, 02: 669-673. 
24. F. Bortolozzi, A. Souza, Jr. A. Britto, Luiz S. Oliveira and 
M. Morita (2005) Recent Advances in Script Recognition,  
Document Analysis, Editors: Umapada Pal, Swapan K. 
Parui, Bidyut B. Chaudhuri, 1-30. 
25. R. J. Pinales, R. Jaime-Rivas, M. J. Castro (2011) 
Discriminative capacity of perceptual features in script 
recognition, Telecommunications and Radio Engineering, 64 
(11), 931-937. 
26. O. D. Trier, A. K. Jain and T. Taxt (1996) Feature Extraction 
Methods for Character recognition- a Survey, Pattern 
Recognition, 29(4): 641-662 
27. X. Wang, X. Ding and C. Liu (2005) Gabor filters based 
feature extraction for character recognition, Pattern 
Recognition, 38(3), 369–379. 
28. A. Rehman and T. Saba (2011) Performance Analysis of 
Segmentation Approach for Cursive Handwritten Word 
Recognition on Benchmark Database, Digital Signal 
Processing, 21(3): 486-490. 
29. M. Harouni, MSM, Rahim, D. Mohamad, A. Rehman and T. 
Saba (2012) Online Cursive Persian/Arabic Character 
Recognition by Detecting Critical Points, International 
Journal of Academic Research, 4(2): 209-214 
30. M. Blumenstein, X. Y. Liu and B. Verma (2007) An 
Investigation of the Modified Direction Feature for Cursive 
Character Recognition, Pattern Recognition, 40: 376-388. 
31. F. Camastra and A. Vinciarelli (2003) Combining neural gas 
and learning vector quantization for cursive character 
recognition, Neuro-computing, 51: 147–159 
32. M. Cheriet, N. Kharma, C-Lin. Liu, C-Y. Suen (2007) 
Character Recognition Systems (OCR), Wiley, 204-206. 
33. S. Günter and H. Bunke (2004) Feature selection algorithms 
for the generation of multiple classier systems and their 
application to handwritten word recognition, Pattern 
Recognition Letters, 25(11): 1323–1336. 
34. M. Ghosh, R. Ghosh, and B. Verma (2004) A Fully 
Automated Offline Script Recognition System Incorporating 
Rule Based Neural Network Validated Segmentation and 
Hybrid Neural Network Classifier, International Journal of 
Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, 18(7): 1267-
1283. 
35. C-L. Liu and H. Fujisawa (2005) Classification and learning 
for character recognition: Comparison of methods and 
remaining problems, Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Neural Networks and Learning in Document 
Analysis and Recognition, 5–7. 
36. A. A. Aburas and S. A. Rehiel (2008) New Promising Off 
Line Tool for Arabic Handwritten Character Recognition 
Based On JPEG2000 Image Compression, Proceedings of 
the 3rd International Conference on Introduction and 
Communication Technology. From Theory to Applications. 
(ICTTA, 08), 1-5. 
37. Jr. A. Britto, R. Sabourin, F. Bortolozzi, and C. Y. Suen 
(2004) Foreground and background information in an HMM-
based method for recognition of isolated characters and 
numeral strings, Proceedings of the 9th International 
Workshop on Frontiers in Script Recognition, 371–376. 
38. S. Günter and H. Bunke (2005) Offline cursive script 
recognition using multiple classifier systems. On the 
influence of vocabulary, ensemble, and training set size,  
Optics and Lasers in Engineering, 43(3-5): 437–454. 
6                                                                                                                                                                                       3D Res. 04, 03(2013)4 
 
 
39. M. -P. Schambach (2005) Fast script word recognition with 
very large vocabulary, Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 9–13. 
40. B. Gatos, I. Pratikakis, A. L. Kesidis and S. J. Perantonis 
(2008) Efficient offline cursive script word recognition. 
Proceedings of the Tenth International Workshop on 
Frontiers in Script Recognition. 
41. A. Rehman, S.  Alqahtani, A. Altameem and T.Saba (2013) 
Virtual machine security challenges: case studies, 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernatics, 
DOI: 10.1007/s13042-013-0166-4. 
42. A. Rehman and T. Saba (2011). Document Skew Estimation 
and Correction: Analysis of Techniques, Common problems 
and Possible Solutions, Applied Artificial Intelligence, 25(9): 
769–787. 
43. S. Günter and H. Bunke (2003) Ensembles of classifiers for 
handwritten word recognition, International Journal on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, 5:224-232. 
44. M. Mori, A. Suzuki, A. Siho and S. Ohtsuka (2000) 
Generating new samples from handwritten numerals based 
on point correspondence, 7th International Workshop on 
Frontiers of Script Recognition, 281-290. 
45. M. Helmers and H. Bunke (2003) Generation and use of the 
synthetic training data in cursive script recognition, First 
Iberian Conf. on Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis, 
336-345. 
46. T. Varga, and H. Bunke (2003) Generation of Synthetic 
Training Data for an HMM-based Script Recognition 
System, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, Edinburgh, Scotland, 
618–622. 
 
 
 
