ww.sciencedirect.com
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6Available online at wScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/coseContinuous user authentication using
multi-modal biometricsHataichanok Saevanee a,*, Nathan Clarke a,c, Steven Furnell a,c,
Valerio Biscione b
a Centre for Security, Communications and Network Research, Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom
b Centre for Robotics and Neural Systems, Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom
c Security Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, Perth, Western Australia, Australiaa r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 15 December 2014
Received in revised form
2 June 2015
Accepted 3 June 2015
Available online 12 June 2015
Keywords:
Biometrics
Transparent authentication
Multimodal biometrics
Linguistic profiling
Keystroke dynamics
Behavioural profiling
Mobile device* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: info@cscan.org (H. Saeva
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2015.06.001
0167-4048/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights resea b s t r a c t
As modern mobile devices increase in their capability and accessibility, they introduce
additional demands in terms of security e particularly authentication. With the widely
documented poor use of PINs, Active Authentication is designed to overcome the funda-
mental issue of usable and secure authentication through utilizing biometric-based tech-
niques to continuously verify user identity. This paper proposes a novel text-based
multimodal biometric approach utilizing linguistic analysis, keystroke dynamics and
behavioural profiling. Experimental investigations show that users can be discriminated
via their text-based entry, with an average Equal Error Rate (EER) of 3.3%. Based on these
findings, a framework that is able to provide robust, continuous and transparent authen-
tication is proposed. The framework is evaluated to examine the effectiveness of providing
security and user convenience. The result showed that the framework is able to provide a
91% reduction in the number of intrusive authentication requests required for high secu-
rity applications.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
It is commonly acknowledged that mobile devices have
become part of an individual's everyday life. Mobile devices
are widespread with over 7 billion subscribers around the
world (ITU, 2014). With the rapid development of mobile
network technology and the increasing popularity of mobile
devices, modern mobile devices are capable of providing a
wide range of services and applications over multiple net-
works. The plethora of functionalities offered by mobile de-
vices enables user to store increasing volumes of business andnee).
rved.personal information, both of which could be sensitive. A se-
ries of studies have highlighted the potential risk of mobile
device misuse if personal information (e.g. home address),
credentials (e.g. PIN codes, user name and password) and
business data (e.g. customer data) are stored upon them
(Kaspersky Lab, 2011; Dimensional Research, 2013).
The most commonly used authentication method for pro-
tecting mobile devices from being misused is the use of Per-
sonal Identification Number (PINs) or passwords.
Unfortunately, the weaknesses of passwords and PINs have
been widely documented (McAfee, 2013; Clarke and Furnell,
2005). In addition, the fundamental flaw of the PINs or
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 235passwords is that as a point-of-entry technique, once the user
has been authenticated successfully, they have access to the
system without having to be re-authenticate again. This can
lead to high risk environment when an intruder targets a post
authenticated session. Although many authentication mech-
anisms such as fingerprint or face recognition have been
developed for mobile devices with the aim of increasing the
level of security and convenience for the end user, these
advanced techniques remain point of entry and intrusive to
the user. Several studies have proposed advanced authenti-
cation mechanisms that can provide transparent and
continuous authentication to the user by using behavioural
biometrics (Karatzouni et al., 2007; Li et al., 2011; Sim et al.,
2007). According to these studies a number of biometrics
could have the potential to be used for transparent authenti-
cation on mobile devices including keystroke dynamics,
behavioural profiling and gait recognition. Since texting is one
of the most popular applications that a mobile user uses on a
daily basis (Ofcom, 2012), this paper focuses upon the use of
three behavioural biometric techniques: linguistic profiling,
keystroke dynamics and behaviour profiling for developing an
authentication mechanism that can provide a cost-effective,
non-intrusive and continuous solution to the problem of
user authentication.
There are a large number of studies in the area of trans-
parent and continuous user authentication and they all seek
to develop new and more efficient modalities to support the
underlying biometric performance or focus upon the man-
agement processes (Clarke and Furnell, 2007; Crawford et al.,
2013). The paper aim at contributing to a wider field of
research in the area of transparent authentication and makes
a number of additional contributions over the existing work.
This paper begins by introducing the study and presenting the
state of the art in behavioural biometrics that has been
applied within the mobile domain. This will then be followed
by describing a comprehensive experimental study of multi-
modal biometrics. Based upon the results, Section 4 presents a
novel text-based multimodal framework that will provide the
verification of a mobile user's identify in a continuous and
transparent manner. Section 5 presents an evaluated of the
aforementioned framework through simulation. The paper
concludes by highlighting the future direction of the research.2. An overview of behavioural biometrics for
mobile devices
In recent years, many mobile devices have come equipped
with a variety of hardware components that are able to cap-
ture biometric traits. This enables several biometric ap-
proaches to be deployed on them. For example, Apple has now
incorporated TouchID, a finger-print-based approach, and
Google has Face Unlock for its Android Operating System
(ComputerWeekly; MIT Technology Review). To date, howev-
er, these physiological biometric techniques are mainly
deployed to offer point-of-entry solutions that. In comparison,
behavioural biometric methods have the ability to provide
continuous and transparent verification of a user's identity.
However, behavioural biometric features tend to change over
time and under different external circumstances that canaffect the sample collection and classification. Therefore, care
is required when considering their implementation in an
authentication system where less control over the user and
the environment exists.
A number of studies have been carried out on the use of
behavioural techniques such as gait, hand writing and voice
recognition for authentication on mobile devices (Clarke and
Mekala, 2007; Hoang et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2010). Of interest
in this research is the use of three behavioural biometric
techniques: linguistic profiling, keystroke dynamics and
behavioural profiling. It is hypothesized that the integration of
these three techniques together could offer the opportunity to
improve upon the usability through transparent capture and
improved overall recognition performance.
Linguistic profiling is a behavioural biometric that iden-
tifies people based upon linguistic morphology (Halteren,
2004). A number of researchers have investigated the feasi-
bility of linguistic profiling for several purposes such as text
categorization, authorship identification and authorship
verification (Halteren, 2004; Zhang and Lee, 2006; Stamatatos,
2007). In the authorship verification domain, examples of
writing from a single author are given to the system, which is
then asked to confirm if the given texts were written by this
author. Over 1000 writing styles have been proposed and both
statistical and machine learning methods were used in the
analytical process (Rudman, 1998). Many studies have
confirmed the good discriminative capability of linguistic
features. By using a machine learning method, the perfor-
mance accuracies were in the range of 80%e100% (Halteren,
2004; Zheng et al., 2006). However, there is no agreement on
a best set of features for authorship verification and histori-
cally large volumes of text are required for the training data-
set. The performance of linguistic profiling technique is highly
dependent upon the number of candidate authors, the size of
texts, the combination of the selected features and classifi-
cation models utilized. Although the majority of previous
studies tend to focus on long texts per author e 10,000 words
per author are regarded to be a reliable minimum for an
authorial set (Burrows, 2007), some studies have shown
promising results with short texts (e.g. student essay and
email) but the minimum requirements for a text have not
been determined (Sanderson and Guenter, 2006; Hirst and
Feiguina, 2007). The effectiveness of linguistic profiling have
been examined in various languages. The study (Hirst and
Feiguina, 2007) examined the n-gram language model on
Greek newspaper articles, English documents and Chinese
novels using Bayesian classification techniques. The re-
searchers concluded that to identify unique linguistic char-
acteristics of Chinese, character-based features n-grams
should be used to avoid word-segmentation problems. They
also noted that the Chinese vocabulary is much larger than
the English, which may give rise to sparse data problems. The
results showed that the best accuracy achieved was 90% in all
three language. However, the performance on Chinese was
not as good as that for English.
Behavioural profiling aims to identify users based upon the
way in which they interact with the services on their mobile
device. Previous behaviour-based studies have mainly
focused upon the area of fraud detection and intrusion
detection (Boukerche and Nitare, 2002; Damopoulos et al.,
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 62362012; Buschkes et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2006).
Research in mobile intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can be
divided into two categories: call-based and mobility-based
mechanisms. The former monitors user's calling behaviour
(e.g. start date of call and dial telephone number) that have
been collected over a service provider's network during a
period of time (Boukerche and Nitare, 2002; Damopoulos et al.,
2012). Based upon the theory that people have a predictable
travelling pattern when they travel from one location to
another, the mobility-based approach monitors a mobile
user's location activities to detect abnormal behaviour
(Buschkes et al., 1998). Through monitoring a user's calling or
location activities, behavioural-based IDS can offer a high
detection rate and ability to detect unforeseen attacks
(Boukerche and Nitare, 2002; Damopoulos et al., 2012;
Buschkes et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2005). Depending upon
application types, profiling techniques and classification ap-
proaches, a study by Li et al. (2011) showed that behavioural
profiling could be used for authentication on mobile devices
with accuracies ranging between 87% and 98%.
Keystroke dynamics identifies a user based upon their
typing pattern, looking at characteristics of their interaction
with a keyboard. Based upon previous studies, two main
characteristics were identified: inter-key and hold time
(Clarke and Furnell, 2006). The inter-key is the duration be-
tween two successive keys. The hold-time represents the
duration between the press down and releasing of a single
key. Many studies have shown it is feasible to authenticate
users successfully based upon how the way they type their
usernames and passwords (i.e. in parallel with a typical
Windows login request), with a commercial product on the
market utilizing this technology (Idrus et al., 2014; Behaviosec;
Biopassword). More recent studies (Karatzouni et al., 2007;
Clarke and Furnell, 2006) investigated the possibility of using
keystroke dynamics on mobile devices, showing the possi-
bility of key-stroke dynamic based authentication can be
deployed in practice to provide an extra layer of security for
mobile devices with an average accuracy of 87%.
Based upon the prior-art, these three techniques have
demonstrated the ability to provide valuable discriminative
information to permit identity authentication; however albeit
at varying levels of performance. The biometric traits of these
three techniques can be captured during user interactions
with amobile devicewithout the need for the user to explicitly
provide the sample. Furthermore, no additional hardware is
required to deploy these techniques. As a result, these ap-
proaches arguably provide a cost effective and a non-intrusive
solution for the mobile device. Furthermore, a significant
amount of prior research within the biometric research
community (Kittler et al., 1997; Poh and Korczak, 2001; Snelick
et al., 2005; Indovina et al., 2003) has concluded that using
multiple biometric modalities can improve accuracy and
reliability of single-modal systems. For example, using a
combination of fingerprint and face modality can achieve
better performance than using single biometric, improving
the accuracy from 2.3% to a 0.1% FAR (Indovina et al., 2003).
The next section will describe a feasibility study into the
ability of individual and multi-modal biometrics to classify
mobile user based upon text messaging.3. Studying the feasibility of text-based
multimodal biometrics
The study utilised SMS text messages as it is considered to
represent a fair share of written communication, with over 9.8
trillion messages sent worldwide in 2012 (Cmo Council). On
average, text messaging users send or received 35 messages
per day. One challenge of author verification of SMSmessages
is the limited length of text messages which is limited to 160
characters. The short length of SMS messages may cause
some identifying features in normal texts to be ineffective.
However, SMS messages have some special characteristics
which may help reveal the writing style of the author. Since
the users have to find a way of being concise in their text
message to communicate comprehensible messages within a
limited length, this could manifest their own “text print” in
theirmessages and subsequently be useful in forming suitable
feature collection for discriminate between users. It is envis-
aged however, that this approach could be applied to any text-
based entry e such as emails, tweets and posts.3.1. Methodology
The experiments investigated the performance of linguistic
profiling, keystroke dynamics and behavioural profiling in a
uni-modal fashion. This provides an understanding of the
baseline performance that can be achieved. The final experi-
ment investigated the performance of applying multimodal
fusion of individual techniques to verify user's identity.
3.1.1. Linguistic profiling
The purpose of this investigation is to determine the feasi-
bility of identifying a user based on SMS messages. Given the
importance the dataset has in ensuring appropriate features
are identified, the research sought to examine two datasets.
The first experiment employed a publicly available SMS
corpus provided by the National University of Singapore
(How and Lee, 2004). The NUS SMS corpus consists of 26
users with a total of 1560 messages. Since the majority of
users in NUS corpus are Singaporean, the “Singlish” language
has been used in SMS text messages. Singlish is the English-
based creole spoken and has its own unique slang and syn-
tax (Ref). The vocabulary of Singlish consists of words origi-
nating from English, Malay and Hokkien (the native Chinese
dialect). The second experiment employed an SMS corpus
provided by Plymouth University. The majority of partici-
pants were students at Plymouth University and the use of
English language was stipulated. The PU SMS dataset con-
tains 487 messages from 30 users. Although more than 1000
features including lexical, syntactic, structural, content-
specific, and idiosyncratic characteristics have been evalu-
ated and compared in various studies. This research focused
on features that cover a wide range of linguistic levels and
are simple to measure. As a result, four types of linguistic
features were employed to examine the linguistic profiling's
effectiveness: (1) user's words profiling, (2) lexical, (3) syn-
tactic and (4) structural. A brief description of each type of
these features is given below:
Table 1 e Final dataset used in the experiments.
Users Training size Testing size
Linguistic profiling
NUS corpus 26 1040 520
PU corpus 30 316 171
Keystroke dynamics 30 3339 171
Behaviour profiling 30 1178 171
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 237 User's word profiling features: are collections of abbrevia-
tion and emotional words that are frequently used by each
user.
 Lexical features: can be divided into character-based or
word-based features. In this study, character-based fea-
tures used in De Vel et al. (2001) andword-length frequency
features used in De Vel et al. (2001), Mendenhall (1887) are
investigated. In total, 33 lexical features were adopted into
the key feature set
 Syntactic features: are used to measure an author's writing
style at the sentence level. The discriminative power of
syntactic features is derived from people's different habits
of organizing sentence (Zheng et al., 2006). In total, 23
features were integrated into the key feature set
 Structural features: are used to measure the overall
appearance and layout of the messages. In total, 8 features
used in De Vel et al. (2001) were considered in this study.
In order to create individual user word profiling, special
keywords such as abbreviation and emotion based words that
a user uses in their message were selected as they may pro-
vide some useful insight into the identity of the author. By
manually observing and analysing historical messages on
NUS SMS corpus, a total of 317 abbreviation and emotional
words were identified. For the PU SMS dataset, a total of 133
abbreviation and emotional words were named. For each
message, a total 65 characteristics - the frequency distribution
of abbreviations, emotional and user's favourite words was
used to create a single vector of user's word profiling feature
and 64 discriminating characteristics were extracted to create
feature vectors.
3.1.2. Keystroke analysis
The keystroke dataset utilsied in this experiment was pro-
vided by Clarke and Furnell (2006) as it contains keystroke
dynamic data based on SMS text messages. A total 30 partic-
ipants were obtained with a total of 900 text messages. The
main traditional keystroke characteristics: hold-time and
inter-key time were extracted to create feature vectors. The
hold time vector was constructed from five letters (E, T, A, O,
N) and the inter-key time vector was calculated from the la-
tency between five pair of letters (‘t-g’, ‘e-p’, ‘e-m’, ‘h-d’, ‘a-
m’). After outliers were removed (a standard procedure for
keystroke analysis studies), the final dataset contained 3510
hold-time data and 1080 inter-key latencies. A number of
analyses were undertaken using the Feed-Forward Multi-
Layer Perceptron (FF-MLP) neural network as previous studies
had demonstrated that a better performance was achieved
over other techniques (Clarke and Furnell, 2006).
3.1.3. Behaviour profiling
This study focused upon verifying users by the way in which
they utilise a text messaging application. The experiment
employed a public mobile usage dataset that was provided by
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Reality Min-
ing project (Li et al., 2011). The MIT dataset contains a rich
amount of mobile user's application activities over a long
period of time: 106 participants enrolled for the data collection
process from September 2004 to June 2005; among these par-
ticipants, 49 participants' text messaging activities weresuccessfully logged. This study utilised a subset of 30 partici-
pants whose text messaging activities occurred during the
same period of 24/10/2004 e 21/11/2004. The following data
were extracted to create feature vector: receiver's telephone
number and location of texting. A number of analyses were
undertaken, using a Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural
network as it had performed the best in the prior study (Li
et al., 2011). Table 1 demonstrates the final dataset for ana-
lysing all the experiments.
To perform the classification for the individual techniques,
the dataset was divided into two groups: 171 data samples
were used for the testing set and the remainder was used for
training. The pattern classification test was performed with
one user acting as the valid user, while all others are acting as
impostors (a standard procedure in this type of test)
(Karatzouni et al., 2007; Li et al., 2011; Sim et al., 2007). The
Equal Error Rate (EER) was calculated to evaluate the system.
The EER is the value where False Acceptance Rate (FAR)
crosses the False Rejection Rate (FRR), and is typically used as
a comparativemeasure within the biometric industry (Snelick
et al., 2005; Jain et al., 2005 Dec).
3.1.4. Multimodal biometrics
The multimodal experiment was conducted using all possible
combination of the three techniques. Since no multimodal
database for these modalities exists, a standard practice
employed within the multi-biometrics domain is to combine
the modalities from different datasets and create a virtual
person (Snelick et al., 2005). An individual user from the lin-
guistic profiling database was associated with an individual of
keystroke and behavioural profiling database to create a vir-
tual subject. To maximise the number of users and to ensure
each of them have sufficient samples that contain all three
biometrics, a total of 30 virtual users were generated. As a
result, a final database consisting of 30 users, each user with
their SMS messages, keystroke and text messaging activity
data was created and utilized in this experiment. The results
of each technique were combined at the matching-level - as
each technique utilized different classifiers and a different
range of outputs, the minemax score normalization method
was applied to scale the results of each technique into the
range between 0 and 1 (Jain et al., 2005 Dec). Based upon prior
research, two fusion methods were utilized: Simple Sum and
Matcher Weighting (Snelick et al., 2005). For the Simple Sum
fusion, the raw score of each individual technique were sim-
ple added and rescaled into the 0 to 1 range. For the Matcher
Weighting approach, weights are assigned to the individual
matchers based on their individual EER. The weights are
inversely proportional to the corresponding errors; the
weights for less EER are higher than those of with a high EER.
Table 3 e Experiment results by using the most
successful network.
Classifier Equal error rate (EER)%
Average Best case Worst case
Feed-forward
multi-layer perceptron
12.8 0.0 40.0
K-nearest neighbour 30.0 0.3 50.0
Radial basis function 17.7 0.0 56.5
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 62383.2. Experimental results and discussion
3.2.1. Linguistic profiling
In order to analyse the impact of the linguistic features in a
multi-dimensional fashion, two types of profiling techniques:
static and dynamic were employed. A static profiling tech-
nique utilised all of linguistic features to create a user profile.
For dynamic profiling technique, the t-test ranking measure
was utilized to rank input features according to its discrimi-
native capability on a per user basis. From the ranking list,
features with a p value less than 0.05 were selected to create
input vectors. The key to utilizing the t-test was to ensure a set
of features that was as unique to the individual authorized
user in comparison to the wider population. Therefore, the
number of linguistic features required for discrimination will
vary between users. All experiments were examined using the
most effective and well-known pattern classification: FF-MLP
neural network with an identical configuration to ensure a
consistent and meaningful evaluation of the feature vector.
The results are illustrated in Table 2.
The above results showed that using linguistic profiling to
identify users for the English corpus archived better accuracy
than Singlish corpus. One possible reasons is that themajority
of NUS corpus users shared a number of abbreviation and
emotional words, making it more difficult to distinguish be-
tween them. Furthermore, the unique syntax of the different
language could affect the performance of the technique.
The static profiling approach showed that using all 65 lin-
guistic features produced a fairly high EER or poor perfor-
mance. A possible reason for this is that high dimensional
input feature vector may contain a combination of positive,
negative and no discriminative information. The dynamic
profiling approach has performed significantly better than the
static profiling technique. This is expected since the input
vector contains only strong discriminative features for each
individual user. By employing a dynamic word profiling
technique, individual user word profiling can be added or
deleted over a period of time without affecting the user word
profiling feature. Since a user's typing style can change over
time therefore by using a feature selection technique, a user
profile can contain a user's up to date discriminative infor-
mation rather than using old data/features that might not be
useful anymore. As a result, the dynamic profiling technique
is a better solution to create user profiles. A further investi-
gation was conducted in order to determine the optimal level
of linguistic performance. As showed in previous studies, FF-
MLP, K-Nearest Neighbour (K-NN) and Radial Basis FunctionTable 2 e Experiment results by employing linguistic
profiling.
Database Profiling
technique
Equal error rate (EER)%
Average Best case Worst case
NUS SMS
Static profiling 34.5 10.0 59.0
Dynamic profiling 28.0 8.0 42.0
PU SMS
Static profiling 22.3 0.6 58.0
Dynamic profiling 16.4 0.1 61.0(RBF) have shown the ability to deal efficiently with a high-
dimensional and small size datasets (Jockers and Witten,
2010; Tsimboukakis and Tambouratzis, 2010; Kusakci, 2012).
Each of the classification algorithms performed numerous it-
erations, changing the various network parameters in order to
optimise the performance of the classifier. In this study the
SMS corpus provided by Plymouth University was used in the
analytical process in order to maximise the number of users.
The best overall performances from this experiment are
illustrated in Table 3.
The above results demonstrate that the user can be
discriminated by using linguistic characteristics with a good
level of performance. Among the three chosen classifiers, the
worst performance was generated by the KNN classifier.
Although using an RBF neural network had a better classifi-
cation performance, it was noticed that the RBF is very sen-
sitive to network changes (based upon observations during
the experimental study). The FF-MLP neural network archived
the best overall performance. The smallest spread of perfor-
mance between best and worst cases suggested that this
network provides more robust and stable network topology.
However, this technique is the most intensive among the
three techniques as it is required to perform a large number of
training epochs.
3.2.2. Keystroke dynamics
The experiment investigated the ability of the hold-time and
inter-key time to classify user using different network con-
figurations. As illustrated in Table 4, these two main tradi-
tional keystroke characteristics provide the valuable
discriminative information to classify users. As the hold-time
in this study was defined by the first key press down until the
last key release, this immediately increased the range of
values available in the feature vector. Therefore, it arguably
makes the classification process easier to discriminate be-
tween users. The study also showed that inter-keystroke
characteristics did not perform very well in comparison.
This may have been caused by the tactile interface. The
keyboard used in this study is very small, with a more
restricted keystroke interface thus reduced distance betweenTable 4 e Experiment results by using keystroke
dynamics with the best FF-MLP network.
Classification Equal error rate (EER)%
Average Best case Worst case
Hold-time 20.8 0.6 50.7
Inter-key time 26.6 3.0 55.9
Table 6 e Experiment results for text-based
authentication.
Equal error rate (EER)%
Average Best case Worst case
Fusion by sum
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 239the keys. In addition, the number of fingers utilised in typing
are likely to be only one or two thumbs. Both of these factors
restrict the typing dynamics, as the combination of the fingers
in conjunction with the timing of the keystrokes and move-
ment to achieve them, are reduced. This results in a smaller
feature space for the inter-key characteristics to reside in and
subsequently making it more difficult to distinguish between
them.
The results presented however, must consider that this
feasibility study was performed in controlled conditions, with
users entering data repeatedly. In practice, it is possible that
the variability of the user's input data could be larger as users
might be walking or performing other tasks whilst they type.
These factors would make classification more difficult. The
authentication performance could be increased if the classi-
fication algorithmutilised a number of techniques to classify a
user, capitalising on the specific content of the message. For
example, the hold-time characteristics could be used together
with inter-key latency to perform authentication based on
commonly recurring static-words such as “hello” or “c u later”
in order to provide better classification of the user (Clarke and
Furnell, 2006). Furthermore, user authentication can be per-
formed by using either or both characteristics more than once
within the same text message and the system responding on
the combination of the results.
3.2.3. Behaviour profiling
The result of using behaviour profiling to classify users is
shown in Table 5. The result illustrates that utilising only two
features: receiver's telephone number and location of texting,
some users can be discriminated form each other with a good
degree of performance. One of the reasons behind this could
be that people only send text messages to very close contacts.
A minority of users achieved fairly high EERs. This may be
caused by the number of samples assigned to the training of
the classification was too small (and a limitation of the data-
set). As such any authentication system that implements a
behavioural profiling technique would also have to consider
the small number of users that will experience a high EER to
ensure both security and user convenience factors required by
the overall system are met.
As demonstrated by the three experimental studies, each
of the individual techniques can be used to discriminate users
with relatively low error rates for a good proportion of par-
ticipants. The behavioural profiling technique achieved the
best individual performance using a single network configu-
ration, with the keystroke dynamics method being the worst
classifier. A further analysis of individual user performances
raises a number of interesting points. Foremost, that the best-
case EERs are extremely good. However, it is noticeable that
there are some users experience very high error rates, reiter-
ating the importance of utilising multimodal approaches.Table 5e Experiment results by using behaviour profiling
with the best RBF network.
Classification Equal error rate (EER)%
Average Best case Worst case
Texting behaviour 9.2 0.0 50.03.2.4. Multimodal biometrics
On the basis of the aforementioned experimental findings, it is
evident that a number of users could not be correctly
authenticated to a reasonable degree. This problem can be
potentially alleviated through the combination of two or more
biometric approaches in order to enhance the overall perfor-
mance of biometrics. It is key however to ensure such com-
binations operate in a constructive rather than destructive
manner. The use of multimodal biometric approaches pro-
vides the ability of authentication systems to rely upon more
than one biometric technique. For instance, those users for
whom linguistic profiling is not a viable approach, keystroke
dynamics or behavioural profiling could still be provided with
an adequate level of security. The use of more than one bio-
metric technique also increases reliability due to presence of
multiple independent pieces of evidence, reducing the op-
portunity of forgery and circumvention. As a result, this study
will utilise a novel combination of behaviour profiling,
keystroke dynamics and linguistic profiling in order to eval-
uate the effectiveness of providingmultimodal authentication
for text-based communications (such as texting, email, social
networking and twitter). The results of using the multimodal
approach are shown in Table 6.
As seen in Table 6, both of the two fusion methods lead to
better performance than any of the individual classifiers.
Generally, the Matcher Weighting technique outperforms the
simple sum method. Whilst the results show that on average
the use of more modalities leads to a better performance, this
is not reflected within the individual user results. On occa-
sions, it was noticed that users performed better when using
two inputs (typically LP þ BP) rather than three. Therefore in
an operational environment care must be taken on selecting
the most appropriate classifier. Examining the individual
worst-case performance, it can be seen that the multimodal
models have significantly improved upon the error rates e
further supporting the use of multimodal approaches.4. A novel framework for multimodal
biometrics on mobile devices
The concept of Transparent Authentication System (TAS) on
mobile devices was first proposed in 2002 (Clarke et al., 2002).
The framework utilizes a mixture of biometric techniques toMultimodal (LP þ BP) 5.5 0.0 30.6
Multimodal (KA þ BP) 6.2 0.0 20.0
Multimodal (LP þ KA) 11.2 0.0 45.0
All techniques 4.4 0.0 18.1
Fusion by matcher weighting
Multimodal (LP þ BP) 3.6 0.0 20.0
Multimodal (KA þ BP) 5.3 0.0 20.2
Multimodal (LP þ KA) 8.5 0.0 44.7
All techniques (BP þ LP þ KA) 3.3 0.0 19.3
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6240verify amobile user's identity in a continuous and transparent
manner. The framework is able:
- To increase the authentication security beyond that
offered by the secrete-knowledge based technique
- To provide transparent authenticationmanner for the user
rather than intrusive to maximise user's convenience
- To provide continuous verification of the user, ensuring
that the protection can be maintained throughout the
duration of usage
- To provide an authentication architecture that automati-
cally works on all mobile devices regardless of hardware
configuration, processing capability and network
connectivity
A number of process engines and a security manager have
been devised to achieve these objectives (as demonstrate in
Fig. 1). A detailed description of these processes is presented
in the following sections.
4.1. Processing engines
The primary role of the Data Collection Engine is to capture a
user's input text.When a user utilizes a text-based application
on the mobile, information about the user's typing, message
writing style and the application usage are automatically
collected by the Data Collection Engine and transformed into
various biometric input samples. The captured input samples
are then stored in the Temporary Input Storage to be used
further in the authentication process by the authentication
engine.
The main duty of the Biometric profiling engine is to
generate the various biometric profile templates by using the
combination of the user's historical data and a number of
template generation algorithms. The generated biometric
templates will be stored in the Profile Storage and will be used
in the verification process. The initial profile template gener-
ation process can be a complex task as it would be difficult to
gather all of the input data required to generate the templates
at the device registration stage. Thus the framework willFig. 1 e Text-based mulautomatically gather a user's text-based input by utilising its
Data Collection Engine in the background during the enrol-
ment period. The framework will not, initially, be able to
provide any biometric security mechanism for the device due
to the incomplete profile templates. Therefore, device security
has to rely on other security methods available on the device
such as the PIN or Password.
As behavioural biometric characteristics tend to change
over time and under various situations, the periodical update
of samples and re-generation of templates (from the most
recently captured samples should be included in the template
while older sample should be removed from the profile) is
required to maintain the performance of the biometric
techniques.
The main functionality of the Authentication Engine is to
perform the user authentication process. The Authentication
Engine has the ability to perform authentication for every
permutation of inputs to ensure that authentication can be
performed even if all of the three biometric samples are not
presented (e.g. location may be not be able to be determined).
When a verification process is required by the Authentication
Manager, the Authentication Engine compares the input
samples with the biometric templates to determine the legit-
imacy of the user. Once the verification process is completed,
the verification result is appropriately processed by the
Authentication Manager. If the verification result indicates
the sample(s) came from authorized user, the sample(s) will
be stored within the Profile Storage to be used for profile (re)
generation; otherwise it will be deleted. A multibiometric
authentication technique may produce a verification result
that accepts the samples as coming from the authorized user
even though the sample from one individual technique might
be rejected as coming from an impostor. Since the overall
decisionwas that the sample comes from the authorized user,
the failed samples are deemed to be, in fact, from the autho-
rized user and incorrectly failed. As such, these samples are
added to the profile and are not deleted. In this way, the
template re-training process can produce a more accurate
profile that could provide better performance. This process
overcomes a fundamental issue with biometric template re-timodal framework.
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 241training and ensuring the correct inclusion of relevant
samples.
The framework can operate in both standalone and
distributed modes to allow the framework to be useful for
non-wireless and wireless devices. If the framework operates
in client-server mode, the communication engine works as a
bridge between the capture device and the comprehensive
framework. When the framework operates in a standalone
mode and the device is locked down, the communication
engine sends a code to the user which they can use to unlock
their device.
4.2. Security status element
The security status element is responsible for two main
functions: providing security information to the user and to
calculate the Security Status (SS) level. The security informa-
tion includes the status of the security based on the SS level
and the authentication results (whether failed or passed) of
previous authentication requests. This information provides a
guidance to the user in which how their device is utilised and
therefore help them to identify possible misuse.
The SS level is a numerical value in the range of 0 and þ51
with 0 indicating a low security level and þ5 indicating a
protected security level. When the device is initially switched
on, the SS level is set to the security level of 0. This SS level is a
continuous measure increasing and decreasing over the time
during the user's session. The SS level changes depending
upon the performance of the authentication techniques. Each
of the biometric authentication techniques are given a num-
ber which is added to (verify successfully) or subtracted from
(verify unsuccessfully) the SS level to maintain the current SS
level.
The time that has elapsed between authentication re-
quests also affects the SS level. When a device with high SS
level is not used for a period of time, the framework will
automatically decrease the SS level accordingly. In this way,
the opportunities of an impostor accessing more sensitive
information could be significantly reduced. The actual period
is set dependent upon individual user requirements. After
each defined period of misuse the SS level decrease until the
normal security level of 0 is reached.
In this proposed framework, each application will have its
own security level. Applications or services that associated
with private information or expensive services would require
a high level of security whereas the normal application would
requires a low level of security. This can be achieved either
manually by the user or automatically by the system, using a
database stored in the Long-term Storage. Prior research has
investigated simple mechanisms by which these risk-based
evaluations for applications can be made (Ledermuller and
Clarke, 2011).
4.3. Security manager
The Authentication Manager is the central controller of the
framework and provides the “intelligence”. The key task of the1 The boundaries defined on the numerical scale are only pro-
vided as a suggestion.Authentication Manager is to monitor the security level and
make authentication decisions when the user requests access
to an application. It is the responsibility of the Authentication
Manager to handle the security and user convenience trade-
off. In order to achieve this, the Authentication Manager uti-
lizes two processing algorithms: the Security Status (SS) Level
Automatic Update Algorithm and the Application Request
Algorithm to manage the balance between the security of the
mobile device and user convenience. These processes have
been designed based upon a well-known study (Clarke and
Furnell, 2006).
The Authentication Manager utilizes the SS Level Auto-
matic Update Algorithm in order to periodically update the SS
level based on the results of authentication decisions based
upon the user's input samples. The Authentication Manager
periodically sends an authentication request to the Authen-
tication Engine in order to update the SS level. The time in-
terval in which the authentication should be requested
depends upon the user's preference (i.e. every 5 min). Initially,
the Authentication Manager requires the Authentication En-
gine to perform authentication using the best set of the user's
input samples (i.e. utilizes the classifier with the lowest EER
that samples exist for) from the last x minutes (i.e. 5 min). In a
case where no user's input data is presented, the Authenti-
cation Manager maintains the SS level at its latest updated
value. However, if the Authentication Engine responds with a
pass then the Authentication Manager updates the SS level
and subsequently reverts back to monitoring mode. If not, the
Authentication Manager decreases the SS level and sends an
authentication request again by using the next best set of
user's input samples. The Authentication Manager will try
three times to send an authentication request, every timewith
the next best available sample being employed. The Authen-
tication Manager updates the SS level based upon the
authentication result. The SS value is increased or decreased
based on the type of sample used. For example, a sample using
the keystroke dynamics technique will have an increment/
decrement value of 0.5; a sample which contains both lin-
guistic profiling and behaviour profiling will have an incre-
ment/decrement value of 2. This numbers are based on the
performance of the technique or combination of techniques.
In scenarios where the updated SS level is less than 0, the
Authentication Manager will set the SS level back to 0,
meaning that the user will be able to access only the appli-
cations that do not required security. The process gives bias
toward the user as they are given three non-intrusive chances
to authenticate correctly and no intrusive authentication re-
quests. This enables the system tominimize inconvenience to
its user. Should the user attempt to access applications that
require an SS level greater than the current SS level, the
Authentication Manager will utilize the Application Request
Algorithm to check the legitimacy of the user as shows in
Fig. 2.
The current SS level of the user is compared with the se-
curity level of the requested application. If the level is equal to
or greater than the security level of the required application,
the user can automatically access the application. Otherwise
the user will be asked intrusively to authenticate. If the
authentication response to this intrusive request fails to pass,
the device is locked. Otherwise, the level of the userwill be up-
Fig. 2 e Application request algorithm.
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6242dated to the security level of the requested application and
access will be granted.Table 7 e Configuration in the simulation system.
Technique
ID
Authentication method EER
(%)
Increment/
Decrement value
1 Linguistic profiling (LP) 12.8 1
2 Keystroke dynamics (KA) 20.8 0.5
3 Behaviour profiling (BP) 9.2 1.5
4 LP þ KA 8.5 1.5
5 KA þ BP 5.3 1.5
6 LP þ BP 3.6 2
7 KA þ LA þ BP 3.3 2
8 Intrusive authentication 3.05. Evaluation
In order to understand the performance of the framework,
two aspects of framework: security and user convenience
would be examined. Due to the lack of public datasets, the
effectiveness of the proposed framework was evaluated via a
simulation approach (using the MATLAB environment). The
simulation process involves implementing a virtual user and
applying the SS level Automatic update Algorithm and the
Application Request Algorithms.
To evaluate the performance of the security mechanisms
to an authorized user, three different usage levels (infrequent,
moderate and frequent) will be investigated - as the level of
usage will have a direct impact on the availability of biometric
samples and thus the capability of the system to maintain the
security level. The use of the mobile device is simulated using
a flow of timeslots. Each time slot can be seen as a minute in
real life. Within each time slot the user can do one of two
actions, or both: provide an input sample (thus simulating a
text-based entry) or the use an app. To simulate different
types of users, the probability of these actions occurring will
be changed. There are 6 different types of applications that
can be chosen by the user (reflecting the possible security
levels of an application from 0 to 5). Each type of application
has the same probability of being accessed. Similarly, there
are 7 different non-intrusive techniques (see Table 7). Given
thatwithin a time slot the user provides an input sample, each
type of technique has the same probability of occurring.
All non-intrusive techniques are evaluated based upon the
EER of each authentication technique as demonstrated in theexperimental result section and shown in Table 7. This means
that, when the system evaluates a sample, there is a proba-
bility (equal to the EER of the technique) that an authorized
user will be rejected or an impostor will be authorized. With
regards to the intrusive authentication requests, the proba-
bility of an authorized user and impostor being rejected and
accepted respectively is set to 0.03. This approach to the
methodology removes any bias and provides for a randomly
generated dataset with a mix of samples, performances and
application requests across three usage scenarios. To further
remove any bias that would exist from a single run of the
simulation, the simulation is repeated.
In order to examine the ability of the system security to
prevent an impostor from using the mobile device, two sce-
narios were simulated: an impostor using a mobile device at
the initial state (SS¼ 0) and the impostor using amobile device
starting from a high level of security (SS ¼ 5). This can simu-
late an impostor taking control a mobile device which has just
been used by the authorized user.
The performance of the framework can be influenced by
the frequency of mobile usage and verification time.
Table 8 e Simulation results for infrequent user.
Application
level
Verification time 2 min Verification time 3 min Verification time 10 min
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
5 6.6 5.5 5.9 4.5 7.2 4.2
4 5.8 0.3 7.7 0.8 5.1 0.4
3 6.6 0.2 6.4 0.5 7.3 0.3
2 6.0 0.4 6.3 0.1 5.9 0.2
1 6.7 0.0 4.7 0.1 6.0 0.0
0 5.6 0.0 6.5 0.0 6.7 0.0
Average total 37.3 6.4 37.5 6.0 38.2 5.1
Table 9 e Simulation results for moderate user.
Application
level
Verification time 2 min Verification time 3 min Verification time 10 min
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
5 17.8 9.2 16.8 7.4 16.2 1.5
4 19.4 1.0 19.3 1.0 17.9 0.5
3 18.0 0.3 19.3 0.6 20.0 0.2
2 17.3 0.0 17.9 0.3 16.8 0.3
1 18.3 0.0 18.3 0.2 19.5 0.2
0 17.4 0.0 17.8 0.0 19.3 0.0
Average total 108.2 10.5 109.4 9.5 109.7 2.7
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 243Therefore, the evaluation soughs to analyse the effect these
parameters have upon on the performance. The security
system will work as described in the Security Manager ses-
sion. The SS level will be increased or decreased based upon
the success or failure of authentication attempt, using the
values shown in Table 7. If the mobile device is not used for
10 min consecutively, the SS will be decreased by 0.05 for
every following minute, until the system is used again.
5.1. Simulation results and discussion
5.1.1. Authorised user
For authorised user scenarios, the probability for the user to
provide an input sample or accessing an application will set to
0.05, 0.15 and 0.50 in order to simulate an infrequent, mod-
erate and frequent user respectively. In order to examine the
role of the verification time, the configuration of time period
between authentications will vary from 2 min, 3 min and
10 min. The result for all scenarios is represented using the
average of running the simulation 10 times. The simulationTable 10 e Simulation results for frequent user.
Application
level
Verification time 2 min Verifi
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Applica
reque
5 58.5 5.5 58.4
4 60.7 1.7 62.9
3 59.2 0.4 61.9
2 58.9 0.2 58.3
1 58.1 0.2 57.3
0 59.1 0.0 59.5
Average total 354.5 8.0 358.3results for an infrequent, moderate and frequent authorised
user are presented in Table 8, Table 9 and Table 10
accordingly.
Based upon simulation results, it shows that the security
system can provide high security while minimizing user
inconvenience. Analysing the proportion between intrusive
authentication requests and application accesses permits an
insight into how often the user experiences an intrusive
authentication request when they access the application.
Ideally, this proportion would be zero meaning that the user
will not be required to perform an intrusive authentication
request when they access an application. By calculating an
average of the proportion across thee verification times, the
results show that the infrequent user has been, on average,
asked to authenticate 15% of the time that they accessed an
application while the moderate and frequent user had aver-
ages of 2.5% and 1.6% respectively. The reason why the
infrequent users experience an intrusive request is greater
than a frequent user is because the system decreases the SS
level after the user does not use the mobile device for a periodcation time 3 min Verification time 10 min
tion
st
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
5.1 60.0 1.50
1.4 60.1 0.50
0.5 61.3 0.30
0.1 59.6 0.10
0.2 55.2 0.00
0.0 57.6 0.00
7.3 353.8 2.40
Table 11 e Simulation results for impostor user start using device at SS ¼ 0.
Application
level
Verification time 2 min Verification time 3 min Verification time 10 min
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
5 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.6 0.4
4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.1
3 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.4
2 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.2
1 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.1
0 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.4 0.0
Average Total 0.1 1.1 1.3 1.2 2.4 1.2
Average Time use 2.3 min 2.6 min 5.0 min
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6244of time preventing abuse of high value applications. There-
fore, when the user wishes to access a high value application,
they were required to perform an intrusive authentication
again. On the other hand, a frequent user not only will prevent
the SS level to automatically decrease by continuously using
the device, but will also keep giving samples to the device so
that the SS level can remain high.
5.1.2. Impostor user
The impostor was simulated as a frequent user with the
probability of accessing an application at 0.50 and the proba-
bility of entering an input sample at 0.50. The impostor has
probability of being incorrectly identified as the authorised
user when using an intrusive authentication of 0.03. The
simulation results for the impostor user start using device at
SS ¼ 0 are shown in Table 11.
The simulation results of the first scenario, showed that
the security system works extremely well, blocking the
impostor from using the mobile device after a few minutes.
The majority of impostors never manage to access an appli-
cation requiring a security level of more than 0. The reasons
for this is that when the impostor tried to access an applica-
tion that required a security level greater than 0, the system
requested the impostor to authenticate themselves using an
intrusive technique three times. Although, there was a case
were the impostor passed the intrusive technique (the prob-
ability is 0.8732 (0.03 0.97þ 0.03 0.97þ 0.97 0.03)) and the
security system granted them permission to access the
application. However, the security system decreased the SS
level continuously as the impostor failed to authenticateTable 12 e Simulation results for impostor user start using de
Application
level
Verification time 2 min Ve
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
#Appl
req
5 0.3 0.2 1
4 0.5 0.5 0
3 0.3 0.2 0
2 0.7 0.1 0
1 0.6 0.0 0
0 1.0 0.0 0
Average Total 2.8 1.0 4
Average Time use 8.2 min 8.2 minthemselves using non-intrusive authentication techniques. In
this case, the impostor will be challenged again by an intru-
sive authentication request.
The second scenario was simulated to examine the per-
formance of the security system in preventing an impostor
from accessing a high value application when the mobile de-
vice was left with SS level 5. As can be seen from Table 12, the
simulation results showed that the security system works
very well to prevent device misused by an impostor. Although
the impostor beginswith a big advantage in accessing the high
security application, the systemdecreased the SS level as soon
as the authentication request failed. However, the SS level will
be decreased depending upon the input samples.
As it can be seen from the simulation results from both
authorised and impostor scenarios, the verification time does
play an important role in providing security and user conve-
nience. By regularly authenticating the user, the user will
suffer more intrusive authentication requests but the system
will be able to recognise an impostor in a relatively short
period of time. On the other hand, the user will find the device
more convenient to usewith longer time periods between user
authentications but with the effect that the system will take
longer to recognise an impostor and lock down the system.
Although the time period of decreasing SS level was not
examined, it is expected that this will have an impact on the
system. The infrequent user will experience less challenges
from the intrusive authentication technique when the time
period of the degradation function gets longer. However, the
impostor will have more chance of accessing a high level
application in cases where the device was initially left with avice at SS ¼ 5.
rification time 3 min Verification time 10 min
ication
uest
#Intrusive
request
#Application
request
#Intrusive
request
.1 0.8 1.0 0.2
.4 0.1 1.8 0.6
.3 0.0 1.5 0.0
.7 0.1 1.3 0.1
.6 0.0 1.9 0.1
.9 0.0 1.0 0.0
.0 1.0 8.5 1.0
14.7 min
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6 245high level SS. In this simulation, a linear function is used to
decrease the SS level but it is suggested that the function for
degrading the SS level should be implemented using an
exponential function as it decrease slowly at first and then
more rapidly.6. Conclusion and future work
The first part of this paper presented a feasibility study that
demonstrated the ability of utilizing text-based entry to
authenticate users. The individual techniques can be used to
discriminate users with relatively low error rates for a good
proportion of participants. However, there are someusers that
experience very high error rates. The use multimodal bio-
metrics, specifically the combination of linguistic profiling,
behaviour profiling and keystroke dynamics showed an
excellent level of recognition performance, validating the
feasibility that multimodal text-based has the ability to
authenticate user on mobile devices.
The novel multimodal authentication framework subse-
quently presented to support text-based biometrics was
designed to add additional security to a mobile handset,
providing transparent and continuous authentication. The
system is designed using a variety of single and multimodal
biometric techniques without any additional hard-ware. The
users can benefit from the framework in terms of both device
security and convenience of use. By setting various security
levels for different applications/services based upon their risk,
the framework is capable of controlling the impact on each
application/service. The simulation results clearly showed
that the proposed authentication framework is able to provide
continuous and transparent authentication to protect mobile
devices.
Future work will focus upon the development of a more
representative and larger biometric corpus from which to
further examine the level of recognition performance that can
be achieved. To accompany this work, an operational proto-
type will also be developed to enable an end-user evaluation
to be undertaken so that user acceptance and operational
performance can be established.r e f e r e n c e s
Behaviosec, http://www.behaviosec.com/products/enterprise/.
Biopassword.: the keystroke dynamics approach, http://www.
biopassword.com/bp2/welcome.asp.
Boukerche A, Nitare MSMA. Behavior-based intrusion detection
in mobile phone systems. J Parallel Distrib Comput
2002;62(9):1476e90.
Burrows J. All the way through: testing for authorship in different
frequency strata. Lit Linguist Comput 2007;22(1):27e47.
Buschkes R, Kesdogan D, Reichl P. How to increase security in
mobile networks by anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the
Annual Computer Security Applications conference; 1998.
p. 3e12.
Clarke NL, Furnell SM. Authentication of users on mobile
telephones e a survey of attitudes and practices. Comput
Secur 2005;24(7):519e27.Clarke N, Furnell SM. Authenticating mobile phone users using
keystroke analysis. Int J Inf Secur 2006;6(1):1e14.
Clarke NL, Furnell SM. Advanced user authentication for mobile
devices. Comput Secur 2007;26(2):109e19.
Clarke NL, Mekala AR. The application of signature recognition to
transparent handwriting verification for mobile devices. Inf
Manag Comput Secur 2007;15(3):214e25.
Clarke N, Furnell SM, Reynolds PL, Rodwell PM. Advanced
subscriber authentication approaches for third generation
mobile systems. In: IEEE conference publication, Institute of
Electrical Engineers; 2002. p. 319e23.
Cmo Council, http://www.fastcompany.com/3010237/bottom-
line/texting-is-the-new-emaildoes-your-company-do-it-right.
ComputerWeekly,http://www.computerweekly.com/news/
2240205200/Apple-adopts-hands-off-approach-to-iPhone-
fingerprint-scanner.
Crawford H, Renaud K, Storer T. A framework for continuous,
transparent mobile device authentication. Comput Secur
2013;39(2):127e36.
Damopoulos D, Menesidou S, Kambourakis G, Papadaki M,
Clarke N, Gritzalis S. Evaluation of anomaly-based IDS for
mobile devices using machine learning classifiers. Secur
Commun Netw 2012;5(1):3e14. Wiley.
De Vel O, Anderson A, Corney M, Mohay G. Mining e-mail content
for author identification forensics. ACM Sigmod Rec
2001;30(4):55e64.
Dimensional Research. The impact of mobile devices on
information security: a survey of IT professionals. 2013.
Dimensional Research, http://www.checkpoint.com/
downloads/products/check-point-mobile-security-survey-
report.pdf.
Hall J, Barbeau M, Kranakis E. Anomaly based intrusion detection
using mobility profiles of public transportation users. In:
Proceeding of IEEE International Conference on Wireless and
Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications, 2; 2005.
p. 17e24.
Halteren VH. Linguistic profiling for author recognition and
verification. Comput Linguist 2004:199e206.
Hirst G, Feiguina O. Bigrams of syntactic labels for authorship
discrimination of short texts. Lit Linguist Comput
2007;22(4):405e17.
Hoang T, Choi D, Vo V, Nguyen A, Nguyen T. A lightweight gait
authentication on mobile phone regardless of installation
error. In: Security and privacy protection in information
processing systems; 2013. p. 83e101.
How Y, Lee MF. NUS SMS corpus. 2004. http://www.comp.nus.
edu.sg/~rpnlpir/downloads/corpora/smsCorpus.
Idrus SZS, Cherrier E, Rosenberger C, Bours P. Soft biometrics for
keystroke dynamics: profiling individuals while typing
passwords. Comput Secur 2014;45:147e55.
Indovina M, Uludag U, Snelick R, Mink A, Jain A. Multimodal
biometric authentication methods: a COTS approach. In:
Proceeding MMUA; 2003. p. 99e106.
ITU. The world in 2010 ICT facts and figures, International
Telecommunication Union. 2014. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2014-e.pdf.
Jain AK, Nandakumar K, Ross A. Score normalization in
multimodal biometric systems. Pattern Recognit 2005
Dec;38(12):2270e85.
Jockers ML, Witten DM. A comparative study of machine learning
methods for authorship attribution. Lit Linguist Comput
2010;25(2):215e23.
Karatzouni S, Clarke NL, Furnell SM. Utilising biometric for
transparent user authentication on mobile devices. In:
Internet technologies and applications; 2007. p. 549e57.
Kaspersky Lab. European users mobile behaviour and awareness
of mobile threats. 2011. Kaspersky Lab ZAO, http://www.
kaspersky.com/news?id¼207576289.
c om p u t e r s & s e c u r i t y 5 3 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 2 3 4e2 4 6246Kim D-J, Chung K-W, Hong K-S. Person authentication using face,
teeth and voice modalities for mobile device security. In: IEEE
transactions on consumer electronics; 2010. p. 2678e85.
Kittler J, Matas J, Jonsson K, Sanchez MU. Combining evidence in
personal identity verification systems. Pattern Recognit Lett
1997;18:845e52.
Kusakci AO. Authorship attribution using committee machines
with k-nearest neighbors rated voting. In: The 11th
Symposium on Neural Network Applications in Electrical
Engineering; 2012. p. 161e6.
Ledermuller T, Clarke NL. Risk assessment for mobile devices. In:
8th International Conference Privacy and Security in Digital
Business, TrustBus; 2011. p. 210e21.
Li F, Clarke NL, Papadaki M, Dowland P. Behaviour profiling for
transparent authentication for mobile devices. In: Proceedings
of the European conference on information warfare (ECIW);
2011. p. 307e14.
McAfee. McAfee reveals consumers fail to protect their mobile
devices. 2013. http://www.mcafee.com/us/about/news/2013/
q1/20130224e01.aspx.
Mendenhall TC. The characteristic curves of composition.
Science 1887;11(11):237e49.
MITTechnologyReview, http://www.technologyreview.com/news/
425805/new-google-smart-phone-recognizes-your-face/.
Ofcom. UK is now textingmore than talking. 2012. http://media.
ofcom.org.uk/2012/07/18/uk-is-now-texting-more-than-talking/.
Poh N, Korczak J. Hybrid biometric authentication system using
face and voice features. Lect Notes Comput Sci 2001;2091/
2001:348e53.
Rudman J. The state of authorship attribution studies: some
problems and solutions. Comput Humanit 1998;31:351e65.
Sanderson C, Guenter S. Short text authorship attribution via
sequence kernels, Markov chains and author unmasking: an
investigation. In: Proceedings of the Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP); 2006. p. 482e91.
Sim T, Zhang S, Janakiraman R, Kumar S. Continuous verification
using multimod-al biometrics. Pattern Anal Mach Intell
2007;29(4):687e700.
Snelick R, Uludag U, Mink A, Indovina M, Jain AK. Large-scale
evaluation of multimodal biometric authentication using
state-of-the-art systems. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
2005;27(4):450e5.
Stamatatos E. Author identification using imbalance and limited
training texts. In: Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications.
Regensburg, Germany: IEEE Computer Society; 2007. p. 237e41.
Sun B, Chen Z, Wang R, Yu F, Leung VCM. Towards adaptive
anomaly detection in cellular mobile networks. In: the IEEE
consumer communications and networking conference, 2;
2006. p. 666e70.
Tsimboukakis N, Tambouratzis G. A comparative study on
authorship attribution classification tasks using both neural
network and statistical methods. Neural Comput Appl
2010;19(4):573e82.
Zhang D, Lee WS. Extracting key-substring-group features for text
classification. In: Proceedings of the 12th Annual SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining; 2006. p. 474e83.
Zheng R, Li J, Chen H, Huang Z. A framework for authorship
identification of online messages: writing-style features andclassification techniques. Int. J. Am Soc Inf Sci Technol
2006;53:378e93.
Dr.Hataichanok Saevanee earned her Bachelor degree in com-
puter science from Ubon Ratchathani University in 2002. She
received her Master of Science degree in Information and Tech-
nology in 2005 from the same university. In 2010, she joined the
doctoral program in Computer and Electrical Engineer at Ply-
mouth University. Her research interests reside in the area of
biometric technology user authentication, and security usability,
having received a PhD on the topic of continuous user authenti-
cation using multi-modal biometrics. Her research has given
specific consideration in the use and applicability of biometrics in
that context, having published 7 papers in international
conferences.
Prof. Clarke is a Professor in Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
at Plymouth University. His research interests reside in the area of
information security, biometrics, forensics and cloud security.
Prof Clarke has over 140 outputs consisting of journal papers,
conference papers, books, edited books, book chapters and pat-
ents. He is the Chair of the IFIP TC11.12 Working Group on the
Human Aspects of Information Security & Assurance. Prof Clarke
is a chartered engineer, a fellow of the British Computing Society
(BCS) and a senior member of the IEEE. He is the author of
Transparent Authentication: Biometrics, RFID and Behavioural
Profiling published by Springer.
Prof. Steven Furnell is the head of the Centre for Security, Com-
munications & Network Research at Plymouth University in the
United Kingdom, and an Adjunct Professor with Edith Cowan
University in Western Australia. His interests include security
management and culture, computer crime, user authentication,
and security usability. Prof. Furnell is active within three working
groups of the International Federation for Information Processing
(IFIP) - namely Information Security Management, Information
Security Education, and Human Aspects of Information Security&
Assurance. He is the author of over 250 papers in refereed inter-
national journals and conference proceedings, as well as books
including Cybercrime: Vandalizing the Information Society (2001)
and Computer Insecurity: Risking the System (2005). He is also the
editor-in-chief of Information Management & Computer Security,
and the co-chair of the Human Aspects of Information Security &
Assurance (HAISA) symposium (www.haisa.org). Steve is active in
a variety of professional bodies, and is a Fellow of the BCS, a Senior
Member of the IEEE, and a Board member of the Institute of In-
formation Security Professionals. Further details can be found at
www.plymouth.ac.uk/cscan, with a variety of security podcasts
also available via www.cscan.org/podcasts. Steve can also be fol-
lowed on Twitter (@smfurnell).
Valerio Biscione is currently a Ph.D. candidate in Psychology and a
member of the Centre for Robotics & Neural Systems and Cogni-
tion Institute at Plymouth University. He has also been collabo-
rating with the Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies in
Rome since 2012. His research interests include Artificial Life,
Simulation Modelling, and Optimal Decision Making.
