Identification of Machine-printed and Handwritten Words in Arabic and Latin 
Scripts 
 
A.   Saïdani and A. Kacem Echi 
University of Tunisia, LaTICE-ESSTT 
Tunis, Tunisia 
saidaniasma@yahoo.fr 
afef.kacem@esstt.rnu.tn 
A. Belaïd 
University of Lorraine, LORIA 
Nancy, France 
abdel.belaid@loria.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Our ultimate objective is to contribute to the field of 
script and nature identification to be able to differentiate, at 
word level, handwritten or machine-printed, Arabic and Latin 
scripts. Different sets of features have been employed 
successfully for discriminating between Arabic and Latin 
words. They include few well-established features previously 
used and adapted in our case and new structural features 
which are intrinsic features of Arabic and Latin scripts. We 
select features that maximize the distinction between Arabic 
and Latin words. Experiments have been conducted with 1320 
handwritten and printed words, covering a wide range of fonts, 
and encouraging results have been obtained. We achieved a 
correct classification of 98.4 percent for word level script and 
nature identification using Bayes classifier. 
Keywords— script and nature identification; feature 
extraction; classification; word level 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Script identification is the task of identifying the 
language a given document is written in. It plays a major role 
in several applications. It is mostly used as an important 
preprocessing step in the design of an OCR system. In past 
years, some works have been done on script identification. 
They mainly depend on various features extracted from 
document images at block, line or word level. Notice that 
most of the existing systems work on blocks of text for their 
classification and consider only printed text documents. As 
they are based on the overall visual appearance of the text-
block, they are generally incapable of tackling the variations 
in the writing style, character style and size, spacing between 
lines/words, etc. When the classification is performed by 
words and not by text-line or text-block, it will be possible to 
analyze more complex documents which mix in the same 
text-block, handwritten and machine-printed words written 
in different scripts. 
In this work, a successful attempt has been made to 
identify the script (Arabic or Latin) and its nature (printed-
machine or handwritten), at the word level. Many features, 
extracted from word images are presented, tested and 
evaluated on public databases. Our objective is to contribute 
to the field of script and nature identification through better 
combination and selection of some features, used in the 
literature, to those proposed here. The rest of the paper is 
organized as follows: Section II provides an overview about 
script and nature identification approaches to explain how 
they work, and comments their accuracy. Afterwards, section 
II gives a brief description of the properties of Arabic and 
Latin. Section III emphasizes on the feature extraction. 
Section IV discusses experimental results. Finally, section V 
summarizes the conclusions and future work. 
II. STATE OF ART 
Among the relevant research contributions for Arabic and 
Latin script identification, in printed and handwritten nature, 
the technique in [1] was based on morphological (diacritics, 
occlusions and character “alif”) and geometrical analysis 
(eccentricity of the connected component, densities of black 
pixels and of contour pixels, eccentricity of occlusions, etc.). 
This technique is performed at the text-block level and 
suffers from confusions between printed and handwritten 
text and between Arabic and handwritten Latin. In the same 
context, authors in [9] used a global approach and tested 
Gabor filters, gray-level co-occurrence matrices and 
wavelets separately. The highest rate of correct identification 
is obtained with gray-level co-occurrence matrices. In [10], 
an identification system at word level, based on steerable 
pyramid transform was proposed. The features are extracted 
from pyramid sub bands and served to classify the scripts on 
only one script among the scripts to identify. Three 
techniques on the word and text-line levels are presented and 
separately evaluated in [8]: horizontal projection profiles, 
run-length histogram and moments. To discriminate 
handwritten from machine-printed words in Farsi/Arabic 
documents, authors in [2] extracted three different sets. The 
first set includes structural features related to the physical 
sizes of the blocks (density, width, height, aspect ratio and 
area) and features based on connected components inside the 
blocks (mean and variance of connected component width, 
height, aspect ratio and area). The second set concerns 
crossing count histogram features. Features of the third set 
are extracted from baseline profiles. To distinguish between 
machine-printed and handwritten Latin text at text-line level, 
authors in [6] used structural characteristics extracted from 
the upper-lower profile (ratio of ascender zone to main body 
zone, ratio of descender zone to main body zone and ratio of 
the area to the maximum value of the horizontal histogram of 
the upper-lower profile). In [4], a technique based on 
analysis of connected component profiles was proposed for 
Bangla/English script identification at block-text level.  
2013 12th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition
1520-5363/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICDAR.2013.163
798
In [5], an approach at text-block level, based on three 
decision levels was proposed. The first decision is to identify 
printed Latin considering, for each connected component, the 
eccentricity, density of black pixels and length of separators 
between successive components. The second level is to 
distinguish printed Arabic from the others scripts based on 
occlusions. The third decision is to separate handwritten 
Arabic from Latin scripts using the number of diacritics.  
Structural features such as the number of word parts, 
characters, ascenders, descenders, diacritics and loops, 
considering their position in the word, are used in [11] to 
identify Arabic and Latin scripts but their methodology was 
only discussed about only printed text documents. The 
methods described above are summarized in Table VI. 
III. CHARACTERISTICS OF ARABIC AND LATIN SCRIPTS 
We present the aspects that Arabic has in common with 
Latin as well as those different and characteristic of each one 
of them. 
A. Similarities of Arabic and Latin scripts 
Arabic and Latin writings have in common the following 
points: 
• Presence of writing lines (See Fig. 1): 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Writing Lines. 
• Central band: It is generally the most loaded in terms 
of information density in pixels (See Fig. 2). It 
corresponds to the places of the horizontal ligatures, 
to the centered letters (without extensions) and to the 
loops.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Horizontal Projection. 
• Regularities and singularities: The writing presents 
the singularities on either side of the central band 
and the regularities inside it (See Fig. 3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  Singularities vs regularities. 
• Inter-writer variability: Different people have 
different style of writing which results on 
inconsistent shapes for the same letters (See Fig. 
4). Also, random variations in shapes are 
encountered across different instances of letters 
written by the same scribe. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The same word written by different writers. 
B.  Differences between Arabic and Latin scripts 
Arabic is different from Latin with respect to a number 
of aspects: 
• Writing orientation: It is right to left for Arabic and 
from left to right for Latin.   
• Horizontal projection: The horizontal projection 
profiles of Arabic texts have a single peak around 
the middle of the text-line (see Fig. 2). In contrast, 
projections of Latin texts have two major peaks.  
• Alphabet: The Arabic alphabet consists of 28 letters 
without considering the variation of their shapes 
according to the position, the voyellation elements 
and the phonetic context. 
• Word: Arabic letters are strung together to form 
words in one way only. There is no distinction 
between printing and cursive, as there is the case in 
Latin. 
• Letter shape: Neither are there capital and lowercase 
letters, all the Arabic letters are the same. The letter 
shapes, however, are changeable in form, depending 
on the location of the letter at the beginning, middle 
or at the end of the word.  
• Diacritics: Arabic writing is very rich in diacritic 
marks. Some Arabic letters may have exactly the 
same main shape, and are distinguished from each 
other only by the presence or the absence of these 
diacritics, their number and their position with 
respect to the main shape  
• Semi cursive writing: The Arabic word is a sequence 
of connected components called PAWs (Piece of 
Arabic Word, see Fig. 5).  
 
 
Figure 5.  Semi-cursive writing. 
• Ligatures: Letters of a PAW could be horizontally or 
vertically tied (in some fonts, two, three or even four 
letters can be tied vertically) as shown in Fig. 6.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Vertical and horizontal ligatures in Arabic. 
• Elongations: The same Arabic word does not have a 
fixed length since different elongations numbers 
could appear between letters (See Fig. 7).  
 
Figure 7.  Writing elongations. 
The foregoing features relate to the Arabic writing 
whether printed or handwritten. In the case of the 
manuscript, others specificities are involved: 
• Fusion of diacritical points: Two or three diacritical 
points can easily be agglomerated in two or even one 
diacritical point (see dotted circles in Fig. 4).   
• PAW Overlapping: In one word, two consecutive 
PAWs may overlap (See Fig. 5).  
 
799
IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION 
We extracted several features (53) organized as follows: 
A. Features proposed in this work 
Words can be represented by structural features with high 
tolerance to distortions and style variations. This type of 
representation may also encode some knowledge about word 
structure or may provide some knowledge as to what sort of 
components make up that word. They include: 
• Presence of bottom diacritics: Considering that there 
are no diacritics at the bottom in Latin words which 
is not the case for Arabic words, we check if there 
exist diacritic points under the baseline to distinguish 
between Arabic and Latin scripts (See Fig. 4).  
• Loop position: Loops, in Arabic, are generally 
written in the central band of the word (e.g.  , , 
, etc.) with the exception of the letter () in which 
the loops protrude slightly above and below. In 
Latin, there are a lot of letters which have loops 
above and below the central band (See Fig. 9).  
 
Figure 8.  Bottom diacritics and Loop position. 
• Presence of elongate descender: Arabic script, 
whether machine-printed or handwritten, is 
characterized by the frequently presence of 
elongated descenders. In Latin script, descenders 
tend to be vertical (see Fig. 10). 
 
 
Figure 9.  Descender shape. 
B. Features Proposed in the Litterature 
• Vertical projection variance of the word: Due to 
overlaps between handwritten words, projection 
profiles has smoother valleys and peaks resulting in 
smaller variance compared to machine-printed words 
[9]. We computed the variance of the vertical co-
ordinates of the profile of the vertical projection 
which can be considered as a measure of 
homogeneity of the projection profile.   
• Connected component width, height, aspect ratio, 
area and density: As underlined by [5], the sizes of 
connected components inside a machine-printed 
word are more consistent, leading to smaller width 
and height variances. We then regarded these 
features and generalized them in term of mean and 
standard deviation.  
• Separator length between two successive connected 
components: In printed Latin, connected components 
are separated by regular separators, as noted by [5], 
which is not the case of handwritten Arabic or Latin. 
That is why we retained this feature and generalized 
it in term of mean and standard deviation.  
• Connected component profiles analysis: Both of 
handwritten and machine-printed Arabic is cursive. 
It is not the case of machine-printed Latin. As done 
in [4], we extracted the bottommost profile of the 
connected components (after elimination of 
diacritics points) and measured their contour line 
discontinuity. Notice that Arabic script has lower 
discontinuity than Latin because it is straighter and 
flat and do not have high links between letters as 
Latin script (e.g.  o, v, etc.). In fact, the high links 
increase the differences between coordinates of 
lower profile pixels. Table I illustrates some 
discriminative examples based on connected 
component profiles analysis. 
TABLE I.  BOTTOMMOST PROFILE ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
• Loop aspect ratio: Printed script is a succession of 
connected components comprising occlusions whose 
surfaces are regulars contrary to the handwritten 
Arabic and Latin which depend on the writing style 
of the writer [1]. We then considered the loop 
bounding box width divided by its height as a feature 
and we generalized it in term of mean and standard 
deviation.   
• Pixels distribution: This feature is especially used [6] 
to discriminate handwritten from printed Latin. The 
bounding box is divided in two by a horizontal line. 
Its height is decreased by 10 pixels (See Fig. 11). 
Then the density of the upper part and of the lower 
part is calculated. We retained the difference 
between these densities as feature.  
 
Figure 10.  Bounding box horizontal division. 
• Baseline profile features: Most pixels of machine-
printed words are placed on the baseline. In the 
machine-printed words, position of ascender and 
descender are determined by the baseline however 
in handwritten case, words are not usually written in 
a single baseline and position of ascender and 
descender varies according to the writer’s style.  
Difference between handwritten and machine-
printed word blocks is made in [2] using baseline 
profile features [2]. The baseline is estimated as the 
peak of horizontal histogram of the word image 
(See Fig. 11). The following features are extracted 
from the baseline profile: Baseline position 
(normalized by the word height), Sub-baseline 
number (a sub baseline represents pixels of the 
word image that lies on the baseline), Distance of 
highest scan line from the baseline (d1 normalized 
by the word height), Distance of lowest scan line 
from the baseline (d2 normalized by the word 
height) and Number of pixels on the baseline 
800
(normalized by the word width). Mean, variance of 
sub-baselines, and ratio of sub-baseline to heir 
variances are also taken as features. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Baseline profile features. 
• Run-length histogram: [7] proposed a Run-length 
histogram for machine-printed/handwritten Chinese 
character classification. In our case, we used this 
features to underline the difference between the 
stroke length of machine-printed and handwritten 
words. 
• Crossing Count Histogram: Crossing count is the 
number of transitions from 0 to 1 along a 
hypothetical horizontal or vertical line over the word 
image. Crossing count features are already used by 
[2] for Latin handwritten and machine-printed words 
discrimination. We used this feature to measure 
stroke complexity.  
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Experiments have been carried using two public 
databases: IAM database for Latin handwritten and IFN-
ENIT for Arabic handwritten words. At present, standard 
database of Latin and Arabic machine-printed scripts are not 
available. Hence, we created our own database. The words 
for the database were extracted from various magazines, 
newspapers and other such documents containing variable 
font styles and sizes. A scanning resolution of 300 dpi is 
employed for digitization of all the words. The training and 
test words have 1320 samples each, consisting of equal 
number of Printed Arabic (PA), Handwritten Arabic (HA), 
Printed Latin (PL) and Handwritten Latin (HL) words. Fig. 
12 shows some samples of handwritten and machine-printed 
words of various fonts of both Arabic and Latin scripts used 
in the experiment. In the training phase, the features and the 
correct classification (training set) are used. For the test, we 
used the cross validation method: the words were divided 
into ten non-overlapping sets. Each time a classification 
model was calculated with training examples taken from 
nine sets and evaluated on the remaining set. This procedure 
was repeated ten times, each time using a different set as 
testing examples.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Some sample words used in the experiement. 
In Table II, we give the correct identification rates for each 
feature using AODE (a probabilistic classification learning 
technique which was developed to address the attribute-
independence problem of the popular Bayes classifier). The 
numbers between parentheses in the first column correspond 
to the number of measures representing the feature. 
TABLE II.  ACCURACY BY FEATURES 
Features Precision Recall F-Measure
Vertical projection variance (1) 0.64 0.58 0.57 
Connected component width, height,  
aspect (10) 0.83 0.83 0.83 
Separator length between two  
successive connected components (2) 0.54 0.55 0.54 
Connected component profilee analysis (1) 0.62 0.49 0.47 
Loop ratio (2)  0.58 0.57 
Pixels distribution (1)  0.36 0.45 
Baseline profile features (8) 0.86 0.85 0.85 
Run-length histogram (15) 0.95 0.94 0.94 
Crossing count histogram (10) 0.79 0.79 0.79 
 
To investigate which features are the most predictive 
ones, we tested with many feature selection methods such as 
Forward Selection and Best first techniques but when 
applying a random search such as Genetic algorithm [12], 
the selected features are reduced to 24 features and we 
achieved the highest correct identification rate. Table III 
gives the detailed accuracy by class after combining these 
features with our proposed structural features. As mentioned 
before, the total number of instances are 1320 including 330 
of each class. Correctly classified instances are 1299. Only 
21 are incorrectly classified. 
TABLE III.  DETAILED ACCURACY BY CLASS 
 PA HA PL HL Average 
Precision 0.985 0.982 1 0.991 0.984
Recall 0.997 0.976 0.988 0.994 0.984
F-Measure 0.97 0.976 0.976 0.973 0.984
 
As shown in Table III, the average accuracy is the same: 
about 0.984 for handwritten and machine printed words 
either in Arabic or Latin scripts. Notice that, with the 
proposed and selected features, printed Arabic words can be 
identified, in a reliable way, with a correct identification rate 
of almost 100%. When observing the confusion matrix (See 
Table IV), we note that it is about confusion cases between 
handwritten Arabic and Latin scripts. Most of them mainly 
come from their cursive nature. Confusions, between printed 
and handwritten Latin script arise because of the writing 
styles of many writers who do not use ligatures between the 
letters. 
TABLE IV.  CONFUSION MATRIX 
     
 PA HA PL HL
PA 329 1 0 0
HA 2 322 0 6
PL 0 0 326 4
HL 3 5 0 322
801
Table V gives some results using others typical classifiers1. 
TABLE V.  ACCURACY BY CLASSIFIER 
Classifier Group Classifier Obtained rate
Misc VFI (Voting Features Intervals) 95.0758 %
Meta algorithm Bagging 90.9848 %
Decision trees 
FT 97.80%
J48 88.93% 
In Fig. 13, we display the Receiver Operating 
Characteristics (ROC) curve to compare the classifiers and 
to highlight what is the classifier that has the best 
discriminative power. This will be the classifier that has the 
highest ROC curve widening. Here, it corresponds to AODE 
considering HL class. 
 
Figure 13.  ROC graph for classifier comparison. 
According to the experiments, proposed features, 
combined to those presented in table II, capture significant 
amount of the differences between machine-printed and 
handwritten Arabic and Latin words providing a good 
solution for this task (See the last row of Table VI). 
Compared to a work [10] that deals with the same problem 
but using texture descriptors, our work, tested on a larger 
database, provides better results. 
TABLE VI.  IDENGTIFICATION METHOD SUMMARIZATION 
Ref. Script Nature Analysis levels 
Ident.  
rate 
 [1] Arabic,  Latin 
Printed/ 
Handwritten 
(400 blocks) 
Text-block/ 
Text-line/ 
Component 
88.5 % 
 [9] Arabic,  Latin 
Printed/ 
Handwritten 
(800 documents) 
Text-block  84.75% 
[10] Arabic, Latin 
Printed/ 
Handwritten 
(800 words) 
Word  97.5% 
 [8] 
 
Arabic, 
English 
Printed 
(1976 text-lines, 
8320 words) 
Text-line/  
Word 
99.7% 
(Text-line) 
96.8%(Word)
 [2] Farsi_ Arabic 
Printed 
/Handwritten 
Word 
(3600 words) 97.1% 
 [6] Latin Printed/Handwritten (50 documents) Text-line 
 
98.2% 
[4] Bangla, English 
Handwritten 
 (1200 text-blocks) Component 
 
95% 
[5] Arabic, Printed/ Text-block 95% 
                                                           
1 Tested using WEKA: a collection of machine learning algorithms. 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 
Latin Handwritten 
(400 text-blocks) 
 [3] Latin 
Printed 
/Handwritten 
(public databases) 
 
Word Above 80%
[11] 
 
Arabic, 
Latin 
Printed  (learning 
database:3383 words, 
test database: 846 words) 
Word  94.32 % 
Proposed 
features 
Arabic,
Latin
Printed 
/Handwritten  
(1320 words) 
Word 98.4% 
 
VI.  CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS 
In this work, we proposed some new structural features 
because we believe that are intuitive aspects of writing and 
affect mostly the physical structure of words. We also tried 
to combine with features, used in the literature, and select 
the ones that maximize the distinction between handwritten 
and machine-printed Arabic and Latin words. A set of 24 
simple and different features has been retained after 
selection. Handwritten and machine-printed words, with 
various font styles and sizes, written in Arabic and Latin, 
and different classifiers have been used for the testing. The 
results show the identification process is robust and reliable 
at the word level. In the future, we plan to study, propose 
further discriminative features with test with larger databases 
and compare with work, reported in [10], using common 
database. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Kanoun, I. Moalla, A. Ennaji, and A. M. Alimi, “Script 
Identification for Arabic and Latin Printed and Handwritten 
Documents,” in proc. of DAS, pp. 159-165, 2000.  
[2] S. Mozaffari, and P. Bahar, “Farsi/Arabic Handwritten from machine-
printed words discrimination,” in proc. of ICFHR,  pp.694-699, 2012.  
L. Faria da Silva, A. Conici, and A. Sanchez, “Automatic 
discrimination between printed and handwritten text in documents,’ 
in proc. of  SIBGRAPI, pp. 261-267, 2009.  
[3] L. Zhou, Y. Lu, and C. Tan, “Bangla/ english Script identification 
based on Analysis of Connected Components Profiles,” in proc. of 
DAS, pp. 243-254, 2006.  
[4] M. Ben Jlaiel, S. kanoun, A. M. Alimi, and R. Mullot, “Three 
decision levels strateg for Arabic and Latin texts differentiation in 
printed and handwritten natures,” in proc. of ICDAR, pp. 1103-1107, 
2007.  
[5] E. Kavallieratou, and S. Stamatatos, “Discrimination of machine-
printed from Handwritten Text using Simple Structural 
Characteristics,” in proc. of ICPR, pp. 437-440, 2004.  
[6] Y. Zheng, C. Liu, and X. Ding, “Single character type identification”, 
in proc. of DRR, pp. 49-56, 2002.  
[7] A. M. lgammal, and M. A.Ismail, “Techniques for Language 
Identification for Hybrid Arabic-English Document Images,” in proc. 
of DRR, pp. 1100-1104, 2001.  
[8] K. Baâti, S. Kanoun, and M. Benjlaiel, “Différenciation d écriture 
arabe et latine de natures imprimée et Manuscrite par approche 
globale,” in proc. of CIFED, 2010.  
[9] M. Benjelil, R. Mullot, and A. Alimi, “Language and script 
identification based on Steerable Pyramid Features,” in proc. of 
ICFHR, 18-20 September, pp. 712-717, 2012.  
[10] S.Haboubi, S.S.Maddouri, and H.Amiri, “Discrimination between 
Arabic and Latin from bilingual documents,” in proc. of CCCA, 
2011. 
[11] http://fr.slideshare.net/butest/weka-tutorial. 
802
