Characterizing Genres of Web Pages:  
Genre Hybridism and Individualization 
 
Marina Santini 
University of Brighton, UK 
M.Santini@brighton.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
 
When dealing with genres of web pages, there are two 
important aspects to be taken into account. On the one 
hand, the web is fluid, unstable and fast-paced. On the 
other hand, genres on the web are instantiated in web 
pages, which are a complex type of document, more 
composite and unpredictable than paper documents. 
These two aspects are interwoven and often result in 
classification hurdles. In this paper, I suggest analyzing 
these classification problems in terms of two broad 
textual phenomena: genre hybridism and 
individualization. The identification of these two 
phenomena helps pinpoint the range of flexibility that an 
automatic classification system should have. More 
precisely, genre hybridism accounts for multi-genre 
variation within the individual web page, while 
individualization refers to absence of any recognized 
genre in a web page. In a few words, the aim of this paper 
is to show that web pages need a zero-to-multi-genre 
classification scheme, i.e. a scheme that allows zero genre 
or multi-genre classification, in addition to the traditional 
single-genre classification.  
 
1 Introduction 
 
The aim of this paper is to show that web pages need a 
zero-to-multi genre classification-scheme, i.e. a scheme 
that allows zero genre or multi-genre classification, in 
addition to the traditional single-genre classification. 
More specifically, a zero genre classification accounts for 
those web pages that do not fit into any genre, and multi-
genre classification is useful when a web page contains 
more than one genre. Previous work on web genres has 
assumed that a web page instantiates only a single web 
genre. This is clear both from automatic approaches (e.g. 
Shepherd et al., 2004 [34]; Meyer zu Eissen and Stein, 
2004 [24]; Lim et al., 2005 [17]), and from qualitative 
analyses (e.g. Shepherd and Watters, 1998 [36]; Ashekave 
and Nielsen, 2005 [1]). In contrast with this assumption, 
in this paper I focus on how genres are instantiated in web 
pages, since it is often the case that a web page includes 
more than one genre or has no genre at all. More 
precisely, I suggest considering two attributes – genre 
hybridism and individualization – that might help 
characterize the genre of web pages more accurately. The 
main benefit that would follow from the inclusion of genre 
hybridism and individualization in the characterization of 
genre and from a zero-to-multi genre classification 
scheme is that they would account for the current 
classification intractability of many web pages, i.e. those 
web pages that cannot be classified using a single-genre 
label. 
The argument that a single genre classification scheme 
is inappropriate for genre classification of web pages has 
already been developed by scholars and researchers. In 
particular, it shares some similarities with the multi-
facetted classification of genre recently re-proposed in 
different, but neighboring, areas by Kessler et al. (1997) 
[21] (automatic genre classification), Tyrväinen and 
Päivärinta (1999) [40] (document management) and 
Crowston and Kwasnik, 2004 [8] (information studies). 
The main difference between the multi-facetted 
classification and the zero-to-multi genre classification 
scheme is that the multi-facetted approach is a multi-
dimensional approach that highlights different aspects in a 
document, not necessarily different genres. For example, 
in automatic genre detection, Kessler et al. (1997) [21] 
proposed three facets, BROW, NARRATIVE, and GENRE, 
which relate respectively to the kind of language used in 
the text, the text typology, and the genre itself. Such an 
approach returns three independent and uncorrelated 
classifications, where the classification by genre 
corresponds to the traditional single-genre labeling. In 
other words, more than a multi-genre classification, this 
approach offers three computationally tractable views on a 
document. By contrast, I would like to focus on genre 
identification proper, i.e. on the assignment of zero-, one- 
or multi-genre labels to a web page. 
It is important to stress that my view on genre of web 
pages is geared toward automatic genre identification. 
Since manual annotation is expensive and time-
consuming, the benefits of automatic genre identification 
have been widely acknowledged for a variety of tasks 
related to digital or web environments, especially for 
information retrieval (e.g. Karlgren and Cutting, 1994 
[19]; Kessler et al, 1997 [21], Stamatatos et al., 2000 [38]; 
Meyer zu Eissen and Stein, 2004 [24]; Lim et al., 2005 
[17]), digital libraries (e.g. Rauber and Müller-Kögler, 
2001 [27]), information extraction (e.g. Maynard et al., 
2001 [22]), and other web-related applications. However, 
although a considerable amount of research has already 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
1©1530-1605/07 $20.00     2007 IEEE
been carried out in automatic genre classification, most 
previous work has considered genres as mutually 
exclusive categories, disregarding the fact that many 
documents, and in particular many web pages, do not fit 
into a single genre. This approach has been taken for the 
sake of practicality, but proves inadequate when dealing 
with complex documents, like web pages. For this reason, 
I started implementing an automatic approach that can 
handle a zero-to-multi genre classification scheme with 
promising results (Santini, 2006 [33] and Santini et al., 
2006 [32]). In this paper, however, I would like to focus 
on the theoretical aspect and not on the practical 
implementation, and describe in more detail (a) why a 
single-genre classification scheme is inappropriate when 
dealing with web pages, and (b) in which way the two 
attributes of genre hybridism and individualization help 
pinpoint the range of flexibility that an automatic genre 
classification model should have. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes 
the characteristics of genres on the web, and some textual 
traits of web pages; Section 3 presents a discussion about 
the two attributes that I propose including in the 
characterization of genres of web pages; finally in Section 
4 I draw some conclusions. 
 
2 Genres of Web Pages 
 
The difficulty of assigning a single genre to web pages 
is well expressed by Rosso (2005) [29], when he reports 
the comments of the participants to his studies: 
 
“In summary, the comments provided much insight into 
participants’ experiences of single-genre webpage 
categorization: problem with pages fitting multiple 
categories, problems with pages fitting no categories, 
and general recognition of the characteristic formal 
elements of many of the web pages.” (Rosso, 2005: 116) 
 
This difficulty has been pointed out also by other 
scholars and researchers carrying out surveys on genres of 
web pages, like Haas and Grams (1998) [15], Crowston 
and Williams (2000) [9], Karlgren (2000: 99 ff.) [18], 
Roussinov et al. (2001) [30], and Meyer zu Eissen and 
Stein (2004) [24].  
When dealing with genres of web pages, there are two 
important aspects to be taken into account. On the one 
hand, the web is fluid, unstable and fast-paced. On the 
other hand, genres on the web are instantiated in web 
pages, which are a complex type of document, more 
composite and unpredictable than paper documents. These 
two aspects are intertwined and often result in 
classification intractability because many web pages show 
more than one genre or do not have any. In the next two 
subsections I will analyze these two aspects in more 
detail. 
2.1 Web Pages 
 
Do web pages differ from documents on other media? 
Genres on the web are instantiated in web pages, and web 
pages are complex objects. Even when taken individually, 
web pages appear to be a composite type of document, 
with a visual organization of the space, where different 
communicative purposes and different functions are 
included at the same time. The intertwining of visual and 
verbal is not new. What is new is the frequency of use of 
such a solution. While the linear organization of most of 
paper documents is still reflected in traditional electronic 
corpora, like the British National Corpus (BNC), web 
pages have a visual organization that allows the inclusion 
of several functions or several texts with different 
communicative purposes in a single document. For 
example, the space on a web page can be divided into 
different sections, organized by lists of links – mainly 
isolated noun structures or verbal elements (Haas and 
Grams, 2000: 186-187 [16]) – and snippets of text 
scattered around the main body of the document, such as 
navigational buttons, menus, ads, and search boxes, that 
are visually dislocated in different areas of a single page. 
Additionally, the effect of hyperlinking, interactivity and 
multi-functionality can affect the textuality of web pages, 
which heavily rely also on the use of images and other 
graphical elements. Although the use of fonts of different 
types, sizes, and colors, as well as the use of formatting 
devices, like columns, lines separating different sections 
of a document, pictures, etc. is not new (cf. Waller, 1987 
[41] for a detailed description of the role of both language 
and typography in the formation of document types), a 
NEWSPAPER ARTICLE organized in columns and headlines 
does not lose its specific linguistic and textual 
characteristics when it is included in a corpus like the 
BNC. The same is not true for many web pages, because 
the visual structure of a web page incorporating a 
NEWSPAPER ARTICLE in most cases cannot be flattened out 
or ignored without losing important information or 
functions (cf. Watters and Shepherd, 1997 [42]).  
Hence, a web page can be considered as a sort of 
container of multiple texts – so much so that in coding the 
pages of their sample, Haas and Grams (2000) [16] 
repeatedly encountered pages that could be interpreted as 
comprising more components. Artificially separating what 
is considered to be the main body from the rest is an 
arbitrary operation and it would not make sense in many 
cases, for example in a web page similar to that shown in 
Figure 1.  
In sum, in a web page not all the elements necessarily 
belong together but they all contribute to form a whole, 
even without any linear progression. 
 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
2
 
Figure 1. Example of a web page 
The complexity of web pages can be explained by the 
flexibility provided by HTML and the simplicity of such a 
language (cf. also Furuta and Marshall, 1996 [12]) that 
allows the creation of more complex texts without much 
effort or expertise. This textual or multi-modal complexity 
is then incorporated in the upgrading of conventions of 
existing genre, or in the creation of fresh conventions for 
unprecedented genres, whose introduction is spurred by 
new communication needs caused by the rapid evolution 
of the web.  
The textual complexity of web pages accounts for the 
‘malleability’ of genre. As Orlikowski and Yates (1994) 
[25] have stressed, genres are rarely homogeneous. On the 
contrary, they tend to overlap and mix. In an open 
communication space, like the web, where many 
communities meet, each with its own genre system and 
repertoire (cf. Crowston and Williams, 2000 [9]), 
phenomena like genre colonization (Beghtol, 2001 [3]), 
genre combination (Østerlund, 2006 [26]) and genre 
contamination, common also in other environments, are 
likely to occur.  
For all these reasons, web pages result often more 
unpredictable and difficult to sort into a single genre than 
documents in other media, where often social rigidity, 
work practices or stable settings favor more controlled 
and standardized text production (cf. Yates and Sumner, 
1997 [44]). 
 
2.2 Genres on the Web 
 
Do genres on the web differ from genres on other 
media? The influence of a new communication medium 
on genre evolution and creation has been historically 
proved (cf. also Yates and Orlikowski, 1992 [43]). For 
example, the introduction of printing in the XV century, 
which entailed a passage from hand-written manuscripts to 
printed books, radically enlarged and transformed the 
potential for written genres. Printing is considered an 
important factor in the development of the NOVEL as we 
know it today, and for the spreading of the SONNET as a 
poetic genre throughout Europe. 
As printing, the web is a new communication medium 
that was invented only a few decades ago1. The web is 
also a large and heterogeneous community and a new 
virtual environment where the interaction among the 
members (the internauts or web users) and the possibility 
offered by the technology modify existing genres or create 
new ones, which better satisfy the communication needs 
brought about by these new conditions.  
As shown by Crowston and Williams (2000) [9], who 
were among the first to study the development of genres 
on the web, the web has had a substantial impact on the 
genre repertoire. In their survey, they document the genres 
in use on the web by sampling and classifying randomly 
selected web pages in 1996. Crowston and Williams 
(2000) explicitly refer to Yates and Orlikowski (1992) 
[43] and Orlikowski and Yates (1994) [25] and define 
genres as “social type of communicative actions, 
characterized by a socially recognized communicative 
purpose and common aspect of form”. Crowston and 
Williams (2000) [9] carry out their survey with three main 
objectives in mind: (a) trace the development of genres 
caused by the introduction and the fast evolution of the 
new medium; (b) observe the effects of lack of central 
management, enforced, for examples, in organizations; (c) 
study the effects of the encounter of many communities on 
the web, using different genres systems. They identify four 
types of genres: 
 
1. Reproduced genres: 60.6% 
2. Adapted genres: 28.6% 
3. Novel genres: 5.3% 
4. Unclassified web pages: 5.6% 
 
Predictably, most of genres come from previous 
traditions. When moving to a new medium, it is normal to 
use forms available on existing media, before elaborating 
new ones, more tailored to the specific characteristics of 
the new medium (cf. Askehave and Nielsen, 2004 [2]). 
Most genres on the web in 1996 were still borrowed 
(reproduced genres) from other media, while a large 
proportion appeared to be adapted (adapted genres) to the 
needs and capability of the new media. Interestingly, in 
the survey an equal amount of novel genres and 
unclassified web pages are recorded. Even if the 
proportions could slightly vary across the different genre 
typologies according to different criteria of assessment2, it 
                                                 
1 The World Wide Web began life in 1989 at CERN, the European 
Laboratory for Particle Physics in Geneva, Switzerland.  
2 There are several criteria for assessing novel genres. For example, 
Crowston and Williams (2000) [9] considered FAQs to be a reproduced 
genre, while in Shepherd and Watters (1998) [36], this genre is 
mentioned as an example of novel and spontaneous genres. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
3
is nonetheless interesting that novel genres and 
unclassified web pages have a similar proportion. Both 
novel genres and unclassified web pages represent the 
most advanced manifestations of genre evolution. 
Following the interpretation suggested by Crowston and 
Williams (2000) [9], novel genres (namely, HOME PAGE, 
HOTLISTS, PAGES ABOUT WEB SERVERS, AND INTERACTIVE 
PAGES) serve communicative purposes unique to the web, 
while some of the unclassified pages may be seen as 
examples of genres in the process of adaptation to the web 
or, in other words, as genres still emerging, not fully 
formed yet. This study returns a picture of a highly 
dynamic genre repertoire, where changes are still under 
way and have not fully coalesced yet. 
Similar, in some respects, is the interpretation of genre 
evolution on the web by Shepherd and Watters (1998) 
[36], who coined a special name – cybergenre – to 
designate genres in the new medium, more specifically 
those genres created by the combination of the use of the 
computer and the Internet. Although nowadays the word 
‘cybergenre’ seems to lose ground in favor of the plainer 
compound ‘web genre’ (the authors themselves used this 
variant as a synonym of cybergenre in Shepherd and 
Watters., 2004 [35]), it still keeps a fresh connotation. 
Cybergenre is characterized by the triple <content, form, 
functionality>, where the first two elements are common 
to traditional genres, while functionality refers exclusively 
to the capabilities offered by the web. Shepherd and 
Watters (1998) [36] propose a hierarchical taxonomy that 
accounts for the evolution of genres on the web. The 
driving force behind genre evolution on the web is, in 
their view, the functionality attribute afforded by the new 
medium. According to the level of functionality they 
show, cybergenres can be extant (i.e. based on existing 
genres) or novel (i.e. not like any existing genre in any 
other medium). Extant genres can be replicated, i.e. based 
on genres existing in other media, or variant, i.e. a 
modification of existing genres. Novel genres can be 
emergent, i.e. derived but significantly different from 
existing genres, or spontaneous, i.e. never employed in 
other media. The key evolutionary aspect is the 
functionality attribute, which is illustrated by two 
examples, the NEWS cybergenre and the MATH 
DICTIONARY cybergenre. Shepherd and Watters (1999) 
[37] exemplify what they intend by the attribute of 
functionality. In a survey of 96 complete web sites (and 
not individual web pages as in Crowston and Williams, 
2000 [9]), they identify five cybergenres out of the six 
they had in their palette (namely, HOME PAGE, BROCHURE, 
RESOURCE, CATALOGUE, SEARCH ENGINE, and GAME). 
Each of these cybergenres show different level of 
functionality, defined in terms of browsing, email facility, 
search, discussion, interaction, email ordering/enquiring, 
online ordering, online enquiring, interactivity, and 
collaborative computing. Illuminatingly, Shepherd and 
Watters (1998, 1989) [36] [37] emphasize that 
functionality has caused a leap in genre evolution creating 
a new species, the web genre. However, they assume that 
a web page instantiates only a single web genre. This 
assumption is clear in their practical experiments 
(Shepherd et al., 2004 [34] and Kennedy and Shepherd, 
2005 [20]), where they carry out single-label classification 
of HOME PAGES. 
Crowston and Williams (2000) [9] and Shepherd and 
Watters (1998, 1999) [36] [37] use complementary 
classification schemes. On one side, Shepherd and 
Watters (1998, 1999) never mention unclassified web 
pages, while Crowston and Williams (2000) [9] 
realistically find them in their sample, and consequently 
include them in their classification scheme. On the other 
side, while Crowston and Williams (2000) [9], drawing on 
Yates and Orlikowski (1992) [43], suggest that new 
genres are mostly derived from earlier genres that might 
have seemed appropriate to the situation, Shepherd and 
Watters (1998, 1999) [36] [37] introduce the typology of 
spontaneous cybergenres, which do not have any 
counterpart in other media. This view is supported also by 
Haas and Grams (1998) [15] as they state: “The Web, 
with its multimedia capabilities, has also spawned page 
types that have no equivalent in the print world, such as he 
home page of a corporation, a page containing audio or 
video clips, or interactive pages”. As also pointed out by 
Dillon and Gushrowski (2000) [10], it is unlikely that just 
mimicking existing genres may support adequate design of 
new information types that the digital world enables, 
because this would mean underutilize the power of the 
new medium to provide innovative information structures.  
By combining the two classification schemes, the one 
by Shepherd and Watters (1998, 1999) [36] [37], and the 
other by Crowston and Williams (2000) [9], we get a 
wider range of genre typologies on the web:  
 
1. reproduced/replicated genres,  
2. adapted/variant genres,  
3. emergent/novel genres,  
4. spontaneous genres,  
5. unclassified web pages. 
 
Together with the functionality attribute suggested by 
Shepherd and Watters (1999) [37], there is another 
important attribute that characterize web genres: the use of 
hypertext and HTML.  
For Askehave and Nielsen (2004, 2005) [1] [2] the use 
of hypertext has created a new way of reading, the 
hypertext reading. They introduce the concept of ‘modal 
shift’ between reading mode and navigating mode for 
analyzing the HOME PAGE web genre, thus inaugurating 
the two-dimensional perspective on genre analysis.  
For Rehm (2006) [28] different types of hypertexts can 
be conceptualized as individual hypertexts type. Each 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
4
hypertext type corresponds to a web genre. This leads to 
the equation “one web site = one web genre”, where an 
entire web site (including one or more pages), and not the 
individual web page, is used as a unit of analysis. From an 
evolutionary point of view, Rehm distinguishes between 
automatically converted and manually prepared HTML 
documents. The influence of the genre on the automatic 
conversion of existing documents is straightforward and 
the conversion process does not significantly alter the 
genre itself, so that we can assume that a document’s 
original genre is directly transferred into the web. The 
evolutionary processes that shape and form web genre 
with regard to the manual creation of web sites includes 
four phases: production, modification, change and 
reception. His assumption is that when building a site with 
a specific web genre, an author incorporates, consciously 
or unconsciously, elements of related web sites. Over a 
period of time, this process generates web specific 
conventions and rules that authors choose to apply, extend 
or break. In other words, Rehm suggests that the process 
of imitation maintains stability in the genre repertoire, 
while change is determined by the extension or the break 
of conventions. This view complies with Baktin’s 
interpretation of language, where there is always a tension 
between ‘centripetal’ forces, allowing the continuity of 
communication, and ‘centrifugal’ forces, allowing change 
and evolution. In this respect, for Rehm too, new genres 
are always the outcome of transformation of earlier 
genres, similarly to Crowston and Williams (2000) [9]. In 
contrast with most analysts of web genres, who mainly 
consider genre evolution on the web as a fast process, 
Rehm sees the process of emerging rules and conventions 
for specific web genres as a “slow-going” progress. This 
view is somehow opposed to Shepherd and Watters’ 
(2004) [35], for whom the identification of web genres is 
as difficult as hitting a moving target, because of the 
continuous rearrangement of the genre repertoire caused 
by the functionality afforded by the new medium. 
Similarly, Haas and Grams (2000) [16] see the web as 
quickly moving target, where analyzing format, genres 
and the design conventions that go into web pages is 
tricky because the technology is constantly upgraded. 
Dillon and Vaughan (1997) [11] suggest relying on the 
attribute of ‘shape’ of a document to overcome this 
disorientation on the web, while Yates and Sumner (1997) 
[44] argue that such a rapid advance in new technologies 
results in the evolution of increasingly well-defined genres 
to better support the new communicative needs and 
practices, thus providing ‘fixity’, i.e. stability, in the 
production and transmission of texts. That the web is a 
fast-paced medium and that genre repertoire follows its 
rhythm by being upgraded and updated with the 
introduction of novel genres is also proved by the many 
genre analyses on new kinds of texts (e.g. cf. the recent 
analyses of WIKIS by Mehler, 2006 [23] and Copestake, 
2006 [6]).  
In conclusion, the web can be defined as a “moving 
target” (Shepherd and Watters, 2004 [35]), although 
owning some kind of “self-regulatory force” (Yates and 
Sumner, 1997 [44]), and probably this is the metaphor 
that best suits this stage of the web evolution.  
Additionally, I would like to pinpoint one effect of the 
fast evolution: the presence of emerging genres. 
2.2.1 Emerging genres 
 
Emerging genres represent a transitional phase in 
genre evolution. They are genres still in formation, 
without a name, and not fully standardized or 
acknowledged. They should not be confused with novel 
but emerged genres, i.e. new genres that are 
acknowledged by an audience and whose genre 
conventions can be singled out and coherently described. 
By contrast, emerging genres are still in a phase of 
formation, where it is not yet clear whether they will ever 
coalesce into a new communication object. They can be 
considered as hypothesised genres.  
Although evolving on all media and in all historical 
period, genres are assumed to be slow-forming, often 
emerging only over generations of producers and 
consumers, and proving resistant to change (cf. Dillon and 
Gushrowski, 2000 [10]). However, since the web is 
recent, fluid and evolving at fast pace, the emergence of 
novel genres is much more rapid than in other media, as 
observed by Boese (2005: 14) [5] “new genres are 
emerging frequently and a lot of old ones are in a state of 
flux”.  
The concept of emerging genres has not been 
explicitly formulated in the genre literature. However, it 
results useful because it might account for unclassified or 
unclassifiable web pages. As shown by the findings 
reported in Crowston and Williams (2000) [9], there is a 
number of web pages that cannot be classified by genre, 
for different reasons. More specifically, they state: “some 
of these unclassified pages may in fact be emerging 
genres”. It thus appears that one of the reasons that 
explains the difficulty of classifying web pages by genre is 
the existence of web pages that may belong to emerging 
genres, i.e. to textual patterns without any clear or 
acknowledged genre convention. The hectic introduction 
of new genres creates transitional phases where genre 
conventions in web pages are not clear. For this reason, 
many web pages are difficult to sort into acknowledged 
genres and remain unclassified. For example, before 1998, 
WEB LOGS (or BLOGS) were already present on the web, 
but they were still not identified as a genre. They were just 
“web pages” with similar characteristics and functions. In 
1999, suddenly a community sprang up using this new 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
5
genre (Blood, 2000 [4]). Only at this point, the genre label 
WEB LOG or BLOG started being spread and being 
recognized. 
However, it is worth repeating with Crowston and 
Williams (2000) [9] that the emergence of a novel genre 
depends on social acceptance. Consequently, it is 
impossible to predict exactly when an emerging genre will 
become a fully independent genre or even whether it will 
coalesce at all. It is nonetheless important to have a 
concept that captures the transitional phase that currently 
characterizes so many web pages, i.e. those web pages 
that cannot be sorted into any acknowledged genre.  
As stated earlier, emerging genre are hypothesized 
genres. Although we can confirm and disconfirm these 
hypotheses only in future, some quantitative cues may 
indicate that a new genre is ‘in formation’. 
Computationally, we might suspect an emerging genre 
when there is a recurrent textual pattern without an 
acknowledged name. Emerging genes do not have a name 
because a genre name becomes acknowledged when the 
genre itself has an active role and a communicative 
function in a community or society (Swales, 1990: 54-57 
[39]; Görlach, 2004: 9 [13]; Görlach, 2002 [14]). 
If we see the web as a dynamic environment, we 
could say that there are three forces interacting: what we 
bring from the past (reproduced genres), what is new or 
adapted to the new environment (novel genres and 
adapted genres), what is going to emerge and is not fully 
formed yet (emerging genres) (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Genre evolution on the web 
This representation of the genre evolution can be 
virtually applied to any communication medium. On the 
web this process is much more evident because the web is 
fast and we can see many changes taking place in the short 
term. I suggest postulating emerging genres as the pushing 
force behind genre change and creation. This view of 
genre evolution may complement previous studies on the 
same subject.  
 
2.3 Summary 
 
In summary, I suggested that the fluidity and fast-paced 
dynamism of the web together with the complexity of web 
pages affect the genre system and genre repertoire on the 
web. More precisely: 
 
1. As the web is a new and still developing 
communication medium, mechanisms of re-
adjustments – such as the adaptation of existing 
genres to the new conditions and creation of novel 
genres – are common. These re-adjustments bring 
about a transitional phase where genre conventions 
are unclear, and web pages do not belong to any 
recognizable genre. 
2. The mixture of several genres, coming from different 
traditions, in a single web page is an easy and fast 
operation.  
3. The lack of any institutionalized control (like, for 
example, in an organizational intranet) can stimulate 
authorial creativity and individualization.  
 
In order to account for: (a) unclear genre conventions, 
(b) genre mixture and (c) authorial creativity, I suggest 
including in any characterization of genre of web pages 
the two attributes of genre hybridism and 
individualization, discussed in the next section. 
 
3 Genre Hybridism and Individualization 
 
One effect of this eventful and fermenting scenario is 
the classification intractability of many web pages. I 
suggest breaking down this classification intractability 
into two broad textual phenomena: genre hybridism and 
individualization.  
Broadly speaking, genres show sets of standardized 
or conventional characteristics that make them 
recognizable, and this identity raises specific expectations.  
Together with conventions and expectations, genres have 
many other traits. I would like to focus on three traits, 
namely hybridism, individualization and evolution.  
First, genres are not mutually exclusive and different 
genres can be merged into a single document, generating 
hybrid forms. Second, genres allow a certain freedom of 
variation, and consequently can be individualized. Finally, 
genre repertoires are dynamic, i.e. they change over time, 
thus triggering genre change and evolution. It is also 
important to notice that before genre conventions become 
fully standardized, a genre does not have an official name. 
A genre name becomes acknowledged when the genre 
itself has an active role (Swales, 1990: 54-57 [39]; 
Görlach, 2004: 9 [13]; Görlach, 2002 [14]). Before this 
acknowledgement, a genre shows hybrid or individualized 
forms, and indistinct functions 
All these traits can be accounted for by the two 
attributes of genre hybridism and individualization. 
Genre hybridism is broad term accounting for several 
phenomena. It has often been pointed out that genres are 
not discrete systems (e.g. Gledhill as cited in Chandler, 
1997 [6]). A number of genre combinations are possible 
and common. For example, a mixed genre, like the TRAGI-
COMEDY, is a genre having its own blending aspects of 
two or more genres. Multi-genre documents are 
documents where two or more genres overlap without 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
6
creating a specific and more standardized genre, as in the 
case of ESHOPS, which are often also SEARCH PAGES, as 
noted also by Meyer zu Eissen and Stein (2004) [24]. 
Some genres are intrinsically mixed, such as the 
NEWSLETTER, which contains EDITORIALS, REPORTS, 
INTERVIEWS and so on. An additional problem concerns 
the fuzziness of genre labels because, for example, the 
same document can be named NEWS BULLETIN or PRESS 
RELEASE, as noted by Roussinov et al. (2001) [30] (cf. 
also the difficulties of developing a genre palette 
described in Rosso, 2005: 67 ff.).  
Hybrid genres abound and are very common in the 
mass media (as noted by Fairclough, cited in Chandler, 
1997 [6]). But in an open environment, like the web, 
where many needs and communities meet, genre mixture 
appear to be more extended. For instance, Figure 3 shows 
a personal BLOG that includes a HOW-TO. The attribute of 
genre hybridism does not break down if this page is both a 
BLOG and a HOW-TO, or a HOW-TO within a BLOG or vice-
versa, or half a BLOG and half a HOW-TO. The concept of 
genre hybridism as intended in this paper simply helps pin 
down when a web page contains more than one genre, 
regardless how these genres relate to each other.  
The acknowledgement that a web page can be hybrid 
is important when dealing with automatic genre 
identification because traditional single-label 
classification algorithms are usually confused by hybrid 
genre conventions.  
 
 
Figure 3. A web page showing genre hybridism 
Individualization refers to the impact of authorial 
experimentation. Although there is a process of imitation 
that favors similarities (cf. Furuta and Marshall, 1996 
[12]; Yates and Sumner, 1997 [44]; Askehave and 
Nielsen, 2004 [1]; Rehm, 2006 [28]), authors of web 
pages are virtually free to invent or propose any genre 
variations. It is so much so that many web pages cannot be 
classified into any genres (cf. Haas and Grams, 1998 
[15]). For instance, a web page like the one shown in 
Figure 4 does not find much consensus on the genre label. 
According to a user study based on 135 subjects– fully 
documented in Santini, Forthcoming [31] – this web page 
has been classified as follows: ABOUT PAGE (28 users), 
ESHOP (20 users), HOW-TO (14 users), TUTORIAL (9 users), 
CORPORATE HOME PAGE (5 users), FAQs (3 users), NET AD 
(3 users), BLOG (1 user), ONLINE FORM (1 user), and 
SEARCH PAGE (1 user). The majority of users (36) added 
their own labels, which ranged from ‘content page’ to 
‘product manual’3; and finally a number of users (14) 
frankly declared that they did know its genre.  
The concept of individualization covers web pages 
like the web page shown in Figure 4, where genre 
conventions are not clear, and the range of oscillation is 
large. I ascribe this oscillation to authorial creativity, 
because a web page creator is virtually free to publish any 
kind of text in any kind of format, while in the paper 
world constraints on genre conventions are stronger, as 
noted by Yates and Sumner (1997) [44].  
 
 
Figure 4. A web page showing individualization 
It is worth noting that the border between genre 
hybridism and individualization remains fuzzy, because an 
author can use a mixture of existing genres, or employ 
individualized and unprecedented solutions to create a 
personalized web page. 
In conclusion, if we use Baktin’s metaphor, genre 
conventions can be seen as the centripetal force that keeps 
stability in genre repertoire, while hybridism and 
individualization are the centrifugal forces that de-
                                                 
3 The complete list of labels added for the web page shown in Figure 4 
includes: content page, information page, online product information, 
product catalogue, product documentation, product information, 
product manual, product specification page, sub page of an online 
store, tech specifications, technical description, technical 
documentation, technical information page, technical instructions, 
technical product description, and (normal) webpage (sic). 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
7
stabilize the system. This struggle between “stasis” and 
“change” (cf. also Yates and Sumner (1997) [44]) gives 
rise to an intermediated phase in genre evolution – the 
transitional phase of emerging genres – that shows unclear 
genre conventions, which can also be explained in terms 
of genre hybridism and individualization. 
Unclear genre conventions of emerging genre, genre 
mixture (cf. Figure 3) and authorial creativity (cf. Figure 
4) justify the need for broadening the characterization of 
genre. I propose the following broad theoretical 
characterization of genres of web pages: genres are named 
communication artifacts characterized by conventions, 
raising expectations, showing hybridism or 
individualization, and undergoing evolution. 
This characterization is flexible enough to encompass 
not only genres of web pages and other digital genres, but 
also paper genres, both literary and practical genres.  
In conclusion, the identification of the two attributes 
of genre hybridism and individualization help characterize 
genre of web pages more accurately, and has a practical 
purpose: genre hybridism accounts for multi-genre 
classification, and individualization for no-genre 
assignment. 
 
4 Conclusion 
 
In this paper, I proposed a characterization of genres of 
web pages that includes the two textual attributes of genre 
hybridism and individualization. I explained that they are 
useful because they help describe more accurately how 
genre categories are instantiated in web pages. The web is 
a complex scenario where: 
 
• the mixture of several genres in a single web page is 
fast operation;  
• the lack of any institutionalized control can stimulate 
authorial creativity and individualization; 
• the constant introduction of web technologies brings 
about the transitional phase of emerging genres, 
where genre conventions are unclear. 
 
The identification of the two attributes of genre 
hybridism and individualization help understand how 
flexible a classification system for web pages should be: 
genre hybridism accounts for multi-genre classification, 
and individualization for zero-genre classification.  
 
5 References 
 
[1] Askehave I. and Nielsen A. E. (2005). “What are the 
Characteristic of Digital Genres? – Genre Theory 
from a Multi-modal Perspective”. Proceedings of the 
38
th
 Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. 
[2] Askehave I. and Nielsen A. E. (2004), Web-Mediated 
Genres - A Challenge to Traditional Genre Theory. 
Working Paper nr. 6. Center for 
Virksomhedskommunikation, Aarhus School of 
Business, Denmark. 
[3] Beghtol C. (2001). “The Concept of Genre and Its 
Characteristics”. Bulletin of The American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, Vol. 27, No. 2. 
[4] Blood R. (2000). Weblogs: A History and 
Perspective. Rebecca's Pocket. 07 September 2000. 
<http://www.rebeccablood.net/essays/weblog_history.html”> 
[5] Boese E. (2005). Stereotyping the Web: Genre 
Classification of Web Documents, M.S. Thesis, 
Computer Science Department, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO, March 2005. 
[6] Chandler D. (1997). An Introduction to Genre 
Theory.  
<http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/intgenre/intgenre.html> 
[7] Copestake A. (2006). “Errors in wikis”. Proceedings 
of the workshop on NEW TEXT. Wikis and blogs and 
other dynamic text sources (EACL 2006), Trento. 
[8] Crowston K. and Kwasnik B. (2004). “A Framework 
for Creating a Facetted Classification for Genres: 
Addressing Issues of Multidimensionality”. 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Science. 
[9] Crowston K. and Williams, M. (2000). “Reproduced 
and emergent genres of communication on the World-
Wide Web”. The Information Society, Vol. 16, No. 3, 
pp. 201-216.  
[10] Dillon A. and Gushrowski B. (2000). “Genres and the 
Web: is the personal home page the first uniquely 
digital genre?”. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, Vol. 51, No. 2. 
[11] Dillon A. and Vaughan M. (1997). “It's the journey 
and the destination: Shape and the emergent property 
of genre in evaluating digital documents”. New 
Review of Multimedia and Hypermedia, Vol. 3, pp. 
91-106 
[12] Furuta R. and Marshall C. (1996). “Genre as 
reflection of technology in the World-Wide Web. In 
Hypermedia Design”. Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Hypermedia Design 
(IWHD 95). 182-95, Springer-Verlag. 
[13] Görlach M. (2004). Text Types and the History of 
English, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin - New York. 
[14] Görlach M. (2002). “What’s in a Name? Terms 
Designating Text Types and the History of English”. 
In Fisher A., Tottie G. and Lehmann H. M. (eds.). 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
8
Text Types and Corpora. Gunter Narr Verlag. 
Tübingen (Germany), pp. 17-27. 
[15] Haas S. and Grams E. (1998). “Page and Link 
Classifications: Connecting Diverse Resources”. 
Proceedings of Digital Libraries ’98 – Third ACM 
Conference on Digital Libraries, pp. 99-107. 
[16] Haas S. and Grams E. (2000). “Readers, Authors, and 
Page Structure: A Discussion of Four Questions 
Arising from a Content Analysis of Web Pages”. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 181-192. 
[17] Lim C. S., Lee K. J. and Kim G. C. (2005). 
“Automatic Genre Detection of Web Documents”. Su 
K., Tsujii J., Lee J., Kwong O. Y. (eds.) Natural 
Language Processing – IJCNLP 2004, Springer, 
Berlin Heidelberg. 
[18] Karlgren J. (2000). Stylistic Experiments for 
Information Retrieval, Thesis submitted for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy, Department of 
Linguistics, Stockholm University, Sweden. 
[19] Karlgren J. and Cutting D. (1994). “Recognizing Text 
Genre with Simple Metrics Using Discriminant 
Analysis”. Proceedings of the 15th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 
1994), Kyoto, Japan. 
[20] Kennedy A. and Shepherd M. (2005). “Automatic 
Identification of Home Pages on the Web”. 
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
[21] Kessler B., Numberg G. and Shütze, H. (1997), 
“Automatic Detection of Text Genre”. Proceedings of 
the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
[22] Maynard D., Tablan V., Ursu C., Cunningham H. and 
Wilks Y. (2001). “Named Entity Recognition from 
Diverse Text Types”. EuroConference in Recent 
Advances in NLP (RANLP - 2001), Tzigov Chark, 
Bulgaria. 
[23] Mehler A. (2006). “Text Linkage in the Wiki 
Medium - A Comparative Study”. Proceedings of the 
workshop on NEW TEXT. Wikis and blogs and other 
dynamic text sources (EACL 2006), Trento, Italy. 
[24] Meyer zu Eissen S. and Stein B. (2004). “Genre 
Classification of Web Pages: User Study and 
Feasibility Analysis”. Biundo S., Fruhwirth T. and 
Palm G. (eds.), KI 2004: Advances in Artificial 
Intelligence, Springer, Berlin Hedelberg New York, 
pp. 256-269. 
[25] Orlikowski W. and Yates J. (1994), “Genre 
repertoire: The structuring of communicative 
practices in organizations”. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 541-574. 
[26] Østerlund C. (2006). “Combining Genres: How 
Practice Matters”. Proceedings of the 39th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
[27] Rauber A. and Müller-Kögler A. (2001). “Integrating 
Automatic Genre Analysis into Digital Libraries”. 
Proceedings of ACM/IEEE joint Conference on 
Digital Libraries 2001, Roanoke, USA. 
[28] Rehm G. (2006). “Hypertext Types and Markup 
Languages”. Metzing D. and Witt A. (eds.), 
Linguistic Modelling of Information and Markup 
Languages. Springer, 2006 (in preparation). 
[29] Rosso M. (2005). Using Genre to Improve Web 
Search, PhD dissertation submitted for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, USA. 
[30] Roussinov D., Crowston K., Nilan M., Kwasnik B., 
Cai J. and Liu X. (2001), “Genre Based Navigation 
on the Web”. Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 
[31] Santini, Forthcoming. Automatic Identification of 
Genre in Web Pages, PhD thesis, University of 
Brighton, United Kingdom.  
[32] Santini M., Power R. and Evans R. (2006). 
“Implementing a Characterization of Genre for 
Automatic Genre Identification of Web Pages”. 
Proceeding of Joint Conference of the International 
Committee on Computational Linguistics and the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(COLING/ACL 2006), Poster Session, Sydney, 
Australia. 
[33] Santini M. (2006). “Identifying Genres of Web 
Pages”. Proceeding of TALN 2006 (Traitement 
Automatique des Langues Naturelles), Leuven, 
Belgium. 
[34] Shepherd M., Watters C. and Kennedy A. (2004). 
“Cybergenre: Automatic Identification of Home 
Pages on the Web”. Journal of Web Engineering Vol. 
3, No. 3 & No. 4, pp 236-251 
[35] Shepherd M. and Watters C. (2004). “Identifying 
Web Genre: Hitting a Moving Target”, Proceedings 
of the WWW2004 Conference. Workshop on 
Measuring Web Search Effectiveness: The User 
Perspective, New York, USA. 
[36] Shepherd M. and Watters C. (1998). “The Evolution 
of Cybergenre”. Proceedings of the 31st Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 
[37] Shepherd M. and Watters C. (1999). “The 
Functionality Attribute of Cybergenres”. Proceedings 
of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
9
[38] Stamatatos E., Fakotakis N. and Kokkinakis G. 
(2000). “Text Genre Detection Using Common Word 
Frequencies”. Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 
2000), Saarbrücken, Germany. 
[39] Swales J. (1990), Genre Analysis. English in 
academic and research settings. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
[40] Tyrväinen P. and Päivärinta T. (1999). “On 
Rethinking Organizational Document Genres for 
Electronic Document Management”. Proceedings of 
the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. 
[41] Waller R. (1987). The typographic contribution to 
language, Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor 
of Philosophy, University of Reading, UK. 
[42] Watters C. and Shepherd M. (1997). “The Digital 
Broadsheet: An Evolving Genre. Proceedings of The 
30th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. 
[43] Yates J. and Orlikowski W. (1992), “Genres of 
organizational communication: A structural approach 
to studying communications and media”. Academy of 
Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 229-326. 
[44] Yates S. and Sumner T. (1997). “Digital Genres and 
the New Burden of Fixity”. Proceedings of the 30th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007
10
