Chapter 1
Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web
Concepts and Research Questions
Marina Santini, Alexander Mehler, and Serge Sharoff
1.1 Why Is Genre Important?
Genre, in the most generic definition, takes the meaning “kind; sort; style” (OED).
A more specialised definition of genre in OED reads: “A particular style or category
of works of art; esp. a type of literary work characterised by a particular form,
style, or purpose.” Similar definitions are found in other dictionaries, for instance,
OALD reads “a particular type or style of literature, art, film or music that you can
recognise because of its special features”. Broadly speaking, then, generalising from
lexicographic definitions, genre can be seen as a classificatory principle based on a
number of characterising attributes.
Traditionally, it was Aristotle, in his attempt to classify existing knowledge, who
started genre analysis and defined some attributes for genre classification. Aristotle
sorted literary production into different genre classes by focussing on the attributes
of purpose and conventions.1
After him, through the centuries, numberless definitions and attributes of the
genre of written documents have been provided in differing fields, including literary
criticism, linguistics and library and information science. With the advent of digital
media, especially in the last 15 years, the potential of genre for practical appli-
cations in language technology and information technology has been vigorously
emphasised by scholars, researchers and practitioners.
M. Santini (B)
KYH, Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: marinasantini.ms@gmail.com
1 More precisely, “in the Poetics, Aristotle writes, ‘the medium being the same, and the objects [of
imitation] the same, the poet may imitate by narration – in which case he can either take another
personality as Homer does, or speak in his own person, unchanged – or he may present all his
characters as living and moving before us’ . . . . The Poetics sketches out the basic framework
of genre; yet this framework remains loose, since Aristotle establishes genre in terms of both
convention and historical observation, and defines genre in terms of both convention and purpose”.
Glossary available at The Chicago School of Media Theory, retrieved April 2008.
A. Mehler et al. (eds.), Genres on the Web, Text, Speech and Language
Technology 42, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-9178-9_1,
C© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010
3
4 M. Santini et al.
But why is genre important? The short answer is: because it reduces the cognitive
load by triggering expectations through a number of conventions. Put in another
way, genres can be seen as sets of conventions that transcend individual texts, and
create frames of recognition governing document production, recognition and use.
Conventions are regularities that affect information processing in a repeatable man-
ner [29]. Regularities engage predictions about the “type of information” contained
in the document. Predictions allow humans to identify the communicative purposes
and the context underlying a document. Communicative purposes and context are
two important principles of human communication and interactions. In this respect,
genre is then an implicit way of providing background information and suggesting
the cognitive requirements needed to understand a text. For instance, if we read
a sequence of short questions and brief answers (conventions), we might surmise
that we are reading FAQs (genre); we then realize that the purpose of the doc-
ument is to instruct or inform us (expectations) about a particular topic or event
of interest. When we are able to identify and name a genre thanks to a recurrent
set of regular traits, the functions of the document and its communicative context
immediately build up in our mind. Essentially, knowing the genre to which a text
belongs leads to predictions concerning form, function and context of communica-
tion. All these properties together define what Bateman calls the “the most important
theoretical property” of genre for empirical study, namely the power of predic-
tivity [9, p. 196]. The potential of predictivity is certainly highly attractive when
the task is to come to terms with the overwhelming mass of information available
on the web.
1.1.1 Zooming In: Information on the Web
The immense quantity of information on the web is the most tangible benefit (and
challenge) that the new medium has endowed us as web users. This wealth of infor-
mation is available either by typing a URL (suggested by other web external or web
internal sources) or by typing a few keywords (the query) in a search box. The web
can be seen as the Eldorado of information seekers.
However, if we zoom in a little and focus our attention on the most common
web documents, i.e. written texts, we realize that finding the “right” information
for one’s need is not always straightforward. Indeed, a common complaint is that
users are overwhelmed by huge amounts of data and are faced with the challenge
of finding the most relevant and reliable information in a timely manner. For some
queries we can get thousands of hits. Currently, commercial search engines (like
Google and Yahoo!) do not provide any hint about the type of information con-
tained in these documents. Web users may intuit that the documents in the result list
contain a topic that is relevant to their query. But what about other dimensions of
communication?
As a matter of fact, Information Retrieval (IR) research and products are currently
trying to provide other dimensions. For instance, some commercial search engines
provide specialised facilities, like Google Scholar or Google News. IR research is
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 5
active also in plagiarism detection,2 in the identification of context of interaction
and search,3 in the identification of the “sentiment” contained in a text,4 and in other
aspects affecting the reliability, trust, reputation5 and, in a word, the appropriateness
of a certain document for a certain information need.
Still, there are a number of other dimensions that have been little explored on
the web for retrieval tasks. Genre is one of these. The potential of genre to improve
information seeking and reduce information overload was highlighted a long time
ago by Karlgren and Cutting [47] and Kessler et al. [48]. Rosso [76] usefully lists a
pros and cons of investigating web retrieval by genres. He concludes on a positive
note, saying that genre “can be a powerful hook into the relevance of a document.
And, as far as the ever-growing web is concerned, web searches may soon need
all the hooks they can get”. Similarly, Dillon [29] states “genre attributes can add
significant value as navigation aids within a document, and if we were able to deter-
mine a finer grain of genre attributes than those typically employed, it might be
possible to use these as guides for information seekers”.
Yet, the idea that the addition of genre information could improve IR systems is
still a hypothesis. The two currently available genre-enabled prototypes – X-SITE
[36] and WEGA (see Chapter 8 by Stein et al., this volume) – are too preliminary
to support this hypothesis uncontroversially. Without verifying this hypothesis first,
it is difficult to test genre effectiveness in neighbouring fields like human-computer
interaction, where the aim is to devise the best interface to aid navigation and docu-
ment understanding (cf. [29]).
IR is not the only field that could thrive on the use of genre and its automatic clas-
sification. Traditionally, the importance of genre is fully acknowledged in research
and practice in qualitative linguistics (e.g. [96]), academic writing (e.g. [18]) and
other well-established and long-standing disciplines.
However, also empirical and computational fields – the focus of this vol-
ume – would certainly benefit from the application of the concept of genre. Many
researchers in different fields have already chosen the genre lens, for instance in
corpus-based language studies (e.g. [14, 24, 58]), automatic summarisation [87],
information extraction [40], creation of language corpora [82], e-government (e.g.
[37]), information science (e.g. [39] or [68]), information systems [70] and many
other activities.
The genres used by Karlgren and Cutting [47] were those included in the Brown
corpus. Kessler et al. [48] used the same corpus but were not satisfied with its
genre taxonomy, and re-labelled it according to their own nomenclature. Finding the
appropriate labels to name and refer to genre classes is one of the major obstacles
2 For instance, see “PAN’09: 3rd Int. PAN Workshop – 1st Competition on Plagiarism Detection”.
3 For instance, see “ECIR 2009 Workshop on Contextual Information Access, Seeking and
Retrieval Evaluation”.
4 For instance, see “CyberEmotions” http://www.cyberemotions.eu/
5 For instance, see “WI/IAT’09 Workshop on Web Personalization, Reputation and Recommender
Systems”.
6 M. Santini et al.
in genre research (see Chapter 3 by Rosso and Haas; Chapter 4 by Crowston et al.,
this volume). But, after all, the naming difficulty is very much connected with the
arduousness of defining genre and characterising genre classes.
1.2 Trying to Grasp the Ungraspable?
Although undeniably useful, the concept of genre is fraught with problems and
difficulties. Social scientists, corpus linguists, computational linguists and all the
computer scientists working on empirical and computational models for genre iden-
tification are well aware that one of the major stumbling blocks is the lack of a shared
definition of genre, and above all, of a shared set of attributes that uncontroversially
characterise genre.
Recently, new attempts have been made to pin down the essence of genre, espe-
cially of web genre (i.e. the genre of digital documents on the web, a.k.a. cyber-
genre).
A useful summary on the diverse perspectives is provided by Bateman [9]. Bate-
man first summarises the views of the most influential genre schools – namely Genre
as social action put forward by North American linguists and Genre as social semi-
otic supported by systemic-functional linguistics (SFL)6 – then he points out the
main requirements for a definition of genre for empirical studies:
Fine linguistic detail is a prerequisite for fine-grained genre classification since only then
do we achieve sufficient details (i) to allow predictions to be made and (ii) to reveal more
genres than superficially available by inspection of folk-labelling within a given discourse
community. When we turn to the even less well understood area involved in multimodal
genre, a fine-grained specification employing a greater degree of linguistic sophistication
and systematicity on the kind of forms that can be used for evidence for or against the
recognition of a genre category is even more important ([9, p. 196] – italics in the original)
Bateman argues that the current effort to characterise the kinds of documents
found on the web is seriously handicapped by a relatively simple notion of genre that
has only been extended minimally from traditional, non-multimodal conceptions.
In particular, he claims that the definition of cybergenre, or web genres, in terms
of <content, form, functionality>, taken as an extension of the original tuple
<content, form> is misleading (cf. also Karlgren, Chapter 2 in this volume). Also
the dual model proposed by Askehave and Nielsen [4], which extends the notion of
genre originally developed by Swales [89], is somewhat unsatisfying for Bateman.
Askehave and Nielsen [4] propose a two-dimensional genre model in which the
generic properties of a web page are characterised both in terms of a traditional text
perspective and in terms of the medium (including navigation). They motivate this
divide in the discussion of the homepage web genre. The traditional part of their
model continues to rely on Swales’ view of genre, in which he analyses genres at
6 The contraposition between these two schools from the perspective of teaching is also well
described in Bruce [18], Chapter 2.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 7
the level of purpose, moves and rhetorical strategies. The new part extends the tra-
ditional one by defining two modes that users take up in their interaction with new
media documents: users may adopt either a reading mode or a navigation mode.
Askehave and Nielsen argue that hyperlinks and their use constitute an essential
extension brought about by the medium. Against this and all the stances underpin-
ning hypertext and hyperlinking facilities as the crucial novelty, Bateman argues
that the consideration that a more appropriate definition of genre should not open
up a divide between digital and non digital artefacts.
Other authors, outside the multimodal perspective underpinned by Bateman [9],
propose other views. Some recent genre conceptions are summarised in the follow-
ing paragraphs.
Bruce [18] builds upon some of the text types proposed by Biber [11] and Biber
[12] to show the effectiveness of his own genre model. Bruce proposes a two-layered
model and introduces two benchmark terms: social genres and cognitive genres.
Social genres refer to “socially recognised constructs according to which whole texts
are classified in terms of their overall social purpose”, for instance personal letters,
novels and academic articles. Cognitive genres (a.k.a. text types by some authors)
refer to classification terms like narrative, expository, descriptive, argumentative or
instructional, and represent rhetorical purposes. Bruce points out that cognitive gen-
res and social genres are characterised by different kinds of features. His dual model,
originally devised for teaching academic writing, can be successfully applied to web
genre analysis, as shown by Bruce’s chapter in this volume.
The genre model introduced by Heyd [43] has been devised to assess whether
email hoaxes (EH) are a case of digital genre. Heyd provides a flexible framework
that can accommodate for discourse phenomena of all kinds and shapes. The author
suggests that the concept of genre must be seen according to four different param-
eters. The vertical view (parameter 1) provides levels of descriptions of increasing
specificity, that start from the most general level, passing through an intermediate
level, down to a sublevel. This view comes from prototype theory and appears to be
highly applicable to genre theory (cf. also [53]), with the intermediate level of genre
descriptions being the most salient one. The horizontal view (parameter 2) accounts
for genre ecologies, where it is the interrelatedness and interdependence of genre
that is emphasised. The ontological status (parameter 3) concerns the conceptual
framework governing how genre labels should be ascribed, i.e. by a top-down or a
bottom-up approach. In the top-down approach, it is assumed that the genre status
depends upon the identification of manifest and salient features, be they formal or
functional (such a perspective is adopted also in Chapter 7 by Sharoff, this vol-
ume); by contrast a bottom up approach assumes that the genre status is given by
how discourse communities perceive a discourse phenomenon to be a genre (see
Chapter 3 by Rosso and Haas; Chapter 4 by Crowston et al., this volume). The
issue of genre evolution (parameter 4) relates to the fast-paced advent and evolution
of language on the Internet and to the interrelation with socio-technical factors,
that give rise to genre creation, genre change and genre migration. Interestingly,
Heyd suggests that the frequently evoked hybridity of Computer Mediated Com-
munication (CMC) genres can be accounted for by the “transmedial stability that
8 M. Santini et al.
predominates on the functional sublevel while genre evolution occurs on the for-
mal sublevel: this explains the copresence of old and new in many digital genres”
[43, p. 201].
Martin and Rose [60] focus on the relations among five major families of genres
(stories, histories, reports, explanations and procedures) using a range of descriptive
tools and theoretical developments. Genre for Martin and Rose is placed within the
systemic functional model (SFL). They analyse the relationship between genres in
terms of a multidimensional system of oppositions related to the function of com-
munication, e.g. instructing vs. informing.
This overview on recent work on genre and web genre shows that the debate on
genre is still thrilling and heated. It is indeed an intellectually stimulating discussion,
but do we need so much theory for a definition of web genre for empirical studies
and computational applications?
1.2.1 In Quest of a Definition of Web Genre for Empirical Studies
and Computational Applications
Päivärinta et al. [70] condense in a nutshell the view on genre for information
systems:
[...] genres arguably emerge as fluid and contextual socio-organisational analytical units
along with the adoption of new communication media. On the other hand, more stabilised
genre forms can be considered sufficiently generic to study global challenges related to the
uses of communications technology or objective enough to be used as a means for automatic
information seeking and retrieval from the web.
Essentially, an interpretation of this statement would encourage the separation
of the theoretical side from the practical side of genre studies. After all, on the
empirical and computational side, we need very little. Say that, pragmatically, genre
represents a type of writing, which has certain features that all the members of that
genre should share. In practical terms, and more specifically for automatic genre
classification, this simply means:
1. take a number of documents belonging to different genres;
2. identify and extract the features that are shared within each type;
3. feed a machine learning classifier to output a mathematical model that can be
applied to unclassified documents.
The problem with this approach is that without a theoretical definition and char-
acterisation underpinning the concept of genre, it is not clear how to select the
members belonging to a genre class and in which way the genre labels “represent”
a selected genre class. A particular genre has conventions, but they are not fixed or
static. Genre conventions unfold along a continuum that ranges from weak to strong
genre conformism. Additionally, documents often cross genre boundaries and draw
on a number of characteristics coming from different genres. Spontaneous questions
then arise, including:
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 9
(A) Which are the features that we want use to draw the similarities or differences
between genre classes? (B) Who decides the features? (C) How many features are
really the core features of a genre class? (D) Who decides how many raters must
agree on the same core feature set and on the same genre names in order for a
document to belong to a specific genre? (E) Are the features that are meaningful for
humans equally meaningful for a computational/empirical model? (F) Are genre
classes that are meaningful for humans equally meaningful for a computational
model? And so on and so forth.
Apparently, theoretical/practical definitions of genres have no consequence
whatsoever when deciding about the actual typification of the genre classes and
genre labels required to build empirical and computational models. This gap
between definitions and empirical/classification studies has been pointed out by
Andersen, who notes that freezing or isolating genre, statistically or automat-
ically, dismantles action and context (Andersen, personal communication; cf.
also Andersen [2, 3]), the driving forces of genre formation and use. In this
way, genres become lifeless texts, merely characterized by formal structural
features.
In summary, we are currently in a situation where there is the need to exploit
the predictability inherent in the concept of genre for empirical and computational
models, while genre researchers are striving to find an adequate definition of genre
that can be agreed upon and shared by a large community. Actually, the main diffi-
culty is to work out optimal methods to define, select and populate the constellation
of genres that one wishes to analyse or identify without hindering replication and
comparison.
1.3 Empirical and Computational Approaches
to Genre: Open Issues
Before moving on to the actual chapters, the next three sections focus on the most
important open issues that characterise current empirical and computational genre
research. These open issues concern the nature of web documents (Section 1.3.1),
the construction and use of corpora collected from the web (Section 1.3.2) and the
design of computational models (Section 1.3.3).
1.3.1 Web Documents
While paper genres tend to be more stable and controlled given the restrictions or
guidelines enforced by publishers or editors, on the web centrifugal forces are at
work. Optimistically, Yates and Sumner [97] and Rehm [75] state that the process
of imitation and the urge for mutual understanding act as centripetal forces. Yet,
web documents appear much more uncontrolled and unpredictable if compared to
publications on paper.
10 M. Santini et al.
First of all, what is a web document? On the web, the boundary of a document is
unclear. Is a web document a single file? If so, a frame composing a web page
could be an autonomous web document. Or is it the individual web page? But
then where is the core information in a web page? Can we identify it clearly? Web
pages can be just navigational or both navigational and content bearing. How many
autonomous texts can be found in a individual web pages? Maybe it is safer to iden-
tify the web document with a web site as a whole? Where then is the boundary of a
web site?
It appears evident that on the web the granularity of documents cannot be kept
implicit, because texts with different content and functions are tiled and connected
together more tightly than on paper documents, where the physical pages act, some-
times, as “fences” that separate different contents and functions.
For instance, if we compare a daily newspaper like The Times, and its web coun-
terpart, Timesonline,7 we can realize that the “paper” gives a much more static status
to the concept of “document”. On the paper too, a document can be interpreted
at various degrees of granularity. For instance, a single text (like an editorial or a
commercial advertisement) is a document; a page (like the newspaper frontpage)
is a document; and a medium (like a newspaper or a book) is a document as well.
But on the web, hyperlinking, search facilities, special features (like dynamic mar-
quees), and other technicalities make the concept of documents much more dynamic
and flexible. This is evident if we compare the same document granularity on the
paper and on the web. Figure 1.1 shows an online frontpage (LHS) and a paper
frontpage (RHS). Both the graphic appearance and the functionality associated with
these documents differ. The basic idea of providing an entry point with snippets
of the contents is maintained in both media,8 but the online frontpage has also a
corollary of interactive activities, such as menus, search boxes, and dynamic texts.
Additionally, past editions or news articles are immediately available by clicking on
the archive link. While the paper frontpage is a self-contained unity, with internal
cross-references and occasional citations to external sources, the online frontpage
has no boundaries, each web page or each section of a web page can be connected
to both internal and external pages. Interactivity, multimodality and dynamic con-
tent make the online frontpage different from a paper frontpage. While the paper
frontpage has the physical boundary of the first page in a newspaper, and one can
dwell on it, the online frontpage is a gateway, i.e. a navigational page providing
access to other pages. It becomes clear, then, that when working with web docu-
ments, although all levels of granularity are plausible, there is the need to spell out
explicitly and justify the unit of analysis.
Essentially, web genres are composite functional types of web-based communi-
cation. For this reason, in order to make them an object of automatic classification
we need to decide on the reference units of their manifestations. That is, we need
7 Global edition: http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/global/, or UK edition http://www.timesonline.
co.uk/tol/news/
8 As noted by Bateman [9] functionality belongs to both paper and web documents.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 11
Fig. 1.1 Frontpage of a web newspaper vs. its printed counterpart
to decide which document structures of the web are attributed to web genres: e.g.,
self-contained pages [78] or their constituents [74, 75, 88, 94], websites [57, 65]
or even larger units such as, for example, domains consisting of several websites
[15]. When it comes to modelling such web document structures as instances of
web genres, we realise that the vector space approach (see Part III, this volume) is
only one of many ways to model genre computationally. One reason is that if one
had to choose a single characteristic of genres on the web, then the linkage of their
instances by hyperlinks would be a prime candidate (see Part IV, this volume). Web
genres are manifested by pages [78, 79] that are interlinked to create, in effect, larger
units above the level of single pages. Thus, any decision on the manifestation unit
of web genres should clarify the role of hyperlink-based structure formation as a
source of attributing these units to the focal web genres.
With respect to web content mining, Menczer [67] observes that the content of
a page is similar to that of the pages that link to it. We may vary this link-content
conjecture by saying that you shall know a web genre (though not solely) by the
link-based neighbourhood of its instances. Following this line of thinking we can
distinguish three levels of modelling web documents as instances of web genres
(cf. [62, 75]):
• On the micro level we analyse page-level [77] units and their constituents [88]
as self-contained (though not necessarily the smallest) manifestations of web
genres. These then enter into websites as more complex web genre units.
• On the meso level we deal with single or conglomerate websites and their
web-specific structure formation which, of course, is hardly found beyond the
web [15].
• On the macro level we deal with the web as a whole from the perspective of
complex network analysis and related approaches [30].
12 M. Santini et al.
In order to exemplify the differences of these three perspectives, take social
software as an example: here, web genre analysis may focus microscopically on
single weblogs [69] as instances of this genuine web genre or on networks of blogs
which are interlinked by trackbacks and related means [42, 52]. From the point of
view of a mesoscopic perspective we may analyse, more specifically, blog sites as
sub-networks of networked blogs whose connection may result from their discus-
sion of a common topic [52]. Last but not least, we gain a macroscopic perspec-
tive by taking into account blog network-external links which embed blogs into the
web as a whole. Analogously, by analysing Wikipedia as an instance of web-based
knowledge communication we may distinguish wiki-internal structures (e.g. in the
form of portals) from wiki-external structures (by analysing links from wikis to
pages of external sites) [61].
Genre research has focussed mostly on analysing micro and meso level units
as instances of web genres (see, for example, the contributions of Björneborn [16]
and Santini [80]). One might hesitate to consider macro level approaches under this
perspective. However, by analogy to text genres we know of the existence of macro
genres which are generated from instances of different (micro-level) genres [59].
In the web, this build-up of macro genres is more explicit on the instance level as
authors make use of hyperlinks to interconnect micro or meso level units of the
same macro genre. Further, the macro-level perspective opens the chance to study
both the network of web genres as a network of hypertext types (which evolve as
part of the same semiotic universe) as well as the network of their instances. This
gives a bipartite perspective on networking on the level of hypertext types and their
instances which is nearly inaccessible to text genre analysis.
Björneborn [15] (and in this volume) offers a rich terminology by distinguishing
four nested levels of structure formation (i.e., pages, directories, domains and sites)
together with a typology for the perspective classification of a link. A university
website, for example, is described as comprising different websites of various gen-
res (among other things, the difference between project homepages and personal
academic homepages) whereas, together with other university websites, it forms the
domain of academia. Thelwall et al. [92] generalise this model in terms of the Alter-
native Document Model. They do that by additionally distinguishing web spaces as
sub-networks of web documents demarcated, e.g., by geographic criteria.
If we, on the other hand, look on the micro level of structure formation in the web,
we see that the notion of logical document structure dominates the corresponding
range of models. By analogy to text documents [72] the idea is that the attribution
of a web document to a web genre is made more difficult by insufficiently explicit
logical document structures. This can come as a result of, e.g., the abuse of tags [6]
or the failure to use hyperlinks to connect functionally homogeneous, monomorphic
document units [66]. Manifestations of webgenres are analysed, for example, as
compound documents [31], as logical domains [54], as logical documents [55, 91] or
as multipage segments [25].9 Whatever is seen to be the exact unit of manifestation
9 See also Tajima et al. [90], Cohn and Hofmann [23] and Chakrabarti et al. [22] for topic-related
approaches in this line of research.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 13
of a web genre – say on the page level, below or above – approaches to learning
corresponding classifiers face the formation of hyperlink-based, network-inducing
structures apart from purely hierarchical text structures. Notwithstanding these dif-
ferences we have to state that whatever is seen to be the exact unit of manifestation
of a web genre – say on the page level, below or above – the corresponding classi-
fiers, in their approach to learning, face the challenge of forming hyperlink-based,
network-inducing structures that are fundamentally different from [or more complex
than] purely hierarchical text structures. It might be the case that more complex
graph models (above the level of tree-like structures) are needed to bring into focus
the web genre modelling of the future, which complete and complement the more
traditional vector space approaches.
One obvious consequence of the composite and diversified characterisation of
web documents is the necessity to devise classification schemes not constrained to
the single genre class assignment. Intuitively, there is a high likelihood that many
web documents (whatever their granularity) would fall into multiple genre classes,
and many would remain unclassified by genre because of a high degree of individu-
alisation or hybridism. Genre analysts also point out that the acknowledgement and
usage of genres are subjective and depend upon membership in a discourse commu-
nity (cf. Chapter 4 by Crowston et al., this volume). The flexibility of a classification
scheme would then account also for the subjectivity of use and recognition of genres
by web users. Since the web serves many communities and web users are exposed to
innumerable contacts, it would be wiser to devise a classification scheme addressing
this complexity in the future.
Importantly, the nature and the unit of analysis of web documents has not only
repercussions on genre classification schemes, but also affects genre evolution. Gen-
res are historical entities, they develop over time, and in response to social, cultural
and technological contexts (e.g. see Chapter 13 by Paolillo et al., this volume). Exist-
ing genres may simply go out of fashion, or undergo transformation. Frequently,
genres on the web evolve when they migrate from one medium to another (see
Fig. 1.1). They can also be created from scratch, due to new web technologies or new
contexts of interaction. The personal home page and blog genres are the classical
examples of web genres whose existence cannot be imagined outside the web. The
formation of new genres from an antecedent can also be monitored computationally
[64]. For example, it is easily predictable that the recent booming of social net-
works – from Facebook to Twitter and LinkedIn – will presumably destabilise and
change web genres like the personal home page and blog that were thought to be
“novel” up to very recently. The technology offered by social networks in creating
personal profiles, live feeds, blogging, notes and material of any kind at the same
time are clear signs that new genres are going to materialise soon.
In summary, web documents would require a flexible genre classification scheme
capable of making sense of (1) the composite structure of web documents at any
level of unit of analysis; (2) the complexity of interaction allowed by web doc-
uments; (3) the subjective and differing naming conventions due the membership
to different communities and finally (4) the tendency towards rapid change and
evolution of genre patterns.
14 M. Santini et al.
1.3.2 Corpora, Genres and the Web
According to John Sinclair, a corpus is “a collection of pieces of language that are
selected and ordered according to explicit linguistic criteria in order to be used as
a sample of the language” [85]. Criteria for selecting texts for a corpus can include
information about the authorship, audience or domain of its constituent texts, but
selection of texts by their genre is nearly always present as one of the main criteria
for designing a traditional corpus. For instance, the Brown Corpus, the first com-
puter corpus developed in the 1960s, was compiled using the following linguistic
criteria [51]:
• it was restricted to texts written originally in English by native speakers of Amer-
ican English (as far as this can be determined);
• the texts were first published in the United States in 1961;
• samples of entire texts were selected starting from a random sentence boundary
and ending by the first sentence boundary after an uninterrupted stretch of 2,000
words (this means that texts themselves had to be longer than 2,000 words);
• texts were selected from 15 text categories: (A) Press: reportage, (B) Press: edi-
torial, (C) Press: Reviews, (D) Religion, (E) Skill and hobbies, (F) Popular lore,
(G) Belles-lettres (biography, memoirs, etc.), (H) Miscellaneous: US Govern-
ment & House Organs, (J) Learned (i.e., research articles), (K) Fiction: general,
(L) Fiction: mystery and crime, (M) Fiction: science, (N) Fiction: adventure and
western, (P) Fiction: romance and love story, (R) Humor.
As we can see from this specification, the only variation among samples present
in the Brown Corpus concerns their text categories, which roughly correspond to
genres (the only possible exceptions are Religion, Skills and Hobbies, but even
they constitute distinct functional styles, which are normally associated with specific
genres, i.e., sermons and DIY magazines).
Further development of corpora, e.g., creation of the Bank of English [84], the
British National Corpus [5], or the American National Corpus [44], resulted in a
greater variety of parameters for describing their constituent texts, but they never-
theless classified them into genres, even if the genres in each corpus were defined in
various incompatible ways. For instance, the original release of the BNC classified
the written texts into their publication medium (e.g., book or periodical), domain
(commerce, social sciences or imaginative), and target audience. This provided an
opportunity to specify some genres by restricting one or more BNC metadata tags,
e.g., fiction corresponds to imaginative texts, research papers can be found by a
combination of tags coding texts from natural, applied or social sciences, aimed
at the professional audience, and not published as books. Since this situation was
treated as less than adequate, David Lee developed a system of 70 genre tags for
BNC documents [53], e.g., W_ac_natsci or W_ac_socsci for academic papers in
the domains of natural or social sciences.10
10 This is another example where a difference in the domain of a text contributes to a difference in
its genre.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 15
The situation with genres in web-derived corpora is a bit different. The majority
of large web corpora have not been collected in any pre-planned way with respect to
their target domains or genres. Collection of texts from the web normally involves
taking publicly accessible documents from a list of URLs. This means it is driven
by the availability of sources, which leaves many parameters of corpus collection,
such as genres, unspecified.
Some web corpora are created by “focused crawling”, which, in its simplest
form, involves selecting several websites containing a large number of texts which
are of interest to the corpus collector, and retrieving the entire set of texts from
these websites, e.g., the entire Wikipedia or webpages of major universities. More
advanced methods of focused crawling involve starting with a seed set of links
and then collecting links to other relevant websites, with the relevance assessed
by keywords and/or hypertext links between pages, as similar pages tend to have
more inter-connections with each other [21]. In all cases of focused crawling, the
seed set of URLs used for collecting a web corpus restricts its range of genres, but
does not define it precisely. For instance, articles retrieved from Wikipedia can be
biographies, time-lines of events, introductions to academic theories, some subtypes
of news items, etc., but they cannot include such genres as blogs, fiction, humour or
memoirs.
Another method for corpus collection relies on making automated queries to
a major search engine and retrieving webpages for the top N (10-20-100) URLs
returned by it. The choice of keywords affects the composition of the resulting cor-
pus to some extent. For instance, if a large number of specialised terms are used
in queries, e.g., amnesia, myoclonic, paroxysmal, the resulting corpus will contain
mostly highly technical medical texts and relatively few patient leaflets or news
items. Using common words from the general lexicon, e.g., picture, extent, raised,
events, results in a corpus with a variety of domains and text types [81]. On the other
hand, queries using function words (the, of, to) result in a larger number of index
pages [34].
Finally, web corpora usually contain a very large number of relatively small doc-
uments. The Brown Corpus contains 500 documents. The BNC, being 100 times
bigger in terms of word count, contains just 4,055 distinct documents, many of
which are composite texts collected from entire issues of newspapers, journals or
radio programmes. Given a small number of texts in traditional corpora it was feasi-
ble to annotate them with respect to genres while they were collected. On the other
hand, the number of documents in web corpora is considerably larger, e.g., exceed-
ing two million webpages for Web-as-Corpus projects developed at the University
of Bologna [7, 33]. Thus, their manual annotation is practically impossible. Their
genre composition is usually assessed indirectly by studying samples of their texts
or by comparing the frequencies of keywords extracted from them (however, see
Part III, this volume for a variety of methods for automatic classification of texts by
genre).
There are at least three factors that can influence the distribution of genres in
web-derived corpora:
16 M. Santini et al.
• some genres are not well represented on the web;
• a large number of documents are located in the “hidden web”, which is not acces-
sible to crawling;
• the process of corpus collection usually puts restrictions on file types retrieved
from the web.
The web is an enormous resource, with more and more texts appearing there in a
variety of languages. However, many genres are still underrepresented. This primar-
ily concerns copyrighted work aimed at a wider public audience, such as fiction and
non-fiction recreational reading. Their authors expect to receive royalties for their
effort, and their publishers do not normally provide free online access. Texts in these
genres do appear on the web, for instance, many amateur science-fiction authors
regular publish their works electronically under a Creative Commons licence, and
Project Gutenberg collects out-of-copyright fiction. However, the selection available
on the web is significantly skewed in comparison to offline fiction.
The hidden web (also called Deep Web) consists of pages that are difficult to
access by crawling. Some of them are dynamically generated in response to a user
query, e.g., some archived news items are stored in a database and can be retrieved
only by specifying their date or keywords. Some hidden webpages are ordinary
webpages which are not linked to any visible webpage, or which are accessible
only by a password (not usually available to the crawler) or via a mechanism
requiring some kind of user interaction, e.g., Javascript-based selection. Some esti-
mates put the total size of the hidden web to be 500 times bigger than the sur-
face web accessible to major search engines [41]. The hidden web is particularly
important for search engines, as their aim is to index every possible webpage.
This concern is less important for corpus collection, as a corpus is only a sample
of the totality of texts in a given language. However, understanding the compo-
sition of the hidden web is important as it affects the distribution of genres. For
instance, short descriptions of a large number of resources, such as synopses of
books in a library, are more likely to be in the hidden web (accessible by queries
to book names), so they are more likely to be underrepresented in web-derived
corpora.
Finally, some file types are inherently easier to deal with. For instance, it is easy
to retrieve plain text content from HTML pages, so HTML pages are more often
used for corpus collection in comparison to, say, Word documents, which need spe-
cial tools for retrieving textual content. PDF and Postscript files are commonly used
on the web to present publishable information, such as books, articles or brochures.
However, in terms of their internal format they contain a sequence of drawing prim-
itives, often, but not necessarily, corresponding to characters, so that it is difficult to
reconstruct the flow of text, spaces between words or even the encoding of non-Latin
characters. The situation with Flash objects (normally containing animation, but
often presenting a large amount of text) is even worse, as their drawing primitives
include motion of respective objects across the computer screen. In the end, many
formats apart from plain HTML files are often omitted from web-derived corpora,
skewing their genre diversity. In the modern web this is especially important for PDF
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 17
files, which are the preferred format for final typeset products, such as catalogues,
published research results or white papers. Often these texts are not available in the
form of HTML files.
In summary, although web corpora are designed to contain examples of texts in
exactly the same way as traditional corpora are, they are different in some respects
and there is no consensus on many important aspects.
In addition to the construction issues outlined above, there are also other contro-
versial issues related to formatting and cleaning webcorpora. In many cases tradi-
tional corpora were produced by scanning hard copies of texts and applying OCR
(optical character recognition) to the result. In other cases, texts were typed in from
scratch. In either case, traditional corpora do not preserve much information about
formatting, with the only possible exception of paragraph boundaries. In the end, a
text stored in a traditional corpus often consists of a flat sequence of sentences with
little typographic information preserved.11
On the other hand, Web corpora coming from HTML pages contain relatively
rich markup. As far as corpus collection is concerned, this markup takes three dif-
ferent forms:
1. navigation frames enabling navigation on a complex website (topics/subtopics,
pages on related topics, calendar links, etc); and
2. text-internal hyperlinks, when running text is enriched with hypertextual markup
linking to other relevant documents or other sections of the same document;
3. non-hypertextual markup, such as explicit formatting of headings, lists,
tables, etc.
When webpages are collected to be used as a corpus for linguistic studies, one
approach to corpus collection pays more attention to selecting running text. In this
approach extra efforts are devoted to cleaning webpages from unwanted navigation
frames [8]. The rationale behind this “cleaning” approach is to make web-derived
corpora useful for research in natural language processing, lexicography or transla-
tion, because expressions frequently occurring in navigation frames, such as Current
events, See also or Have your say, can considerably distort the language model.
Similarly, text-internal links are often discarded, while their text remains, so that
web corpora become more similar to their traditional counterparts.
Some portions of non-hypertextual markup in the form of headings and lists
are often preserved in the cleaning approach, since deletion of this information
again distorts the language model by introducing incomplete sentences within stan-
dard running text. Finally, some markup present in many webpages is used for
presentational purposes only. For example, web designers often introduce table cells
to separate different parts of text, e.g., navigation frames from the main body, or
a new reply message in a forum from a quote from a previous message, whereas
11 After collecting texts, developers of traditional corpora often introduce their own set of anno-
tation layers, such as POS tagging, semantic or metatextual markup, but such layers are not taken
from original texts in the form they have been published.
18 M. Santini et al.
from the viewpoint of the content, such elements can be considered as distinct para-
graphs. Therefore, the cleaning approach normally discards information about tables
or replaces them with paragraph boundaries.
This approach to collecting and distributing webcorpora is useful in some
respects, since it makes web-derived corpora closer to their offline counterparts.
However, it discards a lot of information and makes the study of unique features
of web genres more difficult. This also makes it harder to detect web genres auto-
matically, as some crucial information for genre detection is present in the form of
discarded features, e.g., navigation frames are more common in particular genres,
and, similarly, documents of the same genre are often cross-linked. As a matter
of fact, many genre collections built for classification purposes maintain original
webpages in their entirety without attempting to clean them artificially (e.g. see the
KI-04 corpus and the 7-webgenre collections described in Chapter 5 by Santini, this
volume; see also the super-genre collection used in Chapter 10 by Lindemann and
Littig, this volume).
In summary, at the current stage of genre research no standards have been agreed
for the construction of web genre corpora. Decisions, choices and operationalisa-
tions are made subjectively, following individual needs. However, projects are put
forward to establish shared standards (see Chapter 16 by Santini et al., the conclud-
ing chapter of this volume).
1.3.3 Empirical and Computational Models of Web Genres
The approach dominating automatic genre identification research is based on super-
vised machine learning, where each document is represented like a vector of features
(a.k.a. the vector space approach), and a supervised algorithm (e.g. Support Vector
Machines) automatically builds a genre classification model by “learning” from how
a set of features “behave” in exemplar documents (e.g. see Chapter 7 by Sharoff;
Chapter 6 by Kim and Ross, this volume). Many different feature sets have been
tried out to date, e.g. function words, character n-grams, Parts of Speech (POS),
POS tri-grams, Bag of Words (BOW), or syntactic chunks. Most of these feature
sets have been tested on different genre corpora, differing in terms of number and
nature of genres, and in terms of number of documents per genre. Although some
comparative experiments have been carried out, the absence of genre benchmarks
or reference corpora built with shared and agreed upon standards makes any com-
parison difficult, because existing genre collections have been built with subjective
criteria, as pointed out in the previous section. A partial and temporary remedy to
this situation has been adopted recently, i.e. cross-testing (see Chapter 5 by Santini,
this volume).
Although the vector space approach is, for the time being, the most popular
approach, in this last section of the open issues, we would like to outline a more
complex view of web genres as source of inspiration and food for thought in future
research. In Section 1.3.1, we suggested locating instances of web genres on, above
and below the level of websites. The decision on this manifestation level belongs to
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 19
a series of related decisions which have to be made when it comes to modelling web
genres. In this section, we briefly describe four of these decisions when the focus is
on structure.
• Deciding on the level of web genre units as the output objects of web genre clas-
sification: Chapter 10 by Lindemann and Littig (this volume) present a model of
web genre classification at what they call the supergenre level. This concerns a
level of functional units which are composed of one or more genre level units.
Interestingly, Lindemann and Littig consider websites as manifestation units of
these supergenres. From that perspective we get the level of supergenres, of
genres themselves and of subgenres as candidate output objects of a web-genre-
related classification. Note that we may alternatively speak of macro, meso and
micro (level) genres as has been done above. Conversely, Chapter 5 by Santini
(this volume) and all approaches reviewed by her consider generic units of a
comparative level of abstractness, but focus on web pages as their manifestation
units. This divergence opens the possibility of a many-to-many relation between
the output units of classification, i.e., the types which are attributed, and the input
objects of classification, that is, the instances to which these types are attributed.
Thus, by opting for some micro-, meso- or macro-level web genres one does
not automatically determine the manifestation unit in the form of websites, web
pages or page constituents. From that perspective, a decision space is created
in which any location should be substantiated to keep replicability of the model
and comparability with related approaches. By looking for what has been done
towards such a systematisation we have to state that it is like weeding the garden,
and that we are rather at the beginning.
• Deciding on the level of manifestation units as the input objects of web genre
classification: the spectrum of this decision has already been outlined above.
• Deciding on the features to be extracted from the input objects as reference val-
ues of classification: when classifying input objects (e.g. web pages or sites) by
attributing them to some output units (as elements of a certain genre palette),
we need to explore certain features of the input objects. Among other things, we
may explore distinctive features on the level of graphemes [46, 57], linguistic
features in a more traditional sense [17, 38, 49, 80, 83, 86], features related
to non-hyperlink-based discourse structures [19] or structural features induced
by hyperlinks [16, 26, 57, 64]. In Section 1.3.1 we put special emphasis on
less-frequently considered structure-related features of web genres. This is done
according to the insight that they relate to an outstanding characteristic of genres
on the web.
• Deciding on the classifier model to be used to perform the classification: facing
complementary or even competing feature models as being inevitable in web
genre modelling, composite classifiers which explore divergent feature resources
have been common in web genre modelling from the beginning [45]. In line
with this reasoning we may think of web genre models which simultaneously
operate on nested levels of generic resolution. More specifically, we may distin-
guish single-level from multi-level approaches, which capture at least two levels
20 M. Santini et al.
of web genre structuring: that is, approaches which attribute, for example, genre
categories to websites subject to attributing subgenre categories to their elemen-
tary pages (other ways of defining two-level genre models can be found in Chap-
ter 5 by Santini; Chapter 15 by Bruce, this volume). Note that the majority of
approaches to web genre modelling realize single-level models by mapping web
pages onto genre labels subject to one or more bag-of-features models. For this
reason, multi-level approaches may be a starting point for building future models
in this area.
By analogy to Biber [13] we may say that the structure of a web document corre-
lates with its function, that is, with the genre it manifests. In other words: different
genres have different functions, so that their instances are structured differently. As a
consequence, the structure of a web document, whether a site, page or page segment,
can be made a resource of feature extraction in web genre tagging. We summarise
five approaches focussing on structure in the following list:
• Bag-of-Structural-Features Approaches: A classic approach to using structural
features in hypertext categorisation is from Amitay et al. [1] – see Pirolli et al.
[71] for an earlier approach in this line of research. Amongst others, Amitay et al.
distinguish up, down, side and external links by exploring directory structures
as manifested by URLs. They then count their frequencies as structure-related
features. The idea is to arrive at a bag-of-structural features: that is, to analyse
reference units whose frequencies are evaluated as dimensions of corresponding
feature vectors. A comprehensive approach to using structure-related features in
line with this approach is proposed by Lindemann and Littig [57].12 They explore
a wide range of features, similar to Amitay et al. [1], by including features which,
amongst others, are based on the file format and the composition of the URL
of the input pages. See also Kanaris and Stamatatos [46] who build a bag of
HTML tags as one feature model of web genre classification (see Santini [80] for
a comparative study of this and related approaches).
Generally speaking, linguistics has clarified the fundamental difference
between explicit layout structure, implicit logical (document) structure and hid-
den semantic or functional structure [13, 10, 72]. From that perspective one
does not assume, for example, that URL-based features are reliable indicators
of logical web document structures. Rather, one has to assume – as is done by
Lindemann and Littig [57] – an additional level of the manifestation of web gen-
res, that is, their physical storage (including file format and directory structures).
In any event, it is important to keep these structural levels apart as these are
different resources for guessing the functional identity of a website. This can be
exemplified by Amitay et al. [1] who introduce the notion of a side link, which
exists between pages located in the same directory (cf. Eiron and McCurley [31]
for a directory-based notion of up, down and side links). It is easy to construct
12 See Lim et al. [56] for a study of the impact of different types of features including structural
ones.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 21
an example where a side link, which in terms of its physical storage manifests a
paratactic link, is actually a hypotactic down or up link when being considered
from the point of view of logical document structure [62]. Thus, any approach
which explores structural features should clarify its standpoint regarding the dif-
ference of physical storage, layout and logical document structure.
• Website-Tree- and Page-DOM-related Models: A bag-of-structural-features
approach straightforwardly adapts the bag-of-words approach of text categori-
sation by exploring the link and page structure of a site. This is an efficient and
easy way to take web structure into account [57]. However, a more expressive and
less abstract way to map this structure is to focus on the hierarchical Document
Object Model (DOM) of the HTML representation of pages [28] or, additionally,
on the mostly hierarchical kernel of the structure of a website [32]. Starting from
the tree-like representation of a website, Ester et al. [32] build a Markov tree
model which predicts the web genre C of a site according to the probability that
the paths of this tree have been generated under the regime of C . Tian et al. [93]
build a related model based on a hierarchical graph model in which the tree-like
representation of websites consists of vertices which denote the DOM tree of
their elementary pages. See Diligenti et al. [28], Frasconi et al. [35] and Raiko
et al. [73] for related models of web document structures. See Chakrabarti [20]
for an early model which explores DOM structure for hypertext categorisation
(however with a focus on topical categorisations). Further, see Wisniewski et al.
[95] for an approach to transforming DOM trees into semantically interpreted
document models.
• Beyond Hierarchical Document Models: The preceding paragraph has presented
approaches which start from tree-like models of web documents. This raises the
question for approaches based on more expressive graph models. Such an alter-
native is proposed by Dehmer and Emmert-Streib [26]. Their basic idea is to use
the page or site internal link structure to induce a so-called generalised tree from
the kernel document structure, say, a DOM tree. The former is more informative
than the latter as it additionally comprises up, down and lateral edges [63] which
generalise the kernel tree into a graph. Note that this approach is powerful enough
to represent page internal and external structures and, therefore, grasps a large
amount of website structure. However, it maps structured data onto feature vec-
tors which are input to classical approaches of vector-based classifications and,
thus, departs from the track of Markov modelling. See Denoyer and Gallinari [27]
who develop a Markov-related classifier of web document structures which, in
principle, can handle Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG). See alternatively Mehler
[64] who develops a structure-based classifier of social ontologies as part of the
Wikipedia. Extending the notion of a generalised tree, this model generalises the
notion of a DAG in terms of generalised nearly acyclic directed graphs in order
to get highly condensed representations of web-based ontologies with hundreds
and thousands of vertices.
• Two-level Approaches to Exploring Web Genre Structures: The majority of
approaches considered so far have been concerned with classifying units of web
documents of a homogeneous nature – whether pages, their segments or complete
22 M. Santini et al.
websites. This leaves plenty of room for considering approaches which perform,
say, a generic categorisation of websites, subject to the categorisation of their
elementary pages. Alternatively, we may proceed according to a feature-vector
approach by representing a website by a composite vector as the result of aggre-
gating the feature vectors of its pages (cf. the “superpage” approach of Ester
et al. [32]). However, such an approach disregards the structure of a site because
it represents it, once more, as a bag of features. Therefore, alternative models
are required. Such an approach has been proposed by Kriegel and Schubert [50]
with respect to topic-related classifications. They represent websites as vectors
whose dimensions represent the topics of their pages so that the sites are classified
subject to the classification of the pages. Mehler et al. [66] have shown that web
genres may be manifested by whole sites, single pages or page segments. Facing
this variety, the genre-related segmentation of pages and their fusion into units of
the logical web document structure is an important step to grasping macro, meso
and micro level units of web genres in a single model. Such a segmentation and
fusion algorithm is proposed by Waltinger et al. [94] for web pages. The idea
is to arrive at monomorphic segments as manifestations of generic units on the
sub-genre level. This is done by segmenting pages using their visual depiction –
as a byproduct this overcomes the tag abuse problem [6] which results from using
HTML tags for manifesting layout as well as logical document structures. A
paradigmatic approach to a two-level website classification which combines the
multi-level manifestation perspective with a tree-like structure model is proposed
by Tian et al. [93], who build a hierarchical graph whose vertices represent the
DOM structure of the page constituents of the corresponding site.
• Multi-Resource Approaches – Integrating Thematic with Structural Features:
Almost all approaches discussed so far focus on structural features. However,
it is obvious that one must combine structural with content-related features by
considering the structural position of content units within the input pages. See,
for example, Joachims et al. [45] who study combined kernels trained on bag-
of-words and bag-of-links models, respectively. See also Tian et al. [93] who
integrate a topic model with a DOM-related classifier, with a focus on thematic
classification.
In summary, as already suggested in Section 1.3.1, more focus on structure is
needed to enhance web genre modelling in the future. We conjecture that a closer
interaction between vector space approaches and structure-oriented methods can
increase our understanding of web genres as a whole, thus providing a more realistic
computational representation of genres on the web.
1.4 Conclusions
In this introduction, we emphasised why the study of genres on the web is important,
and how empirical studies and computational models of web genres, with all their
challenges, are the cutting edge of many research fields.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 23
In our view, modern genre research is no longer confined to philosophical, liter-
ary and linguistic studies, although it can receive enlightment from these disciplines.
Undoubtedly, Aristotle, with his systematic classificatory mind, can still be consid-
ered the unquestioned initiator of genre studies in the Western World.13 However,
modern genre research transcends the manual and qualitative classification of texts
on paper to become a meta-discipline that contributes to and delves into all the
fields grounded in digital media, where quantitative studies of language, language
technology, information and classification systems, as well as social sciences play
an important role.
In this respect, this volume contributes to the current genre discussion in six
ways:
1. It depicts the state of the art of genre research, presenting a wide range of con-
ceptualisations of genre together with the most recent empirical findings.
2. It presents an overview of computational approaches to genre classification,
including structural models.
3. It focuses on the notion of genres “for the web”, i.e., for the medium that is
pervading all aspects of modern life.
4. It provides in-depth studies of several divergent genres on the web.
5. It points out several representational, computational and text-technological
issues that are specific to the analysis of web documents.
6. Last but not least, it presents a number of intellectually challenging positions and
approaches that, we hope, will stimulate and fertilise future genre research.
1.5 Outline of the Volume
Apart from the introduction, the volume is divided into four parts, each focussing
on a specific facet of genre research.
PART II (Identifying the Sources of Web Genres) includes three chapters that
analyse the selection and palettes of web genres from different perspectives.
Karlgren stresses how genre classes are both sociological constructs and sty-
lostatistically observable objects, and how these two views can inform each
other. He monitors genre variation and change by observing reader and author
behaviour.
Crowston and co-workers report on a study to develop a “bottom-up” genre
taxonomy. They collect a total of 767 (then reduced to 298) genre terms from 52
respondents (teachers, journalists and engineers) engaged in natural use of the Web.
Rosso and Haas propose three criteria for effective labels and report experimental
findings based on 300 users.
13 There are indeed many other scholars in other parts of the world, such as the Mao school in
ancient China, who have pondered about the concept of genre.
24 M. Santini et al.
PART III (Automatic Web Genre Identification) presents the state of the art in
automatic genre identification based on the traditional vector space approach. This
part includes chapters showing how automatic genre identification is needed in a
wide range of disciplines, and can be achieved with a wide range of features.
In computational linguistics, Santini highlights the need for evaluating the
generality and scalability of genre models. For this reason, she suggests using cross-
testing techniques, while optimistically waiting for the construction of a genre ref-
erence corpus.
Kim and Ross present powerful features that perform well with a large number
of genres, which have been selected for digital library applications.
In corpus linguistics, Sharoff is looking for a genre palette and genre model that
can permit comparisons between traditional corpora and web corpora. He proposes
seven functional genre categories that could be applied to virtually any text found
on the Web.
Stein and co-workers present implementation aspects for a genre-enabled web
search. They focus on the generalisation capability of web genre retrieval models,
for which they propose new evaluation measures and a quantitative analysis.
Braslavski studies the effects of aggregating genre-related and text relevance
rankings. His results show moderate positive effects, and encourage further research
in this direction.
PART IV (Structure-oriented Models of Web Genres) focuses on genres at the
website or network level, where structural information play a primary role.
Lindemann and Littig propose a vector-space approach for the automatic identi-
fication of super-genres at website level with excellent results.
Dehmer and Emmert-Streib discuss a graph-based perspective for automatically
analysing web genre data by mining graph patterns representing web-based hyper-
text structures. The contribution emphasises how an approach entirely different from
the vector space model can be effective.
Björneborn outlines an exploratory empirical investigation of genre connectivity
in an academic web space, i.e., how web page genres are connected by links. The
pages are categorised into nine institutional and eight personal genre classes. The
author builds a genre network graph to discuss changes in page genres and page
topics along link paths.
PART V (Case Studies of Web Genres) focuses on the empirical observation of
emerging web genres.
Paolillo and co-workers apply the social network approach to detect genre emer-
gence in the amateur Flash community by observing social interaction. Their results
indicate that participants’ social network positions are strongly associated with the
genres of Flash they produce, and this contributes to the establishment of genre
norms.
Grieve and co-workers apply Biber’s multi-dimensional analysis to investigate
functional linguistic variation in Internet blogs, with the goal of identifying text
types that are distinguished linguistically. Two main sub-types of blogs are identi-
fied: personal blogs and thematic blogs.
Bruce first reviews approaches to the notion of genre as a method of categorisa-
tion of written texts, leading to the presentation of a rationale for the dual approach
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 25
of social genre and cognitive genre. This approach is used to analyse 10 sample
texts of the participatory journalism genre. The author concludes by saying that an
adequate operationalisation of a genre as a category of written texts, including a
web genre, should be able to account for the socially-constructed cognitive, organi-
sational, and linguistic elements of genre knowledge.
The books ends with a view of possible future directions.
References
1. Amitay, E., D. Carmel, A. Darlow, R. Lempel, and A. Soffer. 2003. The connectivity sonar:
Detecting site functionality by structural patterns. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference
on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 38–47. University of Nottingham, UK.
2. Andersen, J. 2008. The concept of genre in information studies. Annual Review of Information
Science & Technology 42:339, 2007.
3. Andersen, J. 2008. Bringing genre into focus: Lis and genre between people, texts, activity
and situation. Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 34(5):
31–34.
4. Askehave, I., and A.E. Nielsen. 2005. Digital genres: A challenge to traditional genre theory.
Information Technology & People 18(2):120–141.
5. Aston, G., and L. Burnard. 1998. The BNC handbook: Exploring the British National Corpus
with SARA. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
6. Barnard, D.T., L. Burnard, S.J. DeRose, D.G. Durand, and C.M. Sperberg-McQueen. 1995.
Lessons for the World Wide Web from the text encoding initiative. In Proceedings of the 4th
international World Wide Web conference “The Web Revolution”. Boston, MA.
7. Baroni, M., and A. Kilgarriff. 2006. Large linguistically-processed Web corpora for multiple
languages. In Companion Volume to Proceedings of the European Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, 87–90. Trento.
8. Baroni, M., F. Chantree, A. Kilgarriff, and S. Sharoff. 2008. Cleaneval: A competition for
cleaning web pages. In Proceedings of the 6th Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC 2008). Marrakech.
9. Bateman, J.A. 2008. Multimodality and genre: A foundation for the systematic analysis of
multimodal documents. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
10. Bateman, J.A., T. Kamps, J. Kleinz, and K. Reichenberger. 2001. Towards constructive
text, diagram, and layout generation for information presentation. Computational Linguistics
27(3):409–449.
11. Biber, D. 1988. Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
12. Biber, D. 1989. A typology of English texts. Linguistics 27(3):43–58.
13. Biber, D. 1995. Dimensions of register variation: A cross-linguistic comparison. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
14. Biber, D., U. Connor, and T.A. Upton. 2007. Discourse on the move: Using corpus analysis to
describe discourse structure. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
15. Björneborn, L. 2004. Small-world link structures across an academic web space: A library and
information science approach. PhD thesis, Royal School of Library and Information Science,
Department of Information Studies, Denmark.
16. Björneborn, L. 2010. Genre connectivity and genre drift in a web of genres. In Genres on the
web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini,
Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
17. Braslavski, P. 2010. Marrying relevance and genre rankings: An exploratory study. In Genres
on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and
M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
26 M. Santini et al.
18. Bruce, I. 2008. Academic writing and genre: A systematic analysis. London: Continuum.
19. Bruce, I. 2010. Evolving genres in online domains: The hybrid genre of the participatory news
article. In Genres on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler,
S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
20. Chakrabarti, S. 2001. Integrating the document object model with hyperlinks for enhanced
topic distillation and information extraction. In Proceedings of the 10th International World
Wide Web Conference, May 1–5, 211–220. Hong Kong.
21. Chakrabarti, S., M. van den Berg, and B. Dom. 1999. Focused crawling: A new approach to
topic-specific web resource discovery. In Proceedings of the 8th International World Wide Web
Conference. Toronto, ON.
22. Chakrabarti, S., M. Joshi, K. Punera, and D.M. Pennock. 2002. The structure of broad topics
on the web. In Proceedings of the 11th International World Wide Web Conference, 251–262.
New York, NY: ACM Press.
23. Cohn, D.A., and T. Hofmann. 2000. The missing link – a probabilistic model of document
content and hypertext connectivity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13,
Papers from Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), eds. T.K. Leen, T.G. Dietterich,
and V. Tresp, 430–436. Denver, CO: MIT Press,
24. Condamines, A. 2008. Taking genre into account when analysing conceptual relation patterns.
Corpora 3(2):115–140.
25. Craven, M., D. DiPasquo, D. Freitag, A.K. McCallum, T.M. Mitchell, K. Nigam, and
S. Slattery. 2000. Learning to construct knowledge bases from the World Wide Web. Artificial
Intelligence 118(1–2):69–113.
26. Dehmer, M., and F. Emmert-Streib. 2010. Mining graph patterns in web-based systems:
A conceptual view. In Genres on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds.
A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht:
Springer.
27. Denoyer, L., and P. Gallinari. 2004. Un modèle de mixture de modèles génératifs pour les
documents structurés multimédias. Document numérique 8(3):35–54.
28. Diligenti, M., M. Gori, M. Maggini, and F. Scarselli. 2001. Classification of HTML documents
by hidden tree-markov models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Document
Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), 849–853. Seattle, WA.
29. Dillon, A. 2008. Bringing genre into focus: Why information has shape. Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Society for Information Science and Technology 34(5):17–19.
30. Donato, D., L. Laura, S. Leonardi, and S. Millozzi. 2007. The web as a graph: How far we are.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 7(1):4.
31. Eiron, N., and K.S. McCurley. 2003. Untangling compound documents on the web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 85–94. Nottingham.
32. Ester, M., H.-P. Kriegel, and M. Schubert. 2002. Web site mining: A new way to spot competi-
tors, customers and suppliers in the world wide web. In KDD ’02: Proceedings of the 8th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 249–258. New
York, NY: ACM Press.
33. Ferraresi, A., E. Zanchetta, S. Bernardini, and M. Baroni. 2008. Introducing and evaluating
ukWaC, a very large web-derived corpus of English. In The 4th Web as Corpus Workshop:
Can We Beat Google? (At LREC 2008). Marrakech.
34. Fletcher, W.H. 2004. Making the web more useful as a source for linguistic corpora. In Corpus
linguistics in North America 2002: Selections from the 4th North American Symposium of the
American Association for applied corpus linguistics, eds. U. Connor, and T. Upton. Editions
Rodopi: Amsterdam/New York.
35. Frasconi, P., G. Soda, and A. Vullo. 2002. Hidden Markov models for text categorization in
multi-page documents. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 18(2–3):195–217.
36. Freund, L. 2008. Exploiting task-document relationships to support information retrieval in
the workplace. PhD thesis, University of Toronto.
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 27
37. Freund, L., and C. Nilsen. 2008. Assessing a genre-based approach to online government
information. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Canadian Association for
Information Science (CAIS). University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
38. Grieve, J., D. Biber, E. Friginal, and T. Nekrasova. 2010. Variation among blogs: A multi-
dimensional analysis. In Genres on the web: Computational models and empirical studies,
eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht:
Springer.
39. Gunnarsson, M. 2010. Classification along genre dimensions. PhD, Inst. f. Biblioteks- och
Informationsvetenskap, Göteborgs Universitet.
40. Gupta, S., H. Becker, G. Kaiser, and S. Stolfo. 2006. Verifying genre-based clustering
approach to content extraction. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on World
Wide Web, 875–876. New York, NY: ACM Press.
41. He, B., M. Patel, Z. Zhang, and K. Chen-Chuan Chang. 2007. Accessing the deep web: A sur-
vey. Communications of the ACM 50(2):94–101.
42. Herring, S.C., I. Kouper, J.C. Paolillo, L.A. Scheidt, M. Tyworth, P. Welsch, E. Wright, and
N. Yu. 2005. Conversations in the blogosphere: An analysis “from the bottom up”. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’05). Big
Island, Hawaii.
43. Heyd, T. 2008. Email hoaxes: Form, function, genre ecology. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
44. Ide, N., R. Reppen, and K. Suderman. 2002. The American National Corpus: More than the
Web can provide. In Proceedings of the 3rd Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
839–844. Las Palmas.
45. Joachims, T., N. Cristianini, and J. Shawe-Taylor. 2001. Composite kernels for hypertext
categorisation. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Machine Learning,
250–257. San Fransisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
46. Kanaris, I., and E. Stamatatos. 2007. Webpage genre identification using variable-length char-
acter n-grams. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Arti-
ficial Intelligence (ICTAI’07), Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
47. Karlgren, J., and D. Cutting. 1994. Recognizing text genres with simple metrics using dis-
criminant analysis. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Computational Linguistics, vol.
2, 1071–1075. Kyoto.
48. Kessler, B., G. Nunberg, and H. Schütze. 1997. Automatic detection of text genre. Proceed-
ings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Eighth
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 32–38.
Madrid, Spain.
49. Kim, Y., and S. Ross. 2010. Formulating representative features with respect to genre classi-
fication. In Genres on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler,
S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
50. Kriegel, H.-P., and M. Schubert. 2004. Classification of websites as sets of feature vectors. In
Databases and applications, ed. M.H. Hamza, 127–132. Anaheim, CA: IASTED/ACTA Press.
51. Kucera, H., and W.N. Francis. 1967. Computational analysis of presentday American English.
Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
52. Kumar, R., J. Novak, P. Raghavan, and A. Tomkins. 2004. Structure and evolution of
blogspace. Communications of the ACM 47(12):35–39.
53. Lee, D. 2001. Genres, registers, text types, domains, and styles: clarifying the concepts
and navigating a path through the BNC jungle. Language Learning and Technology 5(3):
37–72.
54. Li, W.-S., O. Kolak, Q. Vu, and H. Takano. 2000. Defining logical domains in a web site. In
Proceedings of the 11th ACM on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 123–132. San Antonio, TX.
55. Li, W.-S., K.S. Candan, Q. Vu, and D. Agrawal. 2002. Query relaxation by structure and
semantics for retrieval of logical web documents. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 14(4):768–791.
28 M. Santini et al.
56. Lim, C.S., K.J. Lee, and G.C. Kim. 2005. Multiple sets of features for automatic genre classi-
fication of web documents. Information Processing & Management 41(5):1263–1276.
57. Lindemann, C., and L. Littig. 2010. Classification of web sites at super-genre level. In Genres
on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and
M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
58. Marshman, E., M.-C. L’Homme, and V. Surtees. 2008. Portability of cause-effect relation
markers across specialised domains and text genres: a comparative evaluation. Corpora
3(2):141–172.
59. Martin, J.R. 1994. Macro-genres: The ecology of the page. Network 21: 29–52.
60. Martin, J.R., and D. Rose. 2008. Genre relations: Mapping culture. London & Oakland:
Equinox Pub.
61. Mehler, A. 2008. Structural similarities of complex networks: A computational model by
example of wiki graphs. Applied Artificial Intelligence 22(7&8):619–683.
62. Mehler, A. 2010. Structure formation in the web. A graph-theoretical model of hypertext types.
In Linguistic modeling of information and markup languages. Contributions to language tech-
nology, eds. A. Witt and D. Metzing, Text, Speech and Language Technology, 225–247. Dor-
drecht: Springer.
63. Mehler, A. 2009b. Generalised shortest paths trees: A novel graph class applied to semiotic
networks. In Analysis of complex networks: From biology to linguistics, eds. M. Dehmer and
F. Emmert-Streib. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.
64. Mehler, A. 2010. A quantitative graph model of social ontologies by example of Wikipedia.
In Towards an information theory of complex networks: Statistical methods and applications,
eds. M. Dehmer, F. Emmert-Streib, and A. Mehler. Boston, MA/Basel: Birkhäuser.
65. Mehler, A., M. Dehmer, and R. Gleim. 2006. Towards logical hypertext structure: A graph-
theoretic perspective. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Innovative Internet
Computing Systems (I2CS ’04), eds. T. Böhme and G. Heyer, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3473, 136–150. Berlin/New York, NY: Springer.
66. Mehler, A., R. Gleim, and A. Wegner. 2007. Structural uncertainty of hypertext types. An
empirical study. In Proceedings of the Workshop “Towards Genre-Enabled Search Engines:
The Impact of NLP”, September, 30, 2007, in Conjunction with RANLP 2007, 13–19.
Borovets, Bulgaria.
67. Menczer, F. 2004. Lexical and semantic clustering by web links. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 55(14):1261–1269.
68. Montesi, M., and T. Navarrete. 2008. Classifying web genres in context: A case study docu-
menting the web genres used by a software engineer. Information Processing and Management
44:1410–1430.
69. Ounis, I., M. de Rijke, C. Macdonald, G. Mishne, and I. Soboroff. 2006. Overview of the trec
2006 blog track. In Proceedings of the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC). NIST.
70. Päivärinta, T., M. Shepherd, L. Svensson, and M. Rossi. 2008. A special issue editorial. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Information Systems 20(1).
71. Pirolli, P., J. Pitkow, and R. Rao. 1996. Silk from a sow’s ear: Extracting usable structures from
the web. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing,
118–125. New York, NY: ACM Press.
72. Power, R., D. Scott, and N. Bouayad-Agha. 2003. Document structure. Computational Lin-
guistics 29(2):211–260.
73. Raiko, T., K. Kersting, J. Karhunen, and L. de Raedt. 2002. Bayesian learning of log-
ical hidden Markov models. In Proceedings of the Finnish AI Conference (STeP-2002),
64–71. Finland.
74. Rehm, G. 2002. Towards automatic web genre identification – A corpus-based approach in the
domain of academia by example of the academic’s personal homepage. In Proceedings of the
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, Hawaii.
75. Rehm, G. 2010. Hypertext types and markup languages. The relationship between HTML and
web genres. In Linguistic Modeling of Information and Markup Languages. Contributions to
1 Riding the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web 29
Language Technology, eds. A. Witt and D. Metzing, Text, Speech and Language Technology,
143–164. Dordrecht: Springer.
76. Rosso, M.A. 2008. Bringing genre into focus: Stalking the wild web genre (with apologies
to euell gibbons). Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology
34(5):20–22.
77. Rosso, M.A., and S.W. Haas. 2010. Identification of web genres by user warrant. In Genres
on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and
M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
78. Santini, M. 2007a. Characterizing genres of web pages: Genre hybridism and individualiza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS’07). Big Island, Hawaii.
79. Santini, M. 2007b. Automatic identification of genre in Web pages. PhD thesis, University of
Brighton, Brighton.
80. Santini, M. 2010. Cross-testing a genre classification model for the web. In Genres on the web:
Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text,
Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
81. Sharoff, S. 2006. Creating general-purpose corpora using automated search engine queries.
In WaCky! Working Papers on the Web as Corpus, eds. M. Baroni and S. Bernardini, 63–68.
Bologna: Gedit.
82. Sharoff, S. 2007. Classifying web corpora into domain and genre using automatic feature
identification. In Proceedings of Web as Corpus Workshop. Louvain-la-Neuve.
83. Sharoff, S. 2010. In the garden and in the jungle. Comparing genres in the bnc and internet. In
Genres on the web: Computational models and empirical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff,
and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technology. Dordrecht: Springer.
84. Sinclair, J. ed. 1987. Looking up: An account of the COBUILD project in lexical computing.
London and Glasgow: Collins.
85. Sinclair, J. 2003. Corpora for lexicography. In ed. P. van Sterkenberg, A practical guide to
lexicography, 167–178. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
86. Stein, B., S. Meyer zu Eissen, and N. Lipka. 2010. Web genre analysis: Use cases, retrieval
models, and implementation issues. In Genres on the web: Computational models and empir-
ical studies, eds. A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, Text, Speech and Language Technol-
ogy. Dordrecht: Springer.
87. Stewart, J.G. 2008. Genre oriented summarization. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University.
88. Sun, A., and E.-P. Lim. 2003. Web unit mining: Finding and classifying subgraphs of web
pages. In CIKM ’03: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, 108–115, New York, NY: ACM Press.
89. Swales, J.M. 1990. Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
90. Tajima, K., Y. Mizuuchi, M. Kitagawa, and K. Tanaka. 1998. Cut as a querying unit for WWW,
netnews, e-mail. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia,
235–244. New York, NY: ACM Press.
91. Tajima, K., and K. Tanaka. 1999. New techniques for the discovery of logical documents in
web. In International Symposium on Database Applications in Non-traditional Environments.
IEEE, 125–132.
92. Thelwall,M., L. Vaughan, and L. Björneborn. 2006. Webometrics. Annual Review of Informa-
tion Science Technology 6(8):81–135.
93. Tian, Y.H., T.J. Huang, W. Gao, J. Cheng, and P. Bo Kang. 2003. Two-phase web site
classification based on hidden Markov tree models. In WI ’03: Proceedings of the 2003
IEEE/WIC International Conference on Web Intelligence. IEEE Computer Society, 227,
Washington, DC.
94. Waltinger, U., A. Mehler, and A. Wegner. 2009. A two-level approach to web genre classifi-
cation. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Web Information Systems and
Technologies (WEBIST ’09), March 23–26, 2007. Lisboa.
30 M. Santini et al.
95. Wisniewski, G., F. Maes, L. Denoyer, and P. Gallinari. 2007. Modèle probabiliste pour
l’extraction de structures dans les documents web. Document numérique, 10(1):151–170.
96. Wodak, R. 2008. Introduction: Discourse studies – important concepts and terms. In Qualita-
tive Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences, eds. Wodak, R. and Krzyzanowski, M., 1–29.
Palgrave.
97. Yates, S.J., and T.R. Sumner. 1997. Digital genres and the new burden of fixity. In Proceedings
of the 30th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, vol. 6. Maui, HI.
