Marina Santini, Serge Sharoff
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
The project presented in this article focuses on the creation of web genre
benchmarks (a.k.a. web genre reference corpora or web genre test collections),
i.e. newly conceived test collections against which it will be possible to judge
the performance of future genre-enabled web applications. The creation
of web genre benchmarks is of key importance for the next generation of
web applications because, at present, it is impossible to evaluate existing
and in-progress genre-enabled prototypes. We suggest focusing on the
following key points: ) propose a characterisation of genre suitable for
digital environments and empirical approaches shared by a number of genre
experts working in automatic genre identification; ) define the criteria
for the construction of web genre benchmarks and draw up annotation
guidelines; ) create web genre benchmarks in several languages; ) validate
the methodology and evaluate the results. We describe work in progress
and our plans for future development. Since it is sometimes difficult to
anticipate the difficulties that will arise when developing a large resource,
we present our ideas, our current views on genre issues and our first results
with the aim of stimulating a proactive discussion, so that the stakeholders,
i.e. researchers who will ultimately benefit
the resource, can contribute to its design.
1 The Concept of Genre
The concept of genre is hard to agree upon. Many interpretations have been proposed
since Aristotle’s Poetics without reaching any definite conclusions about the inventory
or even principles for classifying documents into genres. Some studies put the number of
genres to , (Görlach, ) or even , (Adamzik, ). Additionally, the lack of
an agreed definition of what genre is causes the problem of the loose boundaries between
the term ‘genre’ with other neighbouring terms, such as ‘register’, ‘domain’, ‘topic’, and
‘style’. The inventory of genres can be based on linguistic theories or ‘folksonomies’,
i.e. labels used by users (Rosso and Haas, ). For instance, users are confident
with a term like novel, whereas linguistic researchers may prefer functional terms, like
recreation to indicate a wider range of texts aimed at recreational reading.
Recently definitions of genre have been adapted to the new digital environments,
e.g., (Yates and Orlikowski, ; Erickson, ; Toms and Campbell, ; Beghtol,
; Heyd, ; Bateman, ). Undoubtedly, the situation on the web is more
difficult than in the offline world, because the web is new, genres are fluid, web
documents are very often characterised by a high level of hybridism, by the fragmentation
of textuality across several documents, by the impact of technical features such as
JLCL 2009 – Volume 25 (1) – 125-141
Santini, Sharoff
hyperlinking and posting facilities. Nevertheless, as stressed by Karlgren () the
term ‘genre’ is established and generally understood, at least intuitively, by web users,
and it is currently employed in many web-based real-world environments. For instance,
online bookshops, like Amazon, organise their catalogues by genre, even if their genres
are not defined in a systematic way, e.g., in addition to proper genres the Amazon list
contains subject labels, like Arts, Computing or Science.
At present, many researchers in different fields are working with genres of electronic
documents, such as FAQs, e-shops, home pages, or conference websites in order to
better satisfy users’ needs in a number of different application areas, such as information
retrieval, e.g., (Stamatatos et al., ; Meyer zu Eissen and Stein, ), digital libraries,
e.g., (Rauber and Müller-Kögler, ; Kim and Ross, ), and information extraction,
e.g., (Maynard et al., ; Gupta et al., ). Arguably, genre is a fundamental
concept in information management and definitely deserves in-depth investigations.
Genre-Enabled Prototypes Attempts at automatic genre identification of the Brown
Corpus start with (Karlgren and Cutting, ; Kessler et al., ). The first prototype
of a genre-enabled application for the web was created in  (Karlgren et al., )
(see DropJaw below). More recently, a genre add-on that can be installed on to a
general-purpose search engine (namely Mozilla Firefox) has been completed at Bauhaus
University Weimar, Germany (Stein et al., ) (see WEGA below). In both cases,
these applications could not and cannot be fully evaluated because of the absence of
web genre benchmarks enabling the objective assessment of their effectiveness. Yet, the
design and the construction of genre-enabled prototypes show the potential of genre in
real-world applications. All in all, four prototypes have been described and documented,
namely: DropJaw, Hyppia, X-Site and WEGA.
DropJaw (for English) – Karlgren and co-workers (Karlgren et al., ) built a fully
functional prototype system, DropJaw, to experiment with iterative search on the web.
DropJaw bases its searches for web documents on terms entered by the user, as in a
traditional system. However, rather than producing ranked lists of output based on term
occurrence, DropJaw displays the distribution of the resulting set over two dimensions:
dynamically generated topical clusters and document genres. The two-dimensional
document space is displayed on a work board or matrix for further user processing.
Hyppia (for English) – The Hyppia demo allows news articles to be filtered and
searched based on genre information. The genre classes in this demo are considered
to be “whether a document is subjective or objective” (Finn et al., ; Finn and
Kushmerick, ). (Dimitrova and Kushmerick, ) contributed to the Hyppia
project by showing how shallow text classification techniques can be used to sort the
documents returned by web search engines according to genre dimensions, such as
the degree of expertise assumed by the document, the amount of detail presented, or
whether the document reports mainly facts or opinions.
http://www.amazon.co.uk/Books-Categories/b?ie=UTF8&node=1025612
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brown_Corpus
126 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
X-SITE (for English) – X-Site is a search system designed and implemented to
test the practical value of making use of task-genre relationships in a real-life work
environment (Freund, ). X-Site was implemented as an extension to MultiText, a
pre-existing indexing and retrieval engine (further details about MultiText can be found
in (Freund, )). X-Site makes use of three contextual components in addition to
the basic search engine functionalities, namely ) a genre classifier, which uses machine
learning methods; ) a task profile, which is composed of a work task and an information
task; and ) a task-genre association matrix, which specifies the relationships between
task taxonomies and genre taxonomies.
WEGA (for English and German) – While X-Site has been devised for professionals
(namely software engineers) who can exploit the concept of genre to rapidly find
information that is task-appropriate, situationally-relevant and mission-critical for
their job, WEGA (an acronym that stands for WEb Genre Analysis), (Stein et al.,
) has been designed for the web and for common web users. WEGA is an add-on
that superimposes genre labels a few seconds after the result list is returned by a
general-purpose search engine, namely Mozilla Firefox.
These prototypes show that genre-enabled systems are feasible and that genre classes
can help improve productivity in the workplace (in the case of X-Site) and offer additional
hints about the nature of the web pages listed in the search results (in the case of
DropJaw, Hyppia and WEGA). Additionally, a number of patent applications has been
submitted in the United States by XEROX Corporation on the basis of work from
(Kessler et al., ).
The design and construction of genre-annotated resources is also very timely since
genre-enabled applications are a hot topic in current research, e.g., (Mehler et al., ).
The required next step is to provide evaluation resources to test these applications.
In this article we outline a project for the creation of web genre benchmarks, against
which it will be possible to judge the performance of genre-enabled web applications.
2 Existing Corpora and Problems
Web genre benchmarks are still missing because their design and construction is difficult.
So far, many national and ‘ad-hoc’ corpora have been built to represent the language,
but very few large corpora indicate the genres of the documents they include, and when
they do, classifications are not consistent. For example, there are several competing
genre-related classifications available in the British National Corpus (BNC), such as
the publication medium (book, periodical, etc), audience level, as well as a set of 
labels called genres, such as ’academic texts in social sciences’ (Lee, ). The genre
attribute was included in a few collections used in information retrieval (TREC HARD
 and , or TREC- Blog Track), but the set of genres proposed was either
debatable, e.g. the ‘reaction’ genre in TREC HARD , or limited to a single genre,
e.g. the BLOG genre in TREC- Blog Track.
For instance, see http://http://www.patentgenius.com/patent/6973423.html
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 127
Santini, Sharoff
Not happy with the genres included in these kinds of corpora, many researchers have
created their own genre collections with their own inventories of genre categories. Some
researches have created a hierarchy where super-genres are broken down to different
medium-level genre classes, e.g., (Stubbe and Ringlstetter, ). Others have used
more general categories such as the functional styles of the Russian linguistic tradition
derived from the Prague Linguistic Circle, e.g. everyday or journalistic (Braslavski,
), or functional classes derived from the corpus-linguistic tradition, e.g. instructional
or recreation (Sharoff, ).
While many current genre collections have the individual web pages as unit of
analysis, another line of genre research focuses on genre classes at web site level. For
instance, Symonenko () identifies genre-like regularities in the content structure
in commercial and educational websites; Rehm () analyses the genre of academic
personal homepages, while Mehler et al. () focuses on city websites, conference
websites, and personal academic homepages.
In this blossoming of genre classes and genre corpora assembled with interest-specific
criteria, a practice has been established very recently, namely the testing of classification
models over several existing web genre collections. This cross-testing technique has
been adopted by Santini (), Kim and Ross (), Kanaris and Stamatatos ()
and others. This practice represents a step forward, but only partially addresses the
issues underlying the need for a more objective assessment of genre classes. Table 
shows publicly available genre collections that have been used for cross-testing. As
a matter of fact, existing genre collections have been built without the ambition of
being genre benchmarks. They have been created with subjective criteria following
interest-specific goals. Consequently they do not have the requirements for being a
“reference” or a “standard”, because reference corpora, like the British National Corpus
or the American National Corpus, have been built on a large consensus and based on
principled criteria such as representativeness or balance.
Existing genre collections leave a number of issues unanswered. For instance, we
do not know in which way they represent the genre population on the web (see the
number of genres in column , Table ). Additionally, they are not large enough to
ensure any representativeness of individual genres, since each genre is represented by a
small number of documents (from  to ). Without large and comprehensive web
genre benchmark spawned by a wide and comprehensive discussion on genre, it is hard
to compare different empirical approaches and evaluate progress. For instance, how
does the list of  genre labels collected by Crowston et al. () compare against
the set of eight genres used in the KI- corpus used by Stein et al. ()? Is the
% accuracy reported by Kim and Ross () better than the % accuracy obtained
by Sharoff ()? These are the questions for which we need to find answers with
the construction of large and reliable genre resources. The ultimate goal is then to
These collections are all linked from the WebGenreWiki http://purl.org/net/webgenres. It is
worth pointing out that the SANTINIS corpus also contains pages without genre annotation
(considered as “noise” for the purposes of machine learning), and KRYS-I collection contains PDF
documents, and not HTML pages like all the other collections listed in Table. The WebGenreWiki
also contains other resources and additional discussions on genre-related issues.
128 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
Table 1: Existing web genre collections publicly available
Source # pages Genres
KI- (Meyer zu Eissen and Stein, )  
SANTINIS (Santini, )  
I-EN (Sharoff, )  
MGC (Vidulin et al., this issue)  
HGC (Stubbe and Ringlstetter, )  
KRYS I (Berninger et al., )  
enable the comparison of different empirical methodologies, to objectively evaluate the
performance of different computational models, and, last but not least, to assess the
impact of the number of genres, the number of documents, the number of annotators
and the criteria of annotation may have on genre findings and on the performance of
genre-enabled applications.
3 Research Goals
The major research efforts for the creation of web genre benchmarks are:
. Propose a characterisation of genre suitable for digital environments and empirical
approaches. We pointed out in the Introduction that the lack of a shared and flexi-
ble definition of genre is one of the main obstacle to the progress of genre-enabled
information systems (see also the discussion in Section ).
. Define the criteria for the construction of genre benchmarks and draw up annota-
tion guidelines.
. Create genre benchmarks in several languages. Genre is cross-cultural concept,
so it makes sense to create reference web genre corpora for multiple languages in
order to create and evaluate cross-lingual genre-enabled information systems, a
promising future direction.
. Validate the methodology and evaluate the results.
4 Genre Classes
The construction of genre benchmarks necessarily involves the task of assigning motivated
labels to documents. Although the term genre can be intuitively understood, huge
problems arise when it comes to the identification of which document classes can be
considered “genres”. For instance, while the Sidney School, centred upon the Systemic
Functional Linguistics, e.g., Martin and Rose (), focuses more on the role of genre
in the linguistic communication system, the North American School e.g., (Swales,
; Yates and Orlikowski, ) focuses on the genres used in specific communities,
e.g., Swales accounts for research and academic genres. Independently from the Systemic
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 129
Santini, Sharoff
School and the North American School, there is an established tradition in German text
linguistics of cataloguing genre classes (called Textsorten). Görlach, who lists about
, labels (Görlach, ), and Adamzik, who collected about , labels (Adamzik,
), belong to this tradition. However, all these nomenclatures or taxonomies seem
to be disconnected from the latest trends in automatic genre identification, which is
currently handling a proliferation of classes that are not, properly speaking, genres.
Some of them have been created in ad-hoc fashion (e.g. tables or lists, person, resources,
children, subjective opinion, content delivery, etc.) because they are assumed to be
useful classes when searching the web. An interesting discussion on this point can be
found in (Karlgren, ), where the author suggests that it not enough to discover
new surface features to postulate new genres. Conversely, it is the study of information
needs that allow us to detect them, since genres are behavioral categories. On the other
hand, (Crowston et al., ) showed that also user-based genre taxonomies might have
their own problems.
A number of intriguing challenges must be faced in the construction of web genre
benchmarks. One challenge is to convey the variety of genre classes that have been
used so far in automatic genre classification experiments without cutting out others
that can be potentially useful for the information needs of web users (Issue ). Another
challenge is represented by the size of the benchmarks: although designed to be large,
benchmark corpora are necessarily limited in size. What is the minimum corpus size
(or critical mass) required to test the scalability of genre-enabled applications (Issue
)? Additionally, we do not know anything about the distribution of genres on the web
(Kilgarriff and Grefenstette, ), and knowledge about the distribution is essential for
machine-learning based systems (Issue ). Albeit genre colonisation (Beghtol, ) is
quite extensive on the web, genre classes are social artefacts linked to specific cultures
(e.g. it seems that the obituary genre is not indigenous to Asian countries), so one must
decide on the cross-cultural span of the genre benchmarks (Issue ). Finally, it is hard
to devise benchmarks that are easily updated with the new genres brought about with
the advances of web technology (Issue ). We would like to address these problems as
follows:
Issue 1 Diversified genre palettes will be included in the benchmarks, thus allowing a
large diversification of genre classes. This variety of genres is useful to test the
portability of genre classification systems. Additionally, it will enable the study
of similarities and differences between genre labels taken from different genre
palettes. Possibly, this may lead to the definition of more appropriate and agreed
upon genre labels.
Issue 2 Web genre corpora of different sizes will be devised to investigate problems
related to scalability and robustness.
Issue 3 We plan a genre-oriented replication of the experiences described in, for example
(Thelwall, ), to gain new insights into the distribution of genres of the web
130 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
Table 2: Examples of mapping from KRYS I to FGC and GCL
FGC/subtype GCL genre KRYS I genre
reporting/presentation Curriculum Vitae, Resume Resume, CV
reporting/presentation Encyclopedia Fact sheet
discussion/academic Research report, Academic Academic Monograph
discussion/academic Research report, Academic Technical Report
regulations Contracts, Disclaimer, T & C Contract
and reach a better understanding of the dynamics underlying genre use on the
web.
Issue 4 Development of resources for several different languages will allow us to investi-
gate the cultural distance (if any) between the cultures of different countries, and
to test cross-lingual genre-enabled information systems.
Issue 5 We plan to monitor genre evolution through a monitor corpus. As the con-
struction of genre monitor corpora is not a trivial issue and has the creation of
genre benchmarks as prerequisite, we postpone its creation to future research and
projects.
5 The Roadmap
5.1 Short-Term Plan: Mapping existing web genre collections into macro-genres and
micro-genres
In the short term, the plan is to capitalise on existing genre-annotated resources. In
this “small-scale” work plan we would like to re-utilise the web genre collections listed in
Table . They are all made of manually annotated English web documents, HTML and
PDF. The idea is to provide a stand-off annotation mapping diverse native categories of
collections from Table  (source) to a set of standardised categories (target) following
two genre palettes: the macro-genre of the Functional Genre Classification (FGC), as
proposed and motivated in (Sharoff, ), and the micro-genre of the Genre Classes
List (GCL), as presented in (Rehm et al., ).
In the end, the majority of documents in each of the six collections will be supplied
with their original genre annotation plus two stand-off annotations (see Table  for
examples). In other words, each existing genre collection will have the original genre
annotation decided by its creators (source genre annotation), plus additional genre
labels coming from the FGC palette (stand-off macro-genre annotation) and the GCL
palette (stand-off micro-genre annotation). This means that we will have about ,
webpages with two consistent stand-off annotation schemes.
Later on, genre labels from other palettes can also be added, e.g., from (Rosso and Haas, ).
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 131
Santini, Sharoff
Any mapping between genre schemes has to accommodate three problematic cases:
. a many-to-one mapping, when the target collection does not make finer-grained
distinctions made in a source collection;
. a one-to-many mapping, when the more general class of a source collection can
be mapped into more than one genre class in our target palette;
. a many-to-many mapping, when the two classification schemes are incompatible.
For cases of many-to-many mappings between classes we will define additional
features needed to achieve unambiguous mapping between individual documents.
Our hypothesis is that in many cases it is possible to design a mapping on the
level of classes in each collection, use automatic classification methods for approximate
reclassification of more general classes and review their results manually. The proposed
harmonisation of genre classes is similar to the comparison of Part-Of-Speech tagsets in
the AMALGAM project (Atwell et al., ), when a corpus was tagged with + rival
tagsets.
In the first stage we have mapped the diverse labels from genre collections of Table 
to the FGC palette, which includes the following macrogenres and their subtypes:
. discussion – all texts expressing positions and discussing a state of affairs, the
three main subtypes are public (corresponding to public debates, like blogs or
opinionated journalistic texts), academic (research papers, books), and commu-
nication (spontaneous electronic communication, like discussion forums or chat
rooms);
. reporting – objective texts reporting on a state of affairs, the two main subtypes
are events (like newswires and police reports) and presentation (like homepages,
specifications or CVs);
. information – catalogues, glossaries, sitemaps, other lists of links (mostly con-
taining incomplete or isolated sentences);
. instruction – how-tos, FAQs, tutorials;
. propaganda – adverts, political pamphlets;
. recreation – fiction and popular lore;
. regulations – laws, small print, rules;
. unknown – this was reserved for webpages with little or no natural language,
like forms for queries, logins, flash animation, samples of source code, etc.
This palette is compact and coarse-grained, so that it was easier to conflate finer--
grained genre classes of each genre collection into coarser-grained functional genres and
into their subtypes where possible (see Table  for examples).
Nevertheless, its application to genre collections listed in Table  revealed many
cases of ambiguities. Often labels in source collections are ambiguous, and only an
investigation of their content can help to determine the target category, e.g., the label
informative in MGC applies to CVs, descriptions of companies, encyclopedic definitions;
similarly, article in KI- covers research papers, not news articles. In other cases, a
The complete stand-off annotation is available from http://purl.org/net/webgenres
132 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
Table 3: Mapping from different annotation schemes into the FGC palette
FGC macrogenre FGC subtype Source genre
MGC ( genres)
N/A adult
discussion public blog
recreation childrens
propaganda shop commercial/promotional
discussion communication community
unknown content delivery
recreation entertainment
unknown error message
instruction FAQ
information gateway
information index
reporting presentation informative
discussion public journalistic
N/A official
N/A personal
recreation poetry
recreation prose fiction
discussion academic scientific
propaganda shop shopping
N/A user input
KI- ( genres)
discussion academic article
N/A discussion
unknown download
instruction help
information linklists
reporting presentation portrait-non_priv
reporting presentation portrait-priv
propaganda shop shop
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 133
Santini, Sharoff
single label in a source collection covers webpages of several different genres, so that its
target label is not unique, e.g., adult in MGC covers lists of links, advertising, forms
for accessing websites, legal disclaimers, instructions, etc.
In the second phase of the short-term plan, we would like to utilise experience gained
in this process to map to the fine-grained GCL palette from (Rehm et al., ). In
spite of the more diverse set of genres in GCL, unambiguous mapping is still possible
in many cases (see examples in Table ). However, we envisage much greater need for
semi-automatic one-to-many mappings at this stage.
Another problem with the unification of diverse genre collections concerns the differ-
ence in their storage methods. Some collections include webpages with their respective
stylesheets, images and JavaScripts, while others include only HTML pages proper.
Some collections store files in a hierarchy of directories, while others contain flat lists.
We unified the storage methods to the lowest common denominator: HTML pages
only in a flat list. For the PDF pages from KRYS-I we created their text versions
using pdftotext. The stand-off annotation contains IDs of HTML files with respective
annotation labels.
5.2 Long-Term Plan
Phase I: Discussion, Decisions and Guidelines Building up on the experience accumu-
lated during the short-term plan activities, we will start the long-term plan by building
upon the , web document corpus. This stage will provide a flexible definition
of web genre for computational purposes and comprehensive annotation guidelines to
reduce the level of ambiguity.
Phase II: Genre Benchmark Construction In this phase, the collection, annotation and
storage of the web documents following the criteria defined in Phase I will take place.
We anticipate that a number of genre corpora will be built during this phase. While
the short term plan focused on English, in this phase we plan the construction of three
corpora of web documents in several languages to allow the evaluation of cross-lingual
genre-enabled information systems. Provisionally, we call these three corpora: “gold”
corpus, “main” corpus and “comprehensive” corpus.
The “gold” corpus for each language will be annotated by several annotators to assist
in studies measuring the level of disagreement between annotators, as well as cases of
genre hybridism. With this smaller corpus we will also investigate the effect of using
radically different genre palettes, i.e. documents will be annotated with codes taken
from incompatible sets of genres. It is worth noting that the concept of genre hybridism
subsumes several perspectives on text (see Section ).
Documents in the “main” corpus for each language will be annotated, each following
the main annotation schemes resulting from the previous step.
We will also prepare a “comprehensive” corpus (on the order of hundreds of thousands
documents), which will be annotated automatically. We will train statistical classification
134 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
models on the basis of the “main” corpus, leveraging on semi-supervised machine learning
techniques, e.g., bootstrapping and active learning, and apply them to the bigger corpus.
With the “comprehensive” corpus, we would like to address two research issues:
. genre hybridism, i.e. several separate genres in a single page, e.g., a newspaper
article and a forum discussing it;
. ambiguity in interpretation, e.g., ambiguity in the genre palette itself, see the
description of wikipedia pages in (Rehm et al., ).
Importantly, all the corpora will follow a multi-labelling annotation scheme, where
web pages are not necessarily (and artificially) restricted to the membership of a single
genre. Techniques will be developed to establish sensible labelling thresholds. With
the approach proposed above, web pages will be endowed with zero, one or more genre
labels, as needed. This will allow future investigators to shed some light on whether the
‘nature’ of genre and the annotation method affect the performance of genre-enabled
applications. Even if the quality of automatic classification in the “comprehensive”
corpus is far from perfect, a really big genre-annotated corpus should help researchers
estimate the performance of their models on large-scale resources, one of the main holes
in current automatic genre research.
Phase III: Creation and Evaluation of Automatic Genre Identification Systems In this
phase, the criteria and the experience built up in the previous phases will be used to
develop reliable automatic genre classification models. During this phase, new evaluation
methods and measure will be proposed to investigate the correlation among different
genre granularity and classification schemes. Previous experiments have already shown
that computable relations exist between rhetorical genres (like narration or argumenta-
tion) and social genres (such as blogs and editorials). For instance, see the two-layer
approach proposed by Santini (), where these relations have been investigated only
on small and heterogeneous genre corpora, which did not allow a robust evaluation of
the results. The construction of principled benchmarks will allow us to delve deeply
into evaluation techniques and eventually propose new evaluation measures, which
more suitably account for classifier performance with difficult classes like genres. It
is worth emphasising that multi-labelled genre evaluation is a challenging and very
little explored field (an exception is Vidulin et al. in this Issue), and the contribution
of this project in this respect will certainly be remarkable. Multi-labelling presents
challenges for the current state of machine learning. This is why our project is timely
and would complement other initiatives, e.g., see the upcoming Workshop on Learning
from Multi-Label Data (MLD’).
A similar approach is used in the ongoing project at the University of Leeds (UK) supported by a
Google Research Award for -, http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/webgenres/google.html
http://lpis.csd.auth.gr/workshops/mld09/
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 135
Santini, Sharoff
6 Corpus Design Issues
Since the web is a huge reservoir of texts that can be easily mined, we propose building
genre benchmarks with freely downloadable web documents. This decision still leaves
us with a range of open questions.
Document type Although we are well aware that the web is not limited to HTML pages
and PDF files, in this project we will focus on these two document types, leaving the
exploration of other types to future research.
Document selection An important open question concerns the criteria for selecting
documents. Some researchers have attempted to use equal amount of texts per genre,
while others have mined random samples of webpages for a given language or used
existing text collections. This project is aimed at producing a set of diversified genre
classes, thus resulting in multiple corpora corresponding to multiple benchmarks. In the
end, the exact inventory of genres cannot be fixed and the corpus cannot be balanced
by this criterion a priori. At the same time, a set of annotated texts from the total set
of texts can be selected according to wishes of individual researchers, e.g. the subset
chosen by a researcher can contain  news items vs.  editorials. The second
argument in favour of using a random sample from the web for initial annotation is
related to the purpose of our benchmarks, which have to reflect the composition of the
web to be useful in application domains.
Genre hybridism Genre hybridism is broad term accounting for several phenomena.
It has often been pointed out that genres are not discrete systems. A number of
genre combinations are possible and common. For example, a mixed genre, like
the tragi-comedy, is a genre having its own blending aspects of two or more genres.
Multi-genre documents are documents where two or more genres overlap creating a
specific and more standardised genre, as in the case of eshops, which are often also
search pages. Some genres are intrinsically mixed, such as the newsletter, which contains
editorials, reports, interviews, and so on. An additional problem concerns the fuzziness
of genre labels because, for example, the same document can be named news bulletin or
press release. An account of how difficult can be to build a genre taxonomy is given by
Crowston et al. (). Hybrid genres abound and are very common in all mass media.
In an open environment, such as the web, this phenomenon seems to be pervasive.
Generally speaking, the concept of genre hybridism simply helps pin down when a web
page contains more than one genre, regardless how these genres relate to each other.
The acknowledgement that a web page can be hybrid is important when dealing with
automatic genre identification, because traditional single-label classification algorithms
are usually confused by hybrid genre conventions. However, at this stage, we have
not decided yet whether the produced benchmarks will provide an ordering of labels.
For example, a page of a newspaper article may contain a discussion forum. Ideally,
in this case an ordering could be provided: =article and =forum. However, this
136 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
hierarchical ordering is not always possible, because many web pages often show several
unrelated texts, like the ads connected to certain keywords (e.g. see how the application
“Google AdSense” works). Other interesting genre information could be provided by the
positioning, that is, a specific part of the web page is an article and another specific
part is a discussion forum. Ordering and positioning information are crucial to evaluate
in depth the accuracy of web genre detection tools. However, at present, genre research
has not reached the maturity needed to spell out ordering and positioning. We put off
these interesting issues to future projects.
Copyright Another crucial question concerns copyright. According to existing copyright
law researchers are free to distribute URL links with their descriptions, from which it
is possible to recreate a corpus in any necessary format (Sharoff, b). The major
problem with this method is that the Web changes, some pages get deleted, others
updated. An experiment in measuring the decay rate of URLs estimated the half-life
of an Internet corpus as about seven years, i.e. the half of the offline webpages of an
average collection get changed or deleted in about seven years (Sharoff, a). Storage
and redistribution of complete webpages is not traditionally allowed under copyright
law. Some Internet corpus projects managed to overcome this constraint by putting
sentences in their corpora in random order, for instance, some portions of the Hunglish
corpus have been shuffled (Varga et al., ). This makes it possible to redistribute the
content of webpages with appropriate annotations, but this prevents doing discourse
analysis or any other investigation of contexts larger than a sentence. The most suitable
solution for development of our reference webgenre corpus is to follow the practice of
distribution of other webcorpora, such as deWac (Baroni and Kilgarriff, ) or ukWac
(Ferraresi et al., ), which give the provision for copyright holders of individual
webpages to opt out from keeping their pages in the collection. In addition, it is possible
to select webpages explicitly marked with permissive licences, such as the GNU Free
Documentation Licence or a family of Creative Commons Licences, even though this
choice can bias the selection of texts.
Automatic genre identification Traditionally, scholars and researchers studying the
genre of documents annotate these documents themselves, i.e. manually. The main
drawback with manual annotation is that it is extremely tedious and time-consuming.
Consequently, the number of documents manually annotated by genre is often too small
to have a full picture of certain phenomena or to carry out any quantitative approach.
Additionally, now with the web and with the wealth of freely available documents, the
‘manual annotation pace’ is certainly a huge limitation for genre research. The second
drawback is that since manual annotation is a mentally demanding activity, tiredness
or distraction causes errors and idiosyncrasies. Ideally, as machines do not get tired,
they should provide genre analysts with larger quantity of consistently genre-annotated
documents. In brief, annotating documents by genre is not always an easy task: it takes
time, it is not always intuitive and it is prone to errors, because human annotators get
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 137
Santini, Sharoff
easily tired or confused. For this reason, automatic genre classifiers would be a great
advantage in building web genre benchmarks.
7 Significance of the Research and Conclusion
This project will provide the community of genre scholars and practitioners with a
number of theoretical contributions, and several valuable resources.
From a theoretical point of view, this project will enrich genre studies and genre
research with a characterisation of the concept of genre tailored for digital environments.
It will also produce a set of re-usable criteria for the construction of web genre bench-
marks and annotation guidelines, so that computational experiments can be carried
out with a large number of diverse web documents. Additionally, it will provide a
comparative assessment of a range of existing genre annotation schemes with a mapping
between these onto a neutral palette. We conjecture that significant insights will be
yielded by the experiments tested on such a resource.
Last but not least, it will provide long-lasting web document collections, namely a
number of web genre benchmarks in several languages, which can be updated, monitored
and enlarged in future. Importantly, in this article we describe work in progress and our
plans for future development. Since it is sometimes difficult to anticipate the difficulties
that will arise when developing a large resource, we present our ideas, our current views
on genre issues and our first results with the aim of stimulating a proactive discussion,
so that the stakeholders, i.e. researchers who will ultimately benefit from the resource,
can contribute to its design.
References
Adamzik, K. (). Textsorten – Texttypologie. Eine kommentierte Bibliographie.
Nodus, Münster.
Atwell, E., Demetriou, G., Hughes, J., Schriffin, A., Souter, C., and Wilcock, S. ().
A comparative evaluation of modern english corpus grammatical annotation schemes.
ICAME Journal, :–.
Baroni, M. and Kilgarriff, A. (). Large linguistically-processed Web corpora for
multiple languages. In Companion Volume to Proc. of the European Association of
Computational Linguistics, pages –, Trento.
Bateman, J. (). Multimodality and genre: A foundation for the systematic analysis
of multimodal documents. Palgrave Macmillan.
Beghtol, C. (). The concept of genre and its characteristic. Bulletin of ASIST,
():–.
Berninger, V., Kim, Y., and Ross, S. (). Building a document genre corpus: a profile
of the KRYS I corpus. In Proceedings of the Corpus Profiling Workshop, London.
138 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
Braslavski, P. (). Marrying relevance and genre rankings: an exploratory study. In
Mehler et al. ().
Crowston, K., Kwaśnik, B., and Rubleske, J. (). Problems in the use-centered
development of a taxonomy of web genres. In Mehler et al. ().
Dimitrova, M. and Kushmerick, N. (). Dimensions of web genre. In World Wide
Web Conference WWW, Budapest, Hungary.
Erickson, T. (). Rhyme and punishment: the creation and enforcement of con-
ventionsin an on-line participatory limerick genre. In Proc. nd Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences.
Ferraresi, A., Zanchetta, E., Bernardini, S., and Baroni, M. (). Introducing and
evaluating ukWaC, a very large web-derived corpus of English. In The th Web as
Corpus Workshop: Can we beat Google? (at LREC ), Marrakech.
Finn, A. and Kushmerick, N. (). Learning to classify documents according to genre.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, ().
Finn, A., Kushmerick, N., and Smyth, B. (). Genre classification and domain
transfer for information filtering. In Proc. European Colloquium on Information
Retrieval Research, Glasgow.
Freund, L. (). Exploiting task-document relationships to support information
retrieval in the workplace. PhD thesis, University of Toronto.
Görlach, M. (). Text types and the history of English. Walter de Gruyter.
Gupta, S., Becker, H., Kaiser, G., and Stolfo, S. (). Verifying genre-based clustering
approach to content extraction. In Proceedings of the th international conference
on World Wide Web, pages –. ACM.
Heyd, T. (). Email hoaxes: form, function, genre ecology. Benjamins.
Kanaris, I. and Stamatatos, E. (). Webpage genre identification using variable-length
character n-grams. In Proceedings of ICTAI.
Karlgren, J. (). The whys and wherefores for studying textual genre computationally.
In Proc. AAAI Fall Symposium on Style and Meaning in Language, Art and Music,
Arlington, USA.
Karlgren, J. (). Conventions and mutual expectations — understanding sources for
web genres. In Mehler et al. ().
Karlgren, J., Bretan, I., Dewe, J., Hallberg, A., and Wolkert, N. (). Iterative
information retrieval using fast clustering and usage-specific genres. In Eight DELOS
workshop on User Interfaces in Digital Libraries, pages –.
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 139
Santini, Sharoff
Karlgren, J. and Cutting, D. (). Recognizing text genres with simple metrics using
discriminant analysis. In Proc. of the th. International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Coling 94), pages  – , Kyoto, Japan.
Kessler, B., Nunberg, G., and Schütze, H. (). Automatic detection of text genre.
In Proceedings of the th ACL/th EACL, pages –.
Kilgarriff, A. and Grefenstette, G. (). Introduction to the special issue of the web
as corpus. Computational Linguistics, ():–.
Kim, Y. and Ross, S. (). Formulating representative features with respect to genre
classification. In Mehler et al. ().
Lee, D. (). Genres, registers, text types, domains, and styles: clarifying the concepts
and navigating a path through the BNC jungle. Language Learning and Technology,
():–.
Martin, J. and Rose, D. (). Genre Relations: mapping culture. Equinox Pub.
Maynard, D., Tablan, V., Ursu, C., Cunningham, H., and Wilks, Y. (). Named
entity recognition from diverse text types. In Proc. Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing, pages –.
Mehler, A., Gleim, R., and Wegner, A. (). Structural uncertainty of hypertext
types. an empirical study. In Proc. Towards Genre-Enabled Search Engines: The
Impact of NLP. RANLP-.
Mehler, A., Sharoff, S., Rehm, G., and Santini, M., editors (). Genres on the Web:
Computational Models and Empirical Studies. Springer, Berlin/New York.
Meyer zu Eissen, S. and Stein, B. (). Genre classification of web pages. In
Proceedings of the th German Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Ulm, Germany.
Rauber, A. and Müller-Kögler, A. (). Integrating automatic genre analysis into
digital libraries. In JCDL ’: Proceedings of the st ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference
on Digital libraries, pages –.
Rehm, G. (). Towards automatic web genre identification – a corpus-based approach
in the domain of academia by example of the academic’s personal homepage. In Proc.
of the Hawaii Internat. Conf. on System Sciences.
Rehm, G., Santini, M., Mehler, A., Braslavski, P., Gleim, R., Stubbe, A., Symonenko,
S., Tavosanis, M., and Vidulin, V. (). Towards a reference corpus of web genres
for the evaluation of genre identification systems. In Proceedings of the Sixth Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference, LREC , Marrakech.
140 JLCL
Web Genre Benchmark Under Construction
Rosso, M. A. and Haas, S. W. (). Identification of web genres by user warrant. In
Mehler et al. ().
Santini, M. (). Cross-testing a genre classification model for the web. In Mehler
et al. ().
Sharoff, S. (a). Creating general-purpose corpora using automated search engine
queries. In Baroni, M. and Bernardini, S., editors, WaCky! Working papers on the
Web as Corpus. Gedit, Bologna. http://wackybook.sslmit.unibo.it.
Sharoff, S. (b). Open-source corpora: using the net to fish for linguistic data.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, ():–.
Sharoff, S. (). In the garden and in the jungle. Comparing genres in the BNC and
Internet. In Mehler et al. ().
Stamatatos, E., Kokkinakis, G., and Fakotakis, N. (). Automatic text categorization
in terms of genre and author. Computational Linguistics, ():–.
Stein, B., Meyer zu Eissen, S., and Lipka, N. (). Web genre analysis: Use cases,
retrieval models, and implementation issues. In Mehler et al. ().
Stubbe, A. and Ringlstetter, C. (). Recognizing genres. In Abstract Proceedings of
the Colloqium "Towards a Reference Corpus of Web Genres.
Swales, J. (). Genre Analysis. English in academic and research settings. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Symonenko, S. (). Recognizing genre-like regularities in website content structure. In
Towards Genre-Enabled Search Engines: The Impact of Natural Language Processing.
Thelwall, M. (). Quantitative comparisons of search engine results. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, ():–.
Toms, E. and Campbell, D. (). Genre as interface metaphor: exploiting form
and function indigital environments. In Proc. nd Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences.
Varga, D., Halacsy, P., Kornai, A., Nagy, V., Nemeth, L., and Tron, V. (). Parallel
corpora for medium density languages. In N. Nicolov, K. Bontcheva, G. A. and
Mitkov, R., editors, Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing IV. Selected
papers from RANLP-, pages –. Benjamins.
Yates, J. and Orlikowski, W. (). Genres of organizational communication: A struc-
turational approach to studying communication and media. Academy of management
review, pages –.
Volume 25 (1) – 2009 141
