Text Representation Strategies: An Example With the
State of the Union Addresses
Jacques Savoy
Computer Science Department, University of Neuchatel, Rue Emile Argand 11, Neuchâtel 2000, Switzerland.
E-mail: Jacques.Savoy@unine.ch
Based on State of the Union addresses from 1790 to
2014 (225 speeches delivered by 42 presidents), this
paper describes and evaluates different text representa-
tion strategies. To determine the most important words
of a given text, the term frequencies (tf) or the tf idf
weighting scheme can be applied. Recently, latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) has been proposed to define
the topics included in a corpus. As another strategy, this
study proposes to apply a vocabulary specificity
measure (Z score) to determine the most significantly
overused word-types or short sequences of them. Our
experiments show that the simple term frequency
measure is not able to discriminate between specific
terms associated with a document or a set of texts.
Using the tf idf or LDA approach, the selection requires
some arbitrary decisions. Based on the term-specific
measure (Z score), the term selection has a clear theo-
retical basis. Moreover, the most significant sentences
for each presidency can be determined. As another
facet, we can visualize the dynamic evolution of usage of
some terms associated with their specificity measures.
Finally, this technique can be employed to define the
most important lexical leaders introducing terms over-
used by the k following presidencies.
Introduction
When facing a large corpus, we may want to summarize
it using a short description or even limit such a synthesis to
a few descriptors assigned manually (indexing). Of more
interest would be to have an overview that can show the
specificities of the different subparts of a text collection.
This is the main objective of this study using a political
corpus containing 225 State of the Union addresses deliv-
ered by 42 U.S. presidents from 1790 (G. Washington) to
2014 (B. Obama).
This corpus shows us the issues and difficulties facing
the United States during its existence. Provided on an
annual basis, each State of the Union address describes
the situation of the country as required by the Constitution.
It also indicates the political priorities of the current tenant
of the White House and the proposed legislative projects
that the Congress should deliberate during the upcoming
year.
With this corpus, how can we extract the terms and
expressions that can best characterize each president? Can
we observe some stylistic elements belonging to a continu-
ous sequence of presidents? Can we detect the topics more
closely related to a given presidency or common to a set of
presidents or to leaders of the same political party? To
answer these questions, we propose to apply a method defin-
ing the vocabulary specific to a given subset compared to the
whole corpus (Muller, 1992). Based on this approach, we
can then define the lexical items and topics specific to a
president or a set of presidents. To compare this method with
other representation strategies, we will show the differences
with extracting schemes based only on the term frequency
(tf) information, the well-known tf idf weighting scheme, or
according to the probabilistic latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. An over-
view of related work is presented in then next section fol-
lowed by a section depicting the main features of the corpus
used in our experiments. We then describe how we define the
vocabulary specific to a given subset and apply it to each
presidency. The next section describes and illustrates a
selection process able to extract the most specific sentences
of a given president. Then we explain how we can visualize
the term specificity evolution over time (or across the entire
corpus). Finally, the last section shows how we can deter-
mine lexical leaders, presidents able to introduce an expres-
sion or a formulation that is then overused by their
immediate followers.
Received November 17, 2014; revised January 5, 2015; accepted January 6,
2015
© 2015 ASIS&T • Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.23510
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ••(••):••–••, 2015
Related Work
To define the main topics of a given corpus, we can
generate an overview using a tag cloud system (e.g., as
proposed by the website www.wordle.net). With this
approach, a picture of lexical terms is automatically gener-
ated from the input text. The font size of each word depends
on its occurrence frequency (tf) (terms with high frequency
are more visible). Moreover, very frequently used words
(usually function words such as determiners, prepositions,
conjunctions, pronouns, auxiliary verbs, or modal forms) are
ignored because they do not usually convey useful meaning.
Those words, however, are important to accurately reflect
the style of the different authors (Stamatatos, 2009). Finally,
the surface form of each word is strictly respected and the
system views as distinct the tokens states, state, and States.
Instead of defining the importance of each term accord-
ing to only its tf value, we can consider defining the weight
of each word by computing its tf idf value, a measure well
known in automatic indexing schemes (Manning, Raghavan,
& Schütze, 2008), or in text categorization approaches
(Sebastiani, 2002). This formulation takes account of the
importance of the term inside a document (or a set of texts)
by the tf component, while the idf reflects the term scarcity
inside the corpus. This general idea can be implemented in
different manners as, for example, ntf idf with ntf = tf / max
tf in the document (Rajaraman & Ullman, 2012). The experi-
ments done with the State of the Union corpus indicate very
similar results between these possible variants.
To automatically extract a synthetic view of a given
corpus, we can apply the topic model approach or LDA
proposed by Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003) (Blei & Lafferty,
2009). This approach views the corpus as generated by a
probabilistic model. More precisely, each document is con-
sidered as containing one or more topics, and thus each
document corresponds to a distribution over a set of topics.
Each topic is represented as a distribution over all words.
Given a corpus and a given number of topics, the LDA
system returns, for each topic, a list of words with their
probability of occurrence and, for each document, a prob-
ability for each topic. The output is a complete probabilistic
description of the underlying corpus. This approach does
not, however, provide a way to define directly the vocabu-
lary specific to a given president.
Previously mentioned strategies are usually based on iso-
lated words. When considering phrases, the system can
provide better semantics. For example, specifying that
health is a very frequent word does not provide enough
information to clearly define its precise meaning (e.g.,
healthcare reform vs. preserve the general health). Thus,
selecting the n-gram of words might be a solution to achieve
a more precise meaning. When extracting pertinent sen-
tences to reflect the particular content of a document,
various sentence extraction algorithms have been proposed
(Paice, 1990; Nenkova & McKeown, 2011). Certainly,
selecting a single sentence provides a better context than a
few isolated words. However, the presence of pronominal
references (e.g., “I give it to her”) may hurt its readability.
Moreover, when trying to combine several sentences, textual
cohesion must be taken into account (e.g., anaphoric refer-
ences). Such considerations, however, are beyond the main
purpose of this article focusing on automatically extracting
terms specific to a subset of a large corpus.
Finally, as the target application corresponds to a political
corpus, we can mention some related works in this perspec-
tive. The works of Labbé and Monière (2003, 2008) present
similar objectives by proposing a lexical investigation over a
relatively long period of governmental speeches (1945–
2000). These studies compare three parliamentary systems
by analyzing the Speeches of the Throne (Canada), the Inau-
gural Addresses (Quebec), and general policy statements
(France). Based on the vocabulary used by the different
governments, these studies show how the content of the
speeches evolved during the last 50 years. Moreover, the
similarities between speeches written by governments
coming from different parties are greater than expected.
Similar conclusions were reached for the Italian presidents
over the same time period (Pauli & Tuzzi, 2009).
The State of the Union Addresses
The corpus used in our experiments contains 225
speeches delivered by 42 U.S. presidents, from G. Washing-
ton (January, 8th, 1790) to B. Obama (January, 28th 2014).
The main objective of each address is to inform the Con-
gress and the nation about the state of the country on the one
hand and, on the other, to expose the presidential legislative
projects for the upcoming year. Thus, we have the same
context for each speech across more than 200 years. A more
detailed analysis of the form and political functions of these
speeches can be found in Shogan and Neale (2012).
Even though the president currently uses more diverse
channels to explain his choices (other official remarks, press
conferences, interviews, website, and web-mediated com-
munication), the State of the Union address remains the
most important annual presidential speech. It is clearly a
unique opportunity to present directly to both the Congress
and the nation the objectives and projects of the White
House (Hoffman & Howard, 2006).
Finally, some of these addresses are well known for
explaining an important issue or a political position held
for decades such as the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the
Monroe Doctrine (1823), the Roosevelt corollary to the
Monroe Doctrine (1904), the Four Freedoms (1941), or
the War on Poverty (1964). In others, we can find the first
occurrence of well-known expressions such as the axis of
evil (2002).
In this study, we assume that the same author is behind all
speeches covering a given presidency, and by extension we
assume that the president himself is the author. Of course,
this is not exact because we know that behind each well-
known politician there is usually a speechwriter. For
example, behind Kennedy we find the name of Sorensen
(Carpenter & Seltzer, 1970), Favreau behind Obama, and
2 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
even Madison and Hamilton behind some speeches deliv-
ered by Washington. But, as Sorensen said:
If a man in a high office speaks words which convey his prin-
ciples and policies and ideas and he’s willing to stand behind
them and take whatever blame or therefore credit go with them,
[the speech is] his.
Clearly, even if the president is not the real author, he
approves the style and the content. Moreover, to take the
latest events into account, the president might change some
passages before delivering a message.
This political corpus was generated by downloading all
of the speeches from the website www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Two presidents (W.H. Harrison [1841] and J.A. Garfield
[1881]) do not have any speeches because their terms were
limited to a few months. Cleveland appears twice as presi-
dent corresponding to his two terms interrupted by B. Har-
rison’s presidency. The Appendix presents, with more
details, a complete list of all U.S. presidents with the number
of their State of the Union addresses.
Each speech was cleaned up by replacing certain UTF-8
punctuation marks with their corresponding ASCII symbol.
When needed, the diacritics found in certain words (e.g.,
naïve) have been removed and the contracted forms were
replaced by their equivalent full forms (e.g., don’t into do
not).
To represent each address, we can employ the word-
tokens (e.g., choose, chose, chosen or markets, market) or
the word-types (lemmas or entries in the dictionary). Using
this last form, word-tokens belonging to the same dictionary
entry are regrouped under the same word-type (e.g., choose
or market in our previous example). Using this representa-
tion for our experiments also has the advantage of ignoring
possible variations due to syntax. For example, the two
word-types I and me are not viewed as distinct but are
merged under the common headword I. A spelling normal-
ization procedure was applied when different forms were
present (e.g., Viet Nam or Vietnam, al Qaeda, al-Qaida or Al
Qaida). In such cases, we kept the same spelling to denote
the same entity (e.g., US, U.S., U.S.A., United States).
To define the corresponding word-type to each word-
token, the part-of-speech (POS) tagger proposed by
Toutanova, Klein, Manning, and Singer (2003) was applied.
For each sentence given as input, this system provides the
corresponding POS tag to each token. For example, from the
sentence “Our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to
a cleaner, safer planet.” the POS tagger returns “Our/prp$
energy/nn policy/nn is/vbz creating/vbg jobs/nns and/cc
leading/vbg to/to a/dt cleaner/jjr,/, safer/jjr planet/nn ./..”
Tags may be attached to nouns (nn, noun, singular, nns
noun, plural), verbs (vb, base form, vbg gerund or present
participle, vbz 3rd-person singular present), adjectives (jj),
comparative adjective (jjr), personal pronouns (prp), prepo-
sitions (in), determiners (dt), and adverbs (rb). With this
information we are then able to derive the word-type by
removing the plural form of nouns (e.g., laws/nns → law/
nn) or by substituting inflectional suffixes of verbs (e.g.,
creating/vbg → create/vb). However, when only the plural
form is present, we kept this form (e.g., terrorists).
After this preprocessing, our U.S. corpus contains
1,964,025 tokens for 20,604 distinct word-types (length of
the vocabulary). When considering the occurrence fre-
quency, we have 6,242 hapax legomena (word-types appear-
ing only once, and corresponding to 30.3% of the whole
vocabulary) and 2,432 dis legomena (word-types occurring
exactly twice, representing 11.8% of the vocabulary). The
definite determiner the (151,814 occurrences) is the most
frequent word-type, followed by of (98,337), the comma
(96,497), be (65,705), the full stop (61,777), to (60,487),
and (60,188), and in (38,466).
At the speech level, the mean length is 8,731.2 tokens
(standard deviation: 5,860). The longest address was written
by Taft in 1910 (30,773 tokens) and the shortest by Wash-
ington in January 1790 (1,180 tokens). When considering
the mean length per president, Adams (1797–1800) wrote
the shortest remarks (average of 1,931 tokens per speech)
while Taft (1909–1912) is the author, in mean, of the longest
addresses (24,655 tokens).
Term Specificity Measure
The writing style of an author can be characterized by
the frequency variations of function words or a subset of
them (Stamatatos, 2009). Those terms, however, are of
limited interest when focusing on the semantic level. On
the other hand, each author can also be described by the
particular use of some terms or sequences of them. For
example, the word florins or the expression British subjects
cannot characterize recent U.S. presidents. But those
expressions belong to the specific vocabulary of other
presidents (e.g., Washington). Thus, the vocabulary specific
to an author can belong to both some functional words
(style) and some topical terms. To define this lexical speci-
ficity, Muller’s method (1992) can be adopted and was
used previously as an authorship attribution scheme
(Savoy, 2012). In the current study, the target application
pursues a larger scale than a few authors in describing the
lexical specificities associated with each U.S. president.
Moreover, a recent study shows that when applying a clus-
tering algorithm on this corpus, all speeches appearing
under the same presidency tend to regroup themselves
under the same cluster (Savoy, 2015).
To measure the specificity attached to a term (defined as
a word-type or a sequence of word-types in this study), we
split the whole corpus into two disjoint portions denoted P0
and P1. For a given term ti, its occurrence frequency in P0 is
denoted tfi0, and in P1 by tfi1. In the current study, P0 corre-
sponds to all speeches written during a given presidency,
while P1 denotes all other addresses. Thus, for the entire
corpus the occurrence frequency of the term ti becomes
tfi0 + tfi1. The total number of tokens in part P0 (or its length)
is denoted n0, similarly with P1 and n1, and the length of the
entire corpus is defined by n = n0 + n1.
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 3
DOI: 10.1002/asi
For any term ti we assume that the underlying distribution
is a binomial, with parameters n0 and p(ti) representing the
probability of the term ti being randomly selected from the
entire corpus. Based on the maximum likelihood principle,
this probability would be estimated as p(ti) = (tfi0 + tfi1) / n.
Through repeating this drawing n0 times, the expected
number of occurrences of term ti in P0 can be estimated by
n0 . p(ti). Then this value can be compared with the observed
number (namely tfi0) and a large difference between these
two values indicates a deviation from the expected behavior.
To obtain a more precise definition of large we account for
the binomial variance (defined as n0 . p(ti) . (1-p(ti))). Equa-
tion (1) defines the final standardized Z score (or standard
normal distribution N[0,1]) for term ti, using the partition P0
and P1.
Z score
p t
p t p t
i
i i
t
tf n
n
i
i
0
0 0
0 1
( ) = − ⋅ ( )
⋅ ( )⋅ − ( )( ) (1)
For each term, this procedure defines its specificity weight
according to the text P0. Based on the resulting Z score
value, we can verify whether this term is used proportionally
with roughly the same frequency in both parts (Z score value
close to 0). On the other hand, when a term has a positive Z
score larger than a fixed threshold δ (e.g., 3), we consider it
as significantly overused or belonging to the specific
vocabulary of P0. In such a case, the text P0 contains signifi-
cantly more occurrences of the corresponding term than
expected by a uniform distribution over the whole corpus. A
large negative Z score (less than -δ) indicates than the cor-
responding term is significantly underused in P0.
When applying this approach, we can consider only iso-
lated words or sequences of such lexical items (e.g., nuclear
weapon or healthcare reform). Although the whole vocabu-
lary can be analyzed, terms appearing only once or a few
times do not usually present a noteworthy interest, and thus
can be ignored. Moreover, words occurring in a single or a
few texts or used by only one or a few authors can be
ignored. Of course, it is also possible to add filters to remove
other terms (e.g., numbers, punctuation symbols), or words
belonging to some part-of-speech categories (e.g., such as
function words when the focus is only on topical aspects).
Finally, we suggest modeling the term occurrence using a
binomial distribution. This viewpoint can be modified by
considering a Poisson process or a hyper geometric distri-
bution (Baayen, 2001, 2008).
To have an idea about the most important isolated word-
types extracted by different strategies, Table 1 depicts an
example based on Reagan’s speeches. Words appearing in
the first column are the most frequent ones, and as shown in
the table, they are related to the style of the corresponding
president. Using the tf idf formulation (second column),
some of the main topics of this presidency appear as, for
example, those related to the federal budget (spending,
budget, deficit, program), the economic major problems
(job), the main foreign concern (Soviet), as well as terms
related to the context of these speeches (tonight, America).
To provide another example, the Appendix presents a similar
table extracted from Obama’s speeches (2009–2014).
When applying the LDA method, all functional words
(pronouns, articles, prepositions, auxiliary verbal forms,
punctuations) have been removed. Those words are very
frequent under all presidencies (as shown in the first column
of Table 1) and will appear in the higher ranks for all presi-
dents with the LDA approach. Therefore, it will be hard to
detect the differences between them. Once those very fre-
quent words are removed, the LDA generative approach was
applied and the results for President Reagan are depicted in
the third column of Table 1. As other recurrent concerns, we
see frequent words related to the family (family, child), the
fiscal policy (tax), and recurrent terms associated with
general and abstract objectives (freedom, future, hope). Only
two words appear in both the tf idf and LDA lists (tonight,
budget).
These three representation schemes do not provide a clear
and theoretically grounded decision rule specifying how
many terms are significantly associated with a presidency.
Different ad hoc rules can be adopted, for example, taking
the top k ranking terms or terms having a higher score than
a predefined threshold (Rajaraman & Ullman, 2012). As
mentioned previously, the LDA approach clearly requires an
additional preprocessing to remove functional terms more
associated with the style than the content of the speeches.
The specific vocabulary approach has a clear decision
rule. We suggest considering overused terms as those having
a Z score higher than 3 (and corresponding to 0.14% of the
Gaussian distribution). As depicted in the last column of
Table 1, the most significant terms associated with Reagan’s
presidency reflect three aspects: stylistic markers (we, yes),
words associated with the context (tonight), and terms
related to specific topics of this presidency (spending, San-
dinista, Soviet, deficit, . . .). It is also worth mentioning than
seven words are selected by both the tf idf and Z score
method over the 12 possible ones (spending, Soviet, budget,
deficit, dream, America, and let). The intersection with the
TABLE 1. The 12 most important words according to different weighting
schemes with speeches delivered by Reagan (1982–1988).
tf tf idf LDA Specific vocabulary
tf Word tf idf Word Prob. Word Z score Word
1,974 , 88.90 tonight 0.0090 freedom 33.08 we
1,709 the 74.66 spending 0.0068 future 25.80 America
1,626 . 70.47 Soviet 0.0066 work 24.67 spending
1,381 we 64.02 program 0.0065 family 21.51 freedom
1,215 and 59.75 budget 0.0065 budget 21.29 Sandinista
1,068 of 53.77 deficit 0.0063 tonight 20.69 let
1,043 be 52.10 job 0.0060 federal 18.87 Soviet
1,017 to 49.68 dream 0.0059 tax 18.34 deficit
713 an 48.43 percent 0.0059 free 18.24 dream
664 in 48.30 America 0.0058 give 17.49 budget
476 that 47.84 let 0.0056 child 16.67 family
409 for 44.97 help 0.0053 hope 16.21 yes
4 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
LDA top list is limited to two terms (freedom and family).
These observations indicate that the Z score method pro-
duces results closer to the classical tf idf paradigm than the
LDA approach. Examples coming from Obama’s speeches
in the Appendix confirm these findings.
Specific Vocabulary of Each Presidency
Instead of describing in detail all of the 42 U.S. presi-
dents that have written a State of the Union address, we will
focus on the most important according to Schlesinger’s
rating (1997). This list, as shown in Table 2, contains the
three great presidents (Lincoln, Washington, Roosevelt) and
the six near-great (Jefferson, Jackson, T. Roosevelt, Wilson,
Truman, and Polk). To have examples from more recent
presidents, we have added Kennedy, Clinton, Bush (son),
and Obama. To have a more complete picture, we can find in
the Appendix a table showing the top five most significant
overused word-types under each presidency.
This table shows isolated word-types (e.g., slave, child,
Vietnam), as well as bigrams of word-types (e.g., armed
vessel, Mexico war). In the latter case, such sequences are
formed by considering their POS tags and by selecting only
nouns and adjectives, being adjacent (e.g., free world) or
separated by function words or punctuation symbol (e.g.,
balance (of) payment). The short context of a word-type may
be useful in more precisely determining the meaning of an
isolated word such as nuclear with a possible association
with weapon or power-plant. Finally, instead of computing
the Z score of all possible word-types, we ignore less fre-
quent ones (having an occurrence frequency smaller than 20
in the whole corpus) or those used by only a few presidents
(terms appearing in speeches delivered by fewer than four
presidents).
First, this table depicts some function words (such as
pronouns, auxiliary or modal verbs) associated with a presi-
dency. These words indicate a specific aspect of the presi-
dential style not reused by all other tenants of the White
House. For example, and as depicted in Table 2, the pronoun
we is associated with Truman, Clinton, and Obama, who
used it to establish a link with the audience and to try to
involve it more. As shown in the Appendix, the pronoun we
appears as a style-marker for all presidencies after the
Second World War. This feature corresponds to a general
trend of last presidents towards a more conversational rheto-
ric promoting an intimacy between the speaker and the audi-
ence (Lim, 2002).
T. Roosevelt frequently employs, and in a distinctive way,
the verb should to invite the Congress to elaborate a new law
or to take an action. This aspect is not marginal because T.
Roosevelt slowly takes the initiative and leadership over the
Congress (Hoffman & Howard, 2006). Finally the pronoun
she associated with Polk is not related to the feminine
gender but refers to Mexico.
The second aspect detected by the specific vocabulary
approach is expressions related to the form and context to
the State of the Union addresses. For example, Washington
starts his speeches with the expression “Fellow-Citizens of
the Senate and House of Representatives.”1 Different presi-
dents will also reuse this phrase. However, Washington will
repeat inside each of his addresses the expressions “Gentle-
men of the Senate” and “Gentlemen of the House of Repre-
sentative.” Therefore this expression appears as specific to
the first U.S. President. As another example, we find the
term Tonight specific to Johnson because he was the first
president to utter the State of the Union address in the
evening (9 PM Eastern time) in order to achieve a larger
television audience.
Third, the most visible aspect of the specific vocabulary
detection is the presence of terms related to the topics par-
ticular to a given presidency. With Washington (1790–1796),
we have the questions related to the militia (for the protec-
tion of the frontiers), the peace with the Indians (Creeks,
Cherokees), the improvement of the post office (and military
post) across the country, and the concern of additional bur-
thens on the community, or the necessity to obtain loans
(further loan of 2,500,000 florins has been completed in
1We use italics to indicate terms or phrases appearing in the State of the
Union addresses.
TABLE 2. Five significantly overused terms by 13 different presidents.
Rank President Overused terms
2 Washington Gentlemen Senate militia burthen Creeks post office
4 Jefferson peace friendship armed vessel funded debt Mediterranean Barbary
5 Jackson bank united French ministry State bank Confederacy
9 Polk Mexico war Texas Rio Grande Paredes she
1 Lincoln emancipation insurgent slave rebellion telegraph
6 T. Roosevelt man should corporation forest interstate
7 Wilson thought coast submarine unrest serviceable storage
3 Roosevelt objective democratic United Nations Nazi nurse
8 Truman we atomic free nation world Communist
12 Kennedy nuclear Vietnam recession common market balance payment
20 Clinton we child healthcare 21st century parent
Bush (son) Iraq terrorists coalition homeland weapon
Obama job we clean energy why college
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 5
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Holland). Such recurrent topics correspond to historical
sources about this period (Vincent, 2012).
Under Jefferson’s presidency (1801–1808), the White
House is confronted with the issue of redemption of the
funded debt ($8 million, principal and interest), the need to
maintain peace (and) friendship with the Indians, and the
need to find a solution with the issue of American ships
captured by armed vessels of Spain and the presence of
Barbary States in the borders of the Mediterranean.
Jackson (1829–1836) has to contend with the renewal of
the Bank of the United States (which was also one of the
main topics during the 1832 election), and the related prob-
lems with the State banks. Foreign affairs are also usually
one of the main competences of the president (e.g., French
ministry, French government). As Jackson is clearly in favor
of a strict respect of the rights of the states, the federal level
is named sometimes by Confederacy or Confederated
States.
Under Polk’s presidency (1845–1848), Texas was admit-
ted into the Union. After sending U.S. troops along the Rio
Grande (the border recognized by Mexico was the Nueces
River), the war against Mexico (Paredes was the President
of Mexico) was inevitable and turns in favor of the US (with
the acquisition of the territories of New Mexico, Arizona,
Nevada, Utah, California, Colorado, and Wyoming).
For the other presidents, the terms depicted in Table 2 are
relatively obvious. We can, however, mention that Lincoln
was in favor of the Atlantic telegraph (connecting United
States with Europe) as well as its extension in the Pacific
region. This communication device was also very effective
in winning the Civil War. T. Roosevelt wants to improve
interstate commerce, and interstate business, to regulate and
supervise corporations (and especially combination of cor-
porations) and protect forest reserves. With Wilson, we
encounter the needs of the war (coast submarine) as well as
for Roosevelt (Nazi, nurse).
For the four more recent presidents, the word nuclear is
associated with force, weapons, and defense. Under Kenne-
dy’s presidency, the economic problems appear as top pri-
orities with the terms recession, international balance (of)
payment, and the beginning of the Vietnam war. With
Obama, the word-type job (and the unemployment after the
2008 crisis) is clearly the most important priority, with clean
energy as another concern. The term healthcare, however, is
first associated with Clinton, who was the first to try to
create a universal medical coverage system.
Using the Z score values associated with each term, we
can extract the overused terms that are able to characterize
a presidency either according to its style (with function
words such as I, we, why) or form (e.g., with the introduc-
tory and final sentences). More important, this term speci-
ficity measure can extract the vocabulary related to the
particular issues that the president must face during his
term. Clearly, the examples given in Table 2 illustrate the
usefulness of the specific vocabulary method when
working with many different authors or other subdivisions
of a large corpus.
Most Specific Sentences
Based on the previous method, a specificity weight can be
associated with each term. Using these weights, a system
can compute the specificity of a sentence as the sum of the
weights of its components. In our implementation, we
suggest to simply sum all significantly overused terms (or
terms having a Z score larger than the predefined positive
threshold δ, fixed at 3 in this study).
This extraction strategy tends to favor longer sentences
over a weighting scheme based, for example, on the average
number of overused terms or another mean sentence weight
formula. Experiments based on such mean values tend to
extract very short sentences (e.g., “Yes, we can,” “Thank
you” or “May God bless America”). Such short descriptors
are not useful to clearly indicate an important theme under a
given presidency.
Based on our extraction strategy, the most specific sen-
tence contains many significantly overused word-types or
sequences of such word-types. The extracted sentence cor-
responds usually to one well-known legislative priority or
project of the president. Starting with Lincoln, the following
sentence was extracted from his 1863 State of the Union
address. This sentence is a part of a proposed amendment to
the US Constitution.
The President of the United States shall deliver to every such
State bonds of the United States bearing interest at the rate of __
per cent per annum to an amount equal to the aggregate sum
of___ for each slave shown to have been therein by the Eighth
Census of the United States, said bonds to be delivered to such
State by installments or in one parcel at the completion of the
abolishment, accordingly as the same shall have been gradual or
at one time within such State; and interest shall begin to run
upon any such bond only from the proper time of its delivery as
aforesaid.
In this example, the significantly overused terms by
Lincoln are underlined and italics are used to denote terms
appearing in the top 10 of the most overused terms (e.g.,
slave).
With Roosevelt, the most specific sentence appears in
1945 and summarizes the four freedoms.
Our own objectives are clear; the objective of smashing the
militarism imposed by war lords upon their enslaved peoples
the objective of liberating the subjugated Nations, the objective
of establishing and securing freedom of speech, freedom of
religion, freedom from want, and freedom from fear every-
where in the world.
The most characteristic sentence of Kennedy’s speeches
is included in the 1962 State of the Union address. This
passage shows the importance of economic considerations
under this presidency. It clearly indicates that the president
is also playing the role of the legislative leader. Finally,
Kennedy’s style (Carpenter & Seltzer, 1970) can be typified
by long sentences and this example also illustrates this
aspect.
6 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
To expand our growth and job opportunities, I urge on the
Congress three measures: First, the Manpower Training and
Development Act, to stop the waste of able-bodied men and
women who want to work, but whose only skill has been
replaced by a machine, or moved with a mill, or shut down with
a mine; Second, the Youth Employment Opportunities Act, to
help train and place not only the one million young Americans
who are both out of school and out of work, but the twenty-six
million young Americans entering the labor market in this
decade; and Third, the 8 percent tax credit for investment in
machinery and equipment, which, combined with planned revi-
sions of depreciation allowances, will spur our modernization,
our growth, and our ability to compete abroad.
Reagan’s speeches can be characterized by an overuse of
pronouns we/us/our, the verb do, the function words what,
here, just, but, and the use of the genitive case in the form of
the ’s. Of course, we can also find more topical terms such
as child, America, freedom, or deficit (as shown in Table 1).
The system extracts the following most specific sentence
from the 1983 State of the Union address.
If we do that, if we care what our children and our children’s
children will say of us, if we want them one day to be thankful
for what we did here in these temples of freedom, we will work
together to make America better for our having been here, not
just in this year or this decade but in the next century and
beyond.
With Obama, the economic and financial themes possess
a central place and the related terms such as job, business,
and tax are significantly overused under his presidency. The
most specific sentence extracted from the speech delivered
in 2013 is the following:
The American people deserve a tax code that helps small busi-
nesses spend less time filling out complicated forms, and more
time expanding and hiring; a tax code that ensures billionaires
with high-powered accountants can not pay a lower rate than
their hard-working secretaries; a tax code that lowers incentives
to move jobs overseas, and lowers tax rates for businesses and
manufacturers that create jobs right here in America.
These examples illustrate the usefulness of detecting spe-
cific sentences according to a given author. Each of them
presents a mix between terms more related to the style (such
as pronouns, modal verbs, or other function words) and
word-types reflecting one or more of the characteristic con-
cerns of a given presidency. Moreover, favoring long sen-
tences tends to reduce the presence of anaphoric references
across sentences and thus increases the readability of the
selected sentences.
Finally, instead of being limited to a single sentence, the
system may return a few specific sentences related to a given
presidency. To achieve this an iterative process can be
applied. To define the most specific sentence, we follow the
previously described extraction scheme. Then for all terms
appearing in this sentence their specific values are reduced
by a fixed amount (e.g., six in this study). This decrease
tends to promote other overused terms reflecting another
recurrent topic. We then iterate with the sentence extraction
scheme to determine the next most specific sentence. When
applying this procedure to Reagan’s speeches, Table 3
depicts the five most specific sentences. In this table, the first
column indicates the year of the State of the Union address.
A similar example with Obama’s speeches is depicted in the
Appendix.
Dynamic Evolution of Some Specific Terms
The previous sections demonstrate the usefulness of the
application of the specific vocabulary method to describe
distinctive aspects of a given presidency or to detect their
most specific sentences. This term specificity measure can
be used to visualize the dynamic evolution of selected terms
over time or across the different presidencies.
Figure 1 shows the Z score evolutions of the word-types
job, tax, debt, and bank. In this figure, the two horizontal
dashed lines represent the limits (±3) between which the
variations must be interpreted as normal fluctuations.
The term job is depicted with a dashed black line in
Figure 1. This term appears usually below the second
horizontal limit (indicating the limit value of −3) and
thus corresponds to a significantly underused term. From
TABLE 3. The five most significant sentences from the State of the Union
addresses uttered by Reagan (1982–1988).
Year Specific sentences
1983 If we do that, if we care what our children and our children’s
children will say of us, if we want them one day to be
thankful for what we did here in these temples of freedom,
we will work together to make America better for our
having been here, not just in this year or this decade but in
the next century and beyond.
1988 And as we have worked together to bring down spending, tax
rates, and inflation, employment has climbed to record
heights; America has created more jobs and better, higher
paying jobs; family income has risen for 4 straight years,
and America’s poor climbed out of poverty at the fastest
rate in more than 10 years.
1982 And then there are countless, quiet, everyday heroes of
American who sacrifice long and hard so their children will
know a better life than they’ve known; church and civic
volunteers who help to feed, clothe, nurse, and teach the
needy; millions who’ve made our nation and our nation’s
destiny so very special, unsung heroes who may not have
realized their own dreams themselves but then who reinvest
those dreams in their children.
1986 Tonight the American people deserve our thanks for 37
straight months of economic growth, for sunrise firms and
modernized industries creating 9 million new jobs in 3
years, interest rates cut in half, inflation falling over from
12 percent in 1980 to under 4 today, and a mighty river of
good works, a record $74 billion in voluntary giving just
last year alone.
1984 Can we love America and not reach out to tell them: You are
not forgotten; we will not rest until each of you can reach
as high as your God-given talents will take you.
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 7
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Eisenhower’s presidency, this word-type was significantly
overused by all presidents, with a first maximum reached
under Clinton and the highest value under Obama’s
presidency.
The term tax shown with a thin solid blue line in Figure 1
follows mainly the same pattern. Coolidge (1923–1928) was
the first to significantly overuse this word-type. Starting with
Kennedy, the evolution of this term follows a sinusoidal
curve, with maximums reached under Ford, Reagan, and
Bush (son) (and his policy of tax reduction).
The evolution of the usage of the term debt is displayed
with a dotdashed red line. This word-type is overused by
different presidents during the first 50 years of existence of
the United States. Jefferson (1801–1808), then Quincy
Adams (1825–1828), Jackson (1829–1836), and Van Buren
(1837–1840) were faced with this issue. Of course, this
question reappears under A. Johnson’s presidency (1865–
1868) just after the Civil War (that had to be funded). Coo-
lidge (1923–1928) is the last president who overused this
term. This word-type is not absent in current speeches but
this issue appears more under the term deficit.
The word-type bank follows another pattern. As shown in
Figure 1 with a dotted black line, this term is clearly over-
used by Jackson (1829–1836) but the highest value is
achieved under Van Buren’s presidency (1837–1840) (with
the issue of the Bank of the United States, currently the
Federal Reserve, established under Wilson’s presidency).
This word-type also appears overused during Buchanan’s
term (1857–1860), the second term of Cleveland (1893–
1896), Taft’s term (1909–1912), and Hoover’s presidency
(1929–1932) (with issues related to some bank bankruptcies
during the Great Depression).
If we consider the longest sequence of overused terms,
we can find the word-type need and the full stop, two terms
systematically overused by all 15 presidents after Coolidge
(1923). From this presidency, the sentences tend to be
shorter and thus we require more full stops. This modifica-
tion can also be explained by the fact that, from 1934, the
presidents have usually delivered this address in spoken
form.
The word-types we, can, and world are overused by all
the 13 presidents starting from Roosevelt (1933). Except
world, these terms are mainly related to the style of the
president. The auxiliary verb should, overused by T.
Roosevelt (1901–1908), tends to be replaced by need and
can. This is an indication that the presidents of the second
half of the 20th century tend to have a stronger position to
face Congress than their predecessors of the second half of
the 19th century.
With the frequent use of the pronoun we, the president
tends to establish a link with the audience. In Table 2, this
pronoun appears three times and in association with
Truman, Clinton, and Obama. Of course, the pronoun we
can refer to different entities such as I and my government,
FIG. 1. Variations of the term specificity measure (Z score) of some terms across the State of the Union corpus (1790–2014). [Color figure can be viewed
in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
8 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
I and you (the Congress), our country, or simply together.
Another explanation of the more frequent usage of this
pronoun is the fact that the State of the Union addresses are,
from 1947, televised and, from 1965, they are delivered in
the evening. Clearly, the president wants to reach a larger
audience, and addresses himself more directly to the people
of America to find external support for his proposals. Such a
strategy might be important when the president does not
have a majority in the Congress.
The pronoun I was overused by all nine presidents from
Johnson on (1964). Clearly, the speeches tend to be less
distant, warmer, honest, and personal (Pennebaker, 2011).
The president also clearly indicates that he is the leader. The
pronoun you is also overused but only for the last five presi-
dents, starting with Reagan (1982).
When the president needs to designate his country, he
may use different forms such as U.S., United States, our
country, the nation, the Union, or simply America. This last
form, together with American, are significantly overused by
all the presidents from Johnson on (1964). The previous
presidents tend to opt more for other formulations such as
nation with Roosevelt, Truman, or Kennedy, Union for
Lincoln (1861–1864), or United States for Washington
(1790–1796), Monroe (1817–1824), or Grant (1869–1876).
In France, the preferred term is République but the words
nation or simply France are also frequently used (Labbé &
Monière, 2003) while Italian presidents tend to use Italia
more often than Repubblica (Pauli & Tuzzi, 2009).
When we are looking backward, the definite determiner
the is significantly overused by 11 consecutive presidents,
from Madison (1809) to Buchanan (1860) and then by 10
tenants of the White House from A. Johnson (1865) to Taft
(1912). Only Lincoln (1861–1865) does not overuse this
determiner. The political style of the 19th century is clearly
associated with more nouns typically used to describe and
explain the situation.
Inspecting more of the content of those 19th century
speeches, we discover sequences of overused word-types
such as bond (with the issue of the debt management,
from Hayes [1877] to McKinley [1900]), Indian and reser-
vation (from Grant [1869] to Cleveland [1896]), silver (in
the sense of silver coin, from Hayes [1877] to Cleveland
[1896]), or commerce (from Adams [1797] to Jackson
[1836]).
When analyzing some recent sequences of significantly
overused terms, a picture of recurrent issues appears. Unem-
ployment is certainly one of these problems. The word-type
job is overused by all presidents from Kennedy on (1960)
while the terms work and worker are overused from Carter
on (1978). Spending is significantly overused from Nixon on
(1970) and can be associated with other series of overused
terms such as cut (from Ford [1975]), budget (from Eisen-
hower [1953]), and more recently with tax (from Reagan
[1982]). As sequences of overused terms, there are other
persistent topics such as family, parent, child, senior,
woman, and school. As a more ambiguous word-type, we
have the term nuclear significantly overused from Ford
(1975) and usually associated with weapons (arms, arsenal,
proliferation) and currently it is more linked with
power-plants. As additional sequences of significantly over-
used word-types, we can observe reform, stop, strategy,
research, technology, leader, and commitment.
Lexical Leaders
Using the term specificity measure, we can also deter-
mine the presidents who present or explain a new issue using
an overused term that will then be overused by the k follow-
ing presidencies. Based on this definition, the president who
is the first to overuse this term is called the lexical leader.
Such an expression may occur due to a new issue or problem
(e.g., inflation, Al Qaida), recurrent over at least one presi-
dency (with k = 1) or more (e.g., with k = 3, covering
roughly two decades). Of course, fixing a large value for k
will decrease the probability of observing such an overused
term sequence.
In this study the value of k was fixed to 3, which implies
that the sequence covers at least four presidents overusing
the same expression or word-type. For example, as a figure
of style, Reagan overused the term bless and God, both will
then be overused by the following four presidents (until
Obama). For example, Reagan or Bush (father) repeat it
many times and may finish their speeches with the phrase
“God bless you, and God bless America” while Clinton or
Obama tend to only utter the formulation “God bless you,
and God bless the United States” once. Such an expression
is not fully absent from the other president’s writings, but it
is less frequent and thus not overused. For example, we can
mention Truman with the final phrase “May God bless our
country and our cause” or Roosevelt with “God must
forever bless.” In the beginning of the 19th century, the ref-
erence to God appears differently, as for example, with
Jackson (1829) who wrote “I now commend you, fellow
citizens, to the guidance of Almighty God.” But with
Reagan and his followers, the term God appears in other
places in their remarks and the last sentence in Table 3 is
such an example.
To speed up the computation, we added the constraint
that the word-type must have an occurrence frequency of 20
or more over all the State of the Union addresses. With this
restriction, the vocabulary contains 4,155 distinct word-
types. Fixing the value k = 3, we can detect 160 word-types
that are overused under four consecutive presidencies. The
longest sequence is with the full stop, starting with Coolidge
(1923) until Obama (2014). This aspect is clearly related to
a rhetoric evolution towards the use of shorter sentences and
a style more direct, without long explanations (Lim, 2002).
With k = 3, Bush (father) is the last president that can be
considered as a lexical leader (Clinton is only followed by
two presidents, Bush [son] and Obama).
Inspecting the distribution of these overused term
sequences, we can count 31 such series from Washington
(1790) to Hoover (1932), and 129 from Roosevelt (1933) to
Obama (2014). This skewed distribution indicates that we
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 9
DOI: 10.1002/asi
can distinguish between two main periods, before and after
1933.
As lexical leaders until 1933, the three most influential
presidents are Hayes (with five terms, namely, bond, silver,
coinage, sinking, and reservation), Coolidge (1923–1928)
(five word-types: economic, national, through, need, and the
full stop), Grant (1869–1876) (four terms: polygamy,
Indian, subject, and commend), and Arthur (1881–1884)
(four word-types: suggest, suggestion, revenue, and
pension). The other presidents have introduced between 0 to
two terms overused by the next three presidencies, such as
Adams with the word-types communication and commerce.
Until Roosevelt (1933), the different tenants of the White
House preferred to use their own formulations. On the other
hand, when they are using the same terms as their predeces-
sors, those forms are usually not significantly overused. As
another possible explanation, we must recall that those
speeches were mainly only written.
From 1933, we observe a greater number of sequences of
overused terms. The most fruitful lexical leader is Reagan
(with 52 word-types as, for example, school, initiative, tax,
future, tell, say, technology, woman, reform, etc.), followed
by Bush (father) (with 17 word-types, e.g., student, lead,
clean, health, care, teacher, Israel, need, etc.), Roosevelt
(10 word-types: world, peace, defense, goal, task, program,
can, must, we, and today), and Truman (with 10 word-types:
Soviet, communist, progress, major, help, move, increase,
level, billion and basic).
Following this group, we can find Johnson (seven terms:
people, America, American, challenge, will, I, and face),
Ford (seven word-types: must, strategic, cut, down, eco-
nomic, nuclear, and Lincoln), Carter (seven terms: work,
worker, build, together, leader, commitment, young,
tonight), Nixon (six word-types: strong, inflation, spending,
growth, decade, and problem), Eisenhower (five terms: job,
budget, new, space, and quest), and finally Kennedy (three
terms: more, job, percent). From a lexical point of view, the
presidencies of Eisenhower, Kennedy, or Ford present only
a few overused terms reused by the following presidents.
When analyzing the style of the U.S. presidents (Savoy,
2015), we can see that these three presidents are strongly
related to only one other president and relatively distant
from the others. In other words, and from a lexical point of
view, they are isolated. On the other hand, Reagan’s style is
strongly associated with Clinton, Obama, and the two Bush
presidents.
Conclusion
The State of the Union corpus contains the annual
speeches of 42 U.S. presidents over more than 200 years.
Each address depicts the situation of the country on an
annual basis and presents the legislative agenda and priori-
ties of the White House for the forthcoming year. This
corpus provides a pertinent collection to inspect the terms or
expressions frequently used over time or the main political
formulations and topics according to each president.
Based on this corpus, we have explained how we can
measure the term specificity according to a given president.
This measure is then able to detect terms (isolated words or
short sequence of n-gram of words) particular to a given
presidency or to a given time period. When compared to
other representation strategies, the specific vocabulary
scheme proposes a clear decision rule to determine which
terms are overused. This selection strategy shares some
similarities with the tf idf weighting scheme but both
produce different results than either the simple tf weighting
scheme or the LDA model.
Having associated a specificity weight to each term, the
most distinctive sentence of each president can be deter-
mined. Examples show us that such sentences tend to reflect
both the president’s style and one of his main concerns. If
needed, the suggested extraction scheme may produce a few
significant sentences providing a better overview of the most
recurrent concerns of a given presidency.
As another facet, the dynamic evolution of terms can be
analyzed. For example, the frequency of the definite article
the and the preposition of tends to decrease over time, while
the use of the full stop tends to increase. The presidential
sentences tend to be shorter, with fewer nouns and therefore
present less complex explanations. From Roosevelt (1933),
the frequencies of personal pronouns (we, I, you) tend to
increase significantly. When inspecting more topical terms,
we can detect different patterns. For example, the word-type
debt was significantly overused during the first 50 years and
then it appears less in subsequent governmental speeches.
As an opposite example, the words job or tax are signifi-
cantly overused by the recent presidents.
Finally, we suggest defining the most prolific presidents
by considering terms significantly overused during a given
period of k presidencies. According to this lexical ranking,
Reagan appears in the first position, followed by Bush
(father) then Roosevelt and Truman. Our analysis indicates,
however, that presidents coming after 1933 are inclined to
overuse significantly more terms used by their predecessors.
This finding suggests that the last presidencies tend to have
more similar speeches than presidents of the 19th or begin-
ning of the 20th century.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported, in part, by the Swiss NSF
under Grant #200021_149665/1. I would like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions and remarks.
References
Baayen, H.R. (2001). Word frequency distribution. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Kluwer.
Baayen, H.R. (2008). Analysis linguistic data: A practical introduction to
statistics using R. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Blei, D.M., & Lafferty, J. (2009). Topic models. In A. Srivastava & M.
Sahami (Eds.), Topic models, text mining (pp. 71–94). London: Taylor &
Francis.
10 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., & Jordan, M.I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research: JMLR, 3(1), 993–1022.
Carpenter, R.H., & Seltzer, R.V. (1970). On Nixon’s Kennedy style.
Speaker and Gavel, 7(2), 41–43.
Hoffman, D.R., & Howard, A.D. (2006). Addressing the State of the Union.
The evolution and impact of the president’s big speech. Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner.
Labbé, D., & Monière, D. (2003). Le discours gouvernemental. Canada,
Québec, France (1945–2000). Paris: Honoré Champion.
Labbé, D., & Monière, D. (2008). Les mots qui nous gouvernent. Le
discours des premiers ministres québécois: 1960–2005. Montréal,
Canada: Monière-Wollank.
Lim, E.T. (2002). Five trends in presidential rhetoric: An analysis of rheto-
ric from George Washington to Bill Clinton. Presidential Studies Quar-
terly, 32(2), 328–348.
Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P., & Schütze, H. (2008). Introduction to infor-
mation retrieval. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Muller, C. (1992). Principes et méthodes de statistique lexicale. Paris:
Honoré Champion.
Nenkova, A., & McKeown, K. (2011). Automatic summarization. Founda-
tions and Trends in Information Retrieval, 5(2–3), 1–134.
Paice, C.D. (1990). Constructing literature abstracts by computer: Techniques
and prospects. Information Processing & Management, 26(1), 171–186.
Pauli, F., & Tuzzi, A. (2009). The end of year addresses of the presidents of
the Italian republic (1948–2006): Discourse similarities and differences.
Glottometrics, 18(1), 40–51.
Pennebaker, J.W. (2011). The secret life of pronouns. What our words say
about us. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Rajaraman, A., & Ullman, J.D. (2012). Mining of massive datasets. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Savoy, J. (2012). Authorship attribution based on specific vocabulary.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 30(2), 170–199.
Savoy, J. (2015). Text clustering: An application with the State of the Union
addresses. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology: JASIST, DOI: 10.1002/asi.23283.
Schlesinger, A.M., Jr. (1997). Rating the US presidents: Washington to
Clinton. Political Science Quarterly, 11(2), 179–190.
Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automatic text categorization.
ACM Computing Survey, 34(1), 1–27.
Shogan, C.J., & Neale, T.H. (2012). The president’s State of the Union
address: Tradition, function, and policy implications (pp. 7–5700).
Washington (DC): Congressional Research Service.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy: JASIST, 60(3), 538–556.
Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Manning, C., & Singer, Y. (2003). Feature-rich
part-of-speech tagging with a cyclid dependency network. In M. Hearst
& M. Ostendorf (Ed.), Proceedings of NAACL 2003 (pp. 252–259).
Edmonton, Canada: ACL.
Vincent, B. (2012). Histoire des Etats-Unis. Paris: Flammarion.
Appendix
TABLE A1. List of the U.S. presidents with the number of the State of the
Union addresses (1790–2014).
# President name # speeches From To
1 George Washington 8 1790 1796
2 John Adams 4 1797 1800
3 Thomas Jefferson 8 1801 1808
4 James Madison 8 1809 1816
5 James Monroe 8 1817 1824
6 John Quincy Adams 4 1825 1828
7 Andrew Jackson 8 1829 1836
8 Martin Van Buren 4 1837 1840
9 William H. Harrison 0 1841 1841
10 John Tyler 4 1841 1844
11 James Polk 4 1845 1848
12 Zachary Taylor 1 1849 1849
13 Millard Fillmore 3 1850 1852
14 Franklin Pierce 4 1853 1856
15 James Buchanan 4 1857 1860
16 Abraham Lincoln 4 1861 1864
17 Andrew Johnson 4 1865 1868
18 Ulysses S. Grant 8 1869 1876
19 Rutherford B. Hayes 4 1877 1880
20 James A. Garfield 0 1881 1881
21 Chester A. Arthur 4 1881 1884
22 Grover Cleveland 4 1885 1888
23 Benjamin Harrison 4 1889 1892
24 Grover Cleveland 4 1893 1896
25 William McKinley 4 1897 1900
26 Theodore Roosevelt 8 1901 1908
27 William H. Taft 4 1909 1912
28 Woodrow Wilson 8 1913 1920
29 Warren Harding 2 1921 1922
30 Calvin Coolidge 6 1923 1928
31 Herbert Hoover 4 1929 1932
32 Franklin D. Roosevelt 12 1933 1945
33 Harry S. Truman 7 1947 1953
34 Dwight D. Eisenhower 9 1953 1960
35 John F. Kennedy 3 1961 1963
36 Lyndon B. Johnson 6 1964 1969
37 Richard Nixon 5 1970 1974
38 Gerald R. Ford 3 1975 1977
39 Jimmy Carter 3 1978 1980
40 Ronald Reagan 7 1982 1988
41 George H.W. Bush 4 1989 1992
42 William J. Clinton 8 1993 2000
43 George W. Bush 8 2001 2008
44 Barack Obama 6 2009 2014
Table A2 shows the top 12 word-types selected by the
four strategies based on Obama’s speeches. As for the pre-
vious example with Reagan’s addresses (Table 1), the
simple term frequency (tf) does not provide pertinent infor-
mation. The tf idf weighting scheme indicates more clearly
some important topics related to Obama’s presidency with
lemmas such as job, kid, college, student, innovation, and
deficit. Other words are related to the form (tonight) or the
style (why, get, let). The last column (Z score) forms a list
related to the tf idf one (8 terms in common over 12). As
distinct terms, we can found some stylistic items (we, do)
and the topical terms energy and Afghan. It is interesting to
observe that the pronoun we appears also as the fourth most
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 11
DOI: 10.1002/asi
frequent word in Obama’s speeches as depicted in the first
column. After removing very frequent words, the LDA list
proposes other main concerns of this presidency, namely
tax, business, health, economy as well as ambiguous word-
types (cut, plan).
Table 3 gives the five most specific sentences of Reagan’s
speeches. To establish a parallel, Table A3 illustrates the five
most specific sentences of Obama’s addresses. The first is
clearly related to tax, business, and jobs while the second
is related to the clean energy issue. The third sentence is
related the healthcare reform. The fourth indicates that one
of most important issues under this presidency is related to
new jobs, and the last one concerns the financial system that
must serve both business and families.
TABLE A2. The top most important words according to different weighting schemes with speeches uttered by Obama (2009–2014).
tf tf idf LDA Specific vocabulary
tf Word tf idf Word Prob. Word Z score Word
2291 , 219.24 job 0.0129 work 46.68 job
2216 . 131.76 tonight 0.0128 job 35.00 we
1823 the 98.63 get 0.0093 tax 30.61 why
1695 we 81.88 help 0.0087 business 30.06 get
1406 be 78.53 kid 0.0080 cut 24.43 college
1383 and 77.27 college 0.0065 plan 23.03 kid
1360 to 72.42 why 0.0064 family 22.65 energy
1011 of 65.99 student 0.0061 health 21.34 innovation
915 an 56.87 deficit 0.0060 give 21.15 student
887 that 56.33 clean 0.0060 economy 21.10 tonight
648 in 54.73 innovation 0.0057 change 20.95 do
530 have 51.52 let 0.0053 care 20.92 Afghan
TABLE A3. The five most significant sentences from the State of the
Union addresses uttered by Obama (2009–2014).
Year Specific sentences
2013 The American people deserve a tax code that helps small
businesses spend less time filling out complicated forms, and
more time expanding and hiring; a tax code that ensures
billionaires with high-powered accountants can not pay a lower
rate than their hard-working secretaries; a tax code that lowers
incentives to move jobs overseas, and lowers tax rates for
businesses and manufacturers that create jobs right here in
America.
2014 And when our children’s children look us in the eye and ask if we
did all we could to leave them a safer, more stable world, with
new sources of energy, I want us to be able to say yes, we did.
2009 Now, there will be many different opinions and ideas about how
to achieve reform, and that is why I am bringing together
businesses and workers, doctors and health care providers,
Democrats and Republicans to begin work on this issue next
week.
2012 Tonight, my message to business leaders is simple: Ask
yourselves what you can do to bring jobs back to your country,
and your country will do everything we can to help you
succeed.
2012 The new rules we passed restore what should be any financial
system’s core purpose: Getting funding to entrepreneurs with
the best ideas, and getting loans to responsible families who
want to buy a home, start a business, or send a kid to college.
12 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
TABLE A4. The top-five most significantly overused isolated words under each presidency.
Presidency Word 1 Word 2 Word 3 Word 4 Word 5
Washington Gentlemen militia you Pennsylvania burthen
Adams Gentlemen Philadelphia commissioner amity capture
Jefferson funded Mediterranean millions Orleans Barbary
Madison British enemy militia savage council
Monroe Spain likewise presume colony adventurer
QAdams of enumeration the discriminating Parliament
Jackson French bank Chamber France the
Buren bank money suspension public institution
Tyler Texas she destined paper annexation
Polk Mexico Texas Mexican she Paredes
Taylor California empire construct Granada observance
Fillmore California expedition postage duty dock
Pierce state of compact territory sectional
Buchanan Kansas constitution slavery whilst slave
Lincoln emancipation insurgent slave rebellion telegraph
AJohnson constitution rebellion paper depreciated inclusive
Grant expatriation herewith etc. of claim
Hayes coinage the silver Indian tender
Arthur merchandise likely receipts steel lately
Cleveland1 reservation silver coinage coined of
Harrison elector meat silver steamship $
Cleveland2 gold note $ silver inch
McKinley island Cuba Manila Puerto the
TRoosevelt man should corporation forest interstate
Taft canal wool court the department
Wilson thought unrest play submarine storage
Harding readjustment railway manager transportation relationship
Coolidge marketing agriculture consolidation ought league
Hoover depression construction federal agency unemployment
Roosevelt war objective Japanese fight democracy
Truman we atomic world Communist Soviet
Eisenhower program economic we Communist federal
Kennedy alliance we Communist nuclear recession
Johnson Vietnam we billion tonight poverty
Nixon America goal we responsive truly
Ford energy oil program I federal
Carter Salt inflation Soviet we nuclear
Reagan we America spending freedom let
GHWBush we tonight America I kid
Clinton we child parent 21st you
GWBush Iraq terrorists we coalition homeland
Obama job we why get energy
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 13
DOI: 10.1002/asi
