See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283128522
A	visual	analytics	based	investigation	on	the
authorship	of	the	holy	quran
ARTICLE	·	JANUARY	2015
READS
11
1	AUTHOR:
H.	Sayoud
University	of	Science	and	Technology	Houa…
46	PUBLICATIONS			65	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
All	in-text	references	underlined	in	blue	are	linked	to	publications	on	ResearchGate,
letting	you	access	and	read	them	immediately.
Available	from:	H.	Sayoud
Retrieved	on:	29	March	2016
A Visual Analytics based Investigation  
on the Authorship of the Holy Quran  
Halim Sayoud 
USTHB University, Algiers. 
halim.sayoud@uni.de  halim@sayoud.net 
  
Keywords:  Visual analytics, Authorship attribution, Pattern recognition, Natural language processing, Religious books. 
Abstract:  In this paper, we present a visual analytics based investigation for the task of authorship attribution of the 
holy Quran with regards to the Hadith Author (the Prophet). This can be seen as an authorship 
discrimination task between the two religious books: Quran vs Hadith. The first book represents the Divine 
book written by Allah (God) as claimed by the Prophet Muhammad, whereas the second one represents a 
collection of certified Prophet’s statements. 
Two visual analytics clustering methods are employed, namely: a Hierarchical Clustering and Fuzzy C-
mean Clustering. On the other hand, seven types of NLP features are combined and normalized by PCA 
reduction before the classification process. The visual analytics results have revealed interesting results in 
2D and 3D disposition. In summary, they show two main clusters in both experiments: Quran cluster and 
Hadith cluster; and the disposition of the resulting clusters corresponds to a clear authorship distinction 
between the two religious books. 
 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In the Islamic religion, the Quran is defined as the 
Divine book that was written by Allah and 
transmitted to the Prophet Muhammad by the Anger 
Gabriel (Wi1, 2011) (Nasr, 2013) (Ibrahim, 2014). 
Also, as claimed and confirmed by the Prophet, the 
holy Quran was written by God (Allah) and only 
transmitted to him (the Prophet). Furthermore, in the 
Quran, a clear verse says: « O Messenger 
(Muhammad)! transmit (the Message) which has 
been sent down to you from your Lord. And if you 
do not, then you have not conveyed his Message. 
Allah will protect you from people. Allah do not 
guide the people who disbelieve » [5:67]. 
So, basically there is no dispute on the origin of 
the Quran between the Islamic scholars, since the 
two concerned authors: Allah and his Prophet agree 
and confirm that it is really written by Allah and not 
by the Prophet. 
However, some doubts on the origin of the 
Divine book assume that it could be written by the 
Prophet (Al-Shreef, 2009). 
So, now, a raising question would be: “Was the 
Quran written by the Prophet?” 
To respond to that question, it is important to 
handle the problem with a great delicacy and a 
maximum of scientific rigor.  
The Quran is taken in its entirety in electronic 
unicode form. It should be conform with the official 
Saudi holy Quran, which is agreed by the Saudi 
ministry of religious affairs and which represents the 
universal book recognized by the Islamic 
community.  
Similarly, for the Christian religion, there exist 
several disputes about the origin of some texts of the 
Bible. Such disputes are very difficult to solve due 
to the delicacy of the problem, the religious 
sensitivity and because the texts were written a long 
time ago. One of the purposes of stylometry is 
authorship attribution, which is the determination of 
the author of a particular piece of text for which 
there is some dispute about its writer, as reported by 
Mills (Mills, 2003). Hence, it can be seen why 
Holmes (Mills, 2003) explained that the area of 
stylistic analysis is the main contribution of statistics 
to religious studies. For example, early in the 
nineteenth century, Schleiermacher disputed the 
authorship of the Pauline Pastoral Epistle 1 Timothy. 
As a result, other German speaking theologians, 
namely, Baur and Holtzmann, initiated similar 
studies of New Testament books (Mills, 2003).  
As mentioned previously, in such problems, it is 
crucial to use rigorous scientific tools and it is 
important to interpret the results very carefully. That 
is, knowing that authors possess specific stylistic 
features making them differentiable, we tried to 
make some experiments of authorship discrimination 
between the Quran and some Prophet’s statements in 
order to see whether the Quran was written by the 
Prophet Muhammad or not. For this purpose, 7 types 
of features are extracted and 2 different clustering 
methods based on Visual Analytics are employed. 
 
2 STYLOMETRIC FEATURES  
Several linguistic features have been proposed in the 
field of authorship attribution. We can quote four 
main types: 
Vocabulary based Features: In general, the typical 
words, an author is used to write, can reveal his or 
her identity. The problem with such features is that 
the data can be faked easily. A more reliable method 
would be able to take into account a large fraction of 
the words in the document (Juola, 2006) as the 
average sentence length.  
Syntax based Features: One reason that function 
words perform well is because they are topic-
independent (Juola, 2006). A person’s preferred 
syntactic constructions can be cues to his authorship. 
One simple way to capture this is to tag the relevant 
documents for part of speech or other syntactic 
constructions (Stamatatos, 2001) using a tagger. 
Orthographic based features: One weakness of 
vocabulary-based approaches is that they do not take 
advantage of morphologically related words. A 
person who writes of “work” is also likely to write 
of “working”, “worker”, etc. (Juola, 2006). 
Characters based features: Some researchers 
(Peng, 2003) have proposed to analyze documents as 
sequences of characters. This type of parameter can 
replace several other high-level linguistic features. 
Furthermore, several experiments showed that 
character n-gram is quite reliable in authorship 
attribution (Stamatatos, 2009). 
In our investigation, a mixture of different 
features is proposed: Author Related Pronouns 
(ARP), Father Based Surname (FBS), 
Discriminative Words (DisW), COST value, Word 
Length Frequency (WLF), Coordination 
Conjunction (CC) and Starting Coordination 
conjunction (SCC). All those features are original 
and some of them are used for the first time in 
stylometry. Those seven features are collected from 
the two religious books and normalized by the 
maximum so that the different numerical values will 
range approximately between 0 and 1.  
 3 VISUAL ANALYTICS BASED 
CLUSTERING METHODS 
In pattern recognition, cluster analysis or clustering 
is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way 
that objects in the same group (ie. cluster) are more 
similar to each other than to those in other groups 
(Wi2, 2014) (Norusis, 2008). This task is commonly 
used in data mining, statistical data analysis, 
machine learning and information retrieval. 
On the other hand, visual Analytics (wi3, 2014) 
(Ellis, 2010), which is a combination of several 
fields (ie. computer science, information 
visualization and graphic design) is often used in 
cluster analysis to make the analyst’s judgment 
easier to develop and more objective.  
That is, the combination of those two research 
fields can lead to a strong and efficient analysis tool 
for handling some classification tasks that could be 
extremely difficult to perform with conventional 
analytic tools. 
Furthermore, a great advantage of clustering over 
conventional classification tools is its non-
supervised property (for several clustering 
techniques). 
Consequently, it appears that the association of 
visual analytics with clustering analysis may be 
interesting for solving some stylometric problems, 
for which we do not possess any training possibility 
or information to make a supervised classification 
task. So, it should be extremely motivating to apply 
them in our main task of authorship discrimination 
(ie. Quran vs Hadith). 
As for the clustering methods, in the present 
survey, we have used two different methods 
separately and tried to observe and comment the 
resulting clusters thoroughly. The employed 
methods are: Hierarchical Clustering and Fuzzy C-
mean Clustering. 
 
3.1 Dataset description 
The two books have been segmented into 25 several 
text segments (14 for the Quran and 11 for the 
Hadith). Furthermore, there is no intersection 
between them and there is no prior information on 
how could be the general configuration of the 
clusters (resulting clustering).  
The global text dataset is then decomposed into 
two sets of texts: {Q1, Q2, …Q14} for the Quran 
and {H1, H2, …H11} for the Hadith.  
Figure 1: Results of the Hierarchical Clustering. 
 
3.2 Hierarchical clustering 
Our first method is based on a hierarchical 
clustering. The hierarchical clustering is a method of 
cluster analysis which seeks to build a hierarchy of 
clusters (Greenacre, 2014). In general, there are two 
types: 
-Agglomerative clustering: This is a "bottom up" 
approach, where each observation starts in its own 
cluster, and pairs of clusters are merged as one 
moves up the hierarchy. 
-Divisive clustering: This is a "top down" approach, 
where all observations start in one cluster, and splits 
are performed recursively as one moves down the 
hierarchy. 
In our case, we used the first clustering type with 
a Manhattan distance measure, which is defined 
below. If we assume that X and Y re two vectors, 
then Manhattan distance (between those 2 vectors) is 
given by the following equation: 
,  =  ∑ | − |   (1) 
The resulting linkage of the different documents 
is called “Dendrogram”. It represents the different 
possible clusters in a graphical way. By observing 
the dendrogram, it will be possible to estimate the 
actual number of clusters and the corresponding 
documents for each cluster, since all similar 
documents should be linked together with a 
consistent linkage. 
The Result of the Hierarchical clustering, also 
called dendrogram, is given in the following figure. 
 
3.3 Fuzzy C-Means clustering  
Our second method is based on a Fuzzy C-mean 
clustering. Fuzzy clustering is a class of algorithms 
for cluster analysis in which the allocation of data 
points to clusters is not "hard" (all-or-nothing) but 
"fuzzy" in the same sense as fuzzy logic (Suganya,  
2012). So, every point has a degree of belonging to 
clusters, rather than belonging completely to just one 
cluster. Thus, points on the edge of a cluster, may be 
in the cluster to a lesser degree than points in the 
center of cluster. That is, any point x has a set of 
coefficients giving the degree of being in the kth 
cluster wk(x). With fuzzy c-means, the centroid of a 
cluster is the mean of all points, weighted by their 
degree of belonging to the cluster: 
 =
∑ 

∑ 


  
(2) 
In 3D or 2D dimensions, Fuzzy C-mean can 
provide a graphical representation of the different 
samples and the corresponding clusters to which 
they should belong. This representation allows 
separating the different samples with regards to their 
similarities automatically and in a visual manner. 
The Result of the Fuzzy C-mean clustering, in 
3D representation, is given in the following figure. 
H11 H02 H06 H05 H07 H03 H08 H01 H09 H10 H04 Q01 Q04 Q09 Q06 Q10 Q13 Q14 Q07 Q11 Q12 Q05 Q08 Q02 Q03
0
1
2
3
4
5
Text segment
D
is
ta
n
ce
 
 
Hadith segments                                      Quran segments 
Figure 2: Results of the Fuzzy C-mean Clustering.  
 
 
4 RESULTS SUMMARIZATION 
In this investigation, two visual analytics based 
clustering approaches have been employed to make 
a visual authorship clustering of 25 religious text 
segments. 
- In the first approach (Hierarchical clustering), 
the resulting dendrogram shows two separated 
sharp clusters (the Quran cluster in the right 
and Hadith cluster in the left). We can see that 
there is no intersection between the different 
clusters and that the final linkage is extremely 
weak since the corresponding distance is very 
large. This result shows that there are probably 
two authors: Quran Author and Hadith Author.  
- In the second approach (Fuzzy C-mean 
clustering), which is an automatic clustering 
technique, the resulting 3D representation 
shows two main clusters: a Quran cluster 
located at the top right area and Hadith cluster 
located at the bottom left area of the 3D 
representation. Although the Quran cluster is 
more condensed, the two sets of text segments 
have been automatically organized into 2 sharp 
clusters (with different symbol markers), 
showing that there are two main authors: Quran 
Author and Hadith Author and that the two 
authors are different. 
 
5 DISCUSSION  
Some experiments of authorship discrimination have 
been conducted on two religious books: the holy 
Quran and Hadith, in a visual analytics way. And as 
described in the beginning of this manuscript, 
several original features are used to make a 
stylometric comparison between the two books. On 
the other hand, the task of comparison is ensured by 
two clustering approaches based on visual analytics 
techniques: namely, a Hierarchical Clustering and 
Fuzzy C-mean  Clustering.  
Furthermore, every clustering method is 
performed alone and the resulting clusters are 
commented regardless of the other classifiers results. 
We recall that every book has been segmented into 
25 several text segments (14 for the Quran and 11 
for the Hadith) and that there is no prior information 
on how could be the general configuration of the 
clusters (resulting clustering).   
That is, knowing that there are two sets of texts: 
{Q1, Q2, …Q14} and {H1, H2, …H11}, which are 
extracted from 2 different books: Quran and Hadith 
respectively, it is quite evident to get interesting 
information from the number of obtained clusters 
and the text segments contained within each cluster.  
For instance: 
i. If we get only 1 cluster, this means that 
probably the different texts are written by the 
same author (one author); 
0 0.2
0.4 0.6
0.8 1
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
Feature xFeature y
 
F
e
a
tu
re
 z
Quran Cluster
Hadith Cluster
ii. Also, if we get several clusters, but some 
Quran texts are grouped with some Hadith ones 
(in a same cluster), this means that some Quran 
texts were probably written by the Hadith 
author; 
iii. However, if 2 clusters appear in the clustering 
display and all the Quran texts are grouped in 
one cluster and all the Hadith texts are grouped 
in another distinct cluster, this will implies that 
the two books (Quran and Hadith) are written 
by 2 different authors or at least with 2 
different styles.  
That is, by exploring the results section and by 
observing all the clusters and texts disposition in 
those clusters (and since the topics and genres are 
quite similar for the two books), we easily see that 
all the results, we got, correspond to the third case 
(case iii). In other words, all the clustering methods 
led to 2 distinct clusters (one cluster containing the 
Quran texts and another one containing the Hadith 
texts) in a visual way.  
Consequently and statistically speaking, it 
appears that the two investigated books (Quran and 
Hadith) belong to 2 different authors (or at least 2 
different writing styles).  
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Shreef A. Is the Holy Quran Muhammad’s invention? 
http://www.quran-
m.com/firas/en1/index.php?option=com_content&vie
w=article&id=294:is-the-holy-quran-muhammads-
invention-&catid=51:prophetical&Itemid=105. Last 
access in Nov. 2012. 
Ellis G. and Mansmann F., VisMaster, Visual Analytics. 
Mastering the Information Age. Chapter 2 
http://www.vismaster.eu/book/chapter-2-visual-
analytics/ Editor: (Scientific Coordinator of 
VisMaster) Daniel Keim Jörn Kohlhammer, Edition of 
2010. 
Greenacre M., Hierarchical cluster analysis, online 
documentation, Chapter 7, pp : 7.1-7.11. Last visit on 
November 23, 2014. http://www.econ.upf.edu/ 
~michael/stanford/maeb7.pdf   
Ibrahim I. A.. A brief illustrated guide to understanding 
Islam. Library of Congress, Catalog Card Number: 97-
67654, Published by Darussalam, Publishers and 
Distributors, Houston, Texas, USA. Web version:  
http://www.islam-guide.com/contents-wide.htm, 
ISBN: 9960-34-011-2. Last access in 2014. 
Juola P.. JGAAP: Authorship Attribution. Foundations 
and TrendsR in Information Retrieval Vol. 1, No. 3 
(2006) 233–334, Now Publisher. 
Li, J., Zheng, R., and Chen, H. (2006). From fingerprint to 
writeprint. Communications of the ACM, vol 49, No 
4, April 2006, pp. 76-82. 
Mills D. E.. Authorship Attribution Applied to the Bible. 
Master thesis, Graduate Faculty of Texas, Tech 
University, 2003. 
Nasr S. H., Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 
http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-68890/Quran, 
Last access in 2013.  
Norusis M.. Cluster Analysis, Chapter 16.,pp:361-391. 
SPSS 17.0 Statistical Procedures Companion, Marija 
Norusis , 2008. Pearson editor, Published in 2008. 
Peng F., Shuurmans D., Keselj V., and Wang S., 
“Language independent authorship attribution using 
character level language models”,  In Proceedings of 
the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 267-
274, 2003. 
Stamatatos E., Fakotakis N., and Kokkinakis G., 
“Computer-based authorship attribution without 
lexical measures,” Computers and the Humanities, 
Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 193–214, 2001. 
Stamatatos E. 2009. A Survey of Modern Authorship 
Attribution Methods. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 60, No. 
3, pp. 538-556, 2009, Wiley. 
Suganya R. and Shanthi R.,  Fuzzy C- Means Algorithm- 
A Review, International Journal of Scientific and 
Research Publications, Volume 2, Issue 11, November 
2012, www.ijsrp.org. 
Wi1 2011. Quran. The free encyclopedia. Wikipedia,  Last 
modified in 2011, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Quran  
Wi2 2014. Cluster analysis, Wikipedia. last modified on 
November 12, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/ 
wiki/Cluster_analysis 
Wi3 2014. Visual Analytics, from Wikipedia website. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_analytics. last 
modified on October 09, 2014. 
 
