Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
Comparing and contrasting different approaches for content
analysis: the case of consumers protection in TLC sector in Italy
Stefano Sbalchiero1 • Maria Stella Righettini1
 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2016
Abstract The present study proposes an analysis process to compare and contrast different
approaches to content analysis. Moving from previous findings (Righettini and Sbalchiero,
ICPP—international conference on public policy, 2015), related to consumer protection in the
annual speeches of Italian Presidents ofAGCOM, delivered between 2000 and 2015, statistical
analyses of textual data are applied on the same set of texts in order to compare and contrast
results and evaluate the opportunity of integrating different approaches to enrich the results.
This review of results resorts to topic basedmethods for classification of context units (Reinert,
Les Cah l’Anal Donnees 8(2):187–198, 1983), text clustering and lexical correspondence
analysis (Lebart et al., Exploring textual data, 1998) in a general framework of content analysis
and ‘‘lexical worlds’’ exploration (Reinert, Lang Soc 66:5–39, 1993), i.e., the identification of
main topics and words used by AGCOMPresidents to talk about consumer protection. Results
confirm the strengths and opportunities of topics detection approach and shed light on how
quantitative methods might become useful to political scientists when available policy docu-
ments increase in number and size. One methodological innovation of this article is that it
supplements the use ofword categories in traditional content analysis with an automated topics
analysis which exceeds the problems of reliability, replicability, and inferential circularity.
Keywords Text clustering  Topic detection  Correspondence analysis  Policy change 
Institutional leadership  Independent regulatory agencies
& Stefano Sbalchiero
stefano.sbalchiero@unipd.it
Maria Stella Righettini
mariastella.righettini@unipd.it
1 Department of Political Science, Law and International Relations (SPGI), University of Padova,
Via del Santo, 28, 35123 Padua, Italy
123
Qual Quant
DOI 10.1007/s11135-016-0330-5
1 Introduction
From the early studies and suggestions of Lasswell et al. (1935, 1942, 1949), Krippendorff
(1980), and Berelson (1950), to name just a few, the importance and success of traditional
methods of content analysis is mainly due to the systematic and scientific way to test
hypotheses. In recent years mixed methods have gained ground in influential research
agendas and today the needs of new research tools often lead to methods that integrate
different approaches (Bernard and Ryan 2010); Creswell 2013; Maxwell 2012; Roberts
2000; Tashakkori and Teddlie 2003). As an example, previous attempts, involving scholars
from different disciplines, already proved fruitful in the analysis of political discourses
(Cortelazzo and Gambarotto 2013; Tuzzi et al. 2010; Bara et al. 2007; Cortelazzo and
Tuzzi 2007; Schonhardt-Bailey 2005; Bolasco et al. 2006). This renewed interest builds on
a well-established framework particularly in the application of content analysis methods
(Sbalchiero and Tuzzi 2015; Johnson et al. 2007; Creswell 2002, 2012).
Moreover, statistical analysis of textual data, as a confirmative method, might be used to
test hypotheses or verify how contents are categorized and classified by previous resear-
ches, but also a way of exploring, discovering, and examining the main themes or latent
dimensions emerging from the different texts enriching the results.
In this study, the main findings of a first analysis of annual speeches of the Presidents of
the Italian AGCOM which stand out as ‘‘obligatory’’ rhetoric (Smith 2000, p. 82), are
compared and contrasted with results obtained by statistical analysis of textual data as an
ex post confirmative method (Righettini and Sbalchiero 2015). From this perspective, the
present study has the purpose of confirming that the advantages of quantitative methods
increase the more the texts to be analyzed increases in number and size. The statistical
approach we are proposing allows us to explore the latent contents of institutional texts,
and to achieve a better understanding of the institutional activity. Moreover, content
analysis of institutional speeches aims to verify if changes in institutional leaders, i.e.,
AGCOM’s Presidents (independent variable), cause changes in the relevance and attention
given to the consumer protection issue (dependent variable) by the institutional agenda.
The previous study investigated the case of consumer protection focusing on the ways
different institutional leaders in the communications sectors give a public representation of
what the institution is and what it does to other actors (political institutions, regulated
interests, beneficiaries and other stakeholders). We have used the term ‘‘institutional
leadership’’ to indicate the presidency of independent regulatory agencies, instead of other
terms such as ‘‘policy entrepreneur’’, ‘‘personal presidency’’, ‘‘administrative leadership’’,
‘‘sound of leadership’’, ‘‘rhetorical leadership’’, ‘‘going public strategy’’ (Edwards 1983;
Lowi 1985; Caeser 1985; Tulis 1987, 1996, 1998; Hart 1987; Kernell 1997), because the
former indicates an actor characterized by resources deriving from the legal framework.
One of the most important resources is to give public speeches whenever the authority is
held accountable to the political institutions and to the general public for its work, activities
and future plans. In so doing, the institutional leadership gives account and promotes or
obscures certain values and ideas that have stirred and inspired the future regulatory
policies (Schmidt 2000). The interest in the discursive institutionalism (DI) is due to the
fact that this theoretical framework revaluates ideas as the ‘‘foundation of institutions’’
(Schmidt 2010; Peters 2011) and as internal variables of institutional and regulatory
evolution. Among all the different version of institutionalisms, it is the most closely linked
to policy approach, particularly when change in policy paradigm is empirically defined as
the result of the selection of tools and strategies (Peters 2012). Institutions are in fact
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
considered ‘‘policy arenas’’, and policies are the means of understanding the existence of
institutions. The DI blurs the distinction between institutions and their context or envi-
ronment and structures become less important than in other approaches, such as the rational
approach. The decreased importance of structural and organizational variables corresponds
to a revaluation of the actors’ ideas, beliefs, and communicative resources in the policy
process (Hall 1993). Institutional change is therefore defined through changes in the ideas
and values that are at the core of the public discourses (Hall 1993). In this theoretical
framework the public discourses are the core of the longitudinal evolution of a regulative
policy in order to understand stability and change in a policy paradigm and its implications
for regulatory beneficiaries. The findings of the first analysis (Righettini‘and Sbalchiero
2015) show that, in different contexts, authors, time and topics can play different roles. On
one side, the distribution of these messages shows a chronological pattern, i.e., the tem-
poral variable appears to be one of the most important factors constrained by rules, routines
and ritual. On the other side, these results are interesting because, as other researches have
demonstrated (Cortelazzo and Tuzzi 2007; Tuzzi et al. 2010; Pauli and Tuzzi 2009),
despite the restraints deriving from the legal rules and the solemn nature of the messages,
the individual choices and ideas of each President of Italian communication authority in the
field of consumer and user protection prove the most important factor, more important than
time. Results suggested, in other words, that the marginal incremental accommodation of
ideas in annual speeches over time is regularly affected by significant deviations occurring
with every change of the institutional leader (Baumgartner et al. 2014).
2 Corpus and data
The Italian Communications Regulatory Authority (AGCOM, ‘‘Autorità per le Garanzie
nelle Comunicazioni’’) is an independent regulatory authority established in 1997 and
reformed in 2000 to become a collegial body. The Annual AGCOM Report informs the
Parliament and the general public of the results achieved during the year. In the most cases
the annual reports are accompanied by a speech of the president of the authority, delivered
to the public separately. The corpus includes the annual speeches1 of AGCOM Presidents
delivered between 2000 and 2015 (Table 1).
The size of the available speeches for this new study ranges from 5170 (President Cheli,
2001) to 10,779 (President Calabrò, 2011), with 6360 occurrences on average. The whole
corpus mirrors a vocabulary of V = 7128 different words (word-types) and includes
N = 95,401 occurrences (word-tokens). In a bag-of-words perspective, the vocabulary is a
representation of the corpus and reports the list of different words with their frequencies,
i.e., the number of corresponding occurrences in the speeches and in the corpus as a whole.
Two rough measures of lexical richness are useful to assess whether a corpus is sufficiently
large for statistical purposes: since the type–token ratio (V/N) amounts to 7.5 % (\20 %),
and the percentage of words with only one occurrence (hapax legomena) is 44,8 %
(\50 %), a statistical analysis of textual data seems viable (Bolasco 2013).
Further criteria (Popescu et al. 2009; Muller and Brunet 1988) are relevant to assess the
homogeneity of the interviews included in the corpus before any quantitative analysis of
textual data. In our case the language variable (all interviews are in Italian), as well as
diaphasic (all texts are transcriptions of spoken speeches), diamesic variation (they are all
spoken-transcripted texts), and diastratic (the variation of different social groups) were
1 The discourse of 2012 is not available.
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
offset. Diatopic variation is limited (the speakers’ geographical origin), as well as dia-
chronic variation (deriving from chronological differences), don’t play an important role
for content analysis. Vice versa, the specific features of Presidents and topics are the main
focus of the analysis.
The corpus was pre-processed by means of the Taltac22 dedicated software (Bolasco
et al. 2010) and textual data were processed by means of R3 (R Development Core Team
2010) and IRaMuTeQ4 (Ratinaud 2009; Ratinaud and Déjean 2009).
3 Methods
Computer-aided content analysis of texts already proved fruitful in combining occurrences
of words into categories, within the well know General Inquirer application, for example
the study developed by Stone et al. (1966). It was defined as ‘‘a system of computer
programs to do content analysis objectively, automatically, and relatively painlessly […],
given content analysis a new and respectable life’’ (Green 1967, p. 397). The central idea
of this approach is related to the coding scheme, but while the process is very similar to a
qualitative category-based analysis (Strauss and Corbin 1990; Bryman and Burgess 1994;
Braun and Clarke 2006; Stone 1997), the units of analysis are words and categories of
words. Consequently, the computer-aided words’ count need to be based on dictionaries.
Following this framework, several dictionaries were produced, as the best known Lasswell
value dictionary and the Harvard dictionary (Weber 1990; Laver 1998). Depending on the
purpose of the researcher, a coding scheme and a dictionary are central for the content
2 Taltac2 is a software developed by a research team from the University ‘‘La Sapienza’’ of Rome.
3 R is a popular language and environment for statistical computing available as free software under the
terms of the Free Software Foundation’s GNU General Public License in source code form.
4 IRaMuTeQ stands for ‘‘Interface de R pour les Analyses Multidimensionnelles de Textes et de Ques-
tionnaires’’ [in English, ‘‘R interface for multi-dimensional analysis of text and questionnaire’’].
Table 1 Presidents’ speeches
and length (2000–2015)
Presidents Years Size of speech
(occurrences)
Cheli 2000 5644
Cheli 2001 5170
Cheli 2002 5778
Cheli 2003 5849
Cheli 2004 5586
Calabrò 2005 7048
Calabrò 2006 6121
Calabrò 2007 6728
Calabrò 2008 7357
Calabrò 2009 7496
Calabrò 2010 5936
Calabrò 2011 10,779
Cardani 2013 4807
Cardani 2014 5524
Cardani 2015 5578
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
analysis, and the coding procedure is based on classification of each unit of analysis into a
range of content categories: ‘‘Each category may consist of one, several, or many words.
Words, phrases, or other units of text classified in the same category are presumed to have
similar meaning. […] this similarity may be based on the precise meaning of words (such
as grouping synonyms together), or may be based on words sharing similar connotations
(such as grouping together several words implying a concern with a concept such as wealth
or power)’’ (Weber 1990, p. 12). Of course, the dictionary can be deducible or by literature,
ex ante approach through existing coding categories, or ex post through coding categories
directly derived by texts. Especially in second case, the problem such as the subjectivity of
researcher, reliability of the analysis, replicability, inferential circularity and comparability
of results, remained unresolved (Corbetta 1999), no to talk about the problem of dealing
with texts when their number and size increase.
In our previous analysis of annual speeches of AGCOM Presidents (Righettini and
Sbalchiero 2015) the coding procedure was based on classification of words in order to
develop inductively a limited number of categories (as homogeneous as possible in a
within-perspective and as heterogeneous as possible in a between-perspective). Then, we
have identified and classified the occurrence of words’ categories, and the final constituent
in the analysis design process was the interpretation of data crossing each category with
annual speeches and presidents. Focusing on the degree of attention given to policy targets
by AGCOM’s Presidents, we built the categories ‘‘consumer protection and social bene-
ficiaries’’ composed by the following words: user (utente, utenti, 119), consumer (con-
sumatori, consumatore, 83), children (minori, minore, ragazzi, bambini, 55), citizen
(cittadini, cittadino, 49), customer (cliente, clienti, 31). It interesting to see how the
depiction of target beneficiaries and consumers has increased, especially in recent years
(Fig. 1).5
5 Values are normalized in relation to the size of discourse and standardized to 10.000 occurrences. The
content analysis was directed at the complete set of annual messages that were delivered between 2000 and
2015 by the AGCOM President, with the individual word as the unit of analysis. The figure is adapted from
Righettini and Sbalchiero (2015).
Fig. 1 Evolution of attention to the ‘‘consumer protection and social beneficiaries’’ issue in the annual
messages of president of the Italian Communications Regulatory Authority (AGCOM)
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
Although the main results have already been discussed elsewhere (Righettini and
Sbalchiero 2015), it is worth mentioning that different portraits emerged. In terms of
regulatory ideas, goals and tools, the presidents of AGCOM adopt different communication
strategies which reflect their backgrounds but also the different degree of the authority’s
institutionalization. The first president, Cheli (2000–2004), was oriented toward fostering
the legitimacy of and role played by the authority in the political and administrative
system, defining regulatory value, mission and regulatory goals in a inter-institutional
perspective. He was oriented toward maintaining and strengthening the constitutional
legitimacy of AGCOM, stressing its political and constitutional certification. The second
president Calabrò, faced to contingent events related to television empire problems of the
Prime Minister Berlusconi and to the authority’s independence, has pursued a greater
functional legitimacy. This has resulted in increased reporting and communication by the
AGCOM with regulated interests in the broadcast and telecommunications sector,
underlining and affirming its supervision and control over the media and telecommuni-
cations markets. Cardani, appointed at a time of controversy over the politicization of
independent authorities, gives the institution new legitimacy and redefines the role and the
regulatory objectives carried out by the authority in the communications markets. Cardani
accentuates and focuses the attention towards the beneficiaries of the regulatory perfor-
mances, and points out the positive effects of these latter for the protection of users and
consumers in a context of rapid development of new technologies in communications.
To assess the results of this first category-based content analysis, we propose a content
analysis approach based on three phases:
(1) computer assisted classification of portions of texts that deal with the same topics;
(2) automated selection of portions of texts concerning the topic ‘‘Consumer protection
and social beneficiaries’’ and cluster analysis of discourses;
(3) content analysis by means of correspondence analysis (CA) to highlight distinctive
ideas with regard to ‘‘Social Beneficiaries’’ by AGCOM’s Presidents.
3.1 Topic-based analysis to detect lexical worlds
In any speech a specific theme can emerge in any part of the talk. A topic-based classi-
fication of portions of speeches may prove useful to pool together all portions consistent
with a specific topic (Sbalchiero and Tuzzi 2015; Marchand and Ratinaud 2012). The effect
of such a procedure that involves the selection of portions of texts and their classification
into classes led to a reduction of available textual data and, at the same time, to more
homogeneous subcorpora of texts.
Reinert’s method consists in a classification of small portions of texts into classes, i.e.,
the ‘‘lexical worlds’’ (Reinert 1990, 1993, 1999, 2001). A lexical world is a specific
vocabulary (set of words), which inherits its properties from what is talking about (Reinert
1993, p. 13), in our case the AGCOM’s President, and it is extracted from the whole corpus
without any a priori information.
First of all, Reinert’s algorithm splits texts in elementary context units of approximately
similar length, which are sentences, or fragments of sentences, delimited by punctuation
marks. Then, the algorithm checks the occurrence and co-occurrences of content words6 in
each unit and reports results in a matrix7 (words 9 units). The occurrence and co-
6 In this phase all grammatical words (i.e., articles, conjunctions, etc.) are disregarded.
7 The cells of the matrix report for each elementary context unit the presence or absence of each word.
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
occurrence of words in units is the base to assess similarity among units that is summarized
by means of a clustering procedure. The result is a hierarchical tree diagram (dendrogram)
that groups units into classes that mirror a similar lexical context.
The algorithm performs a descending classification, i.e., it detects the clusters and the
factors that better represent a specific lexical world (sets of units that include words that are
relevant for the same cluster). The classification of units allow to automatically identify
and extract only portions of texts concerning the same topic, and for each cluster also the
list of most significant words is easily identified by means of the v2 measure (Reinert
1999).
The main advantage of this first step is the opportunity of quickly investigating the
whole corpus of speeches to obtain an automatic classification of small portions of texts
into a limited number of clusters that reflect its main contents. Moreover, this classification
provides a first assessment of the general characteristics of the corpus and should not be
affected by the analyst’s bias.
3.2 Classification of respondents by text clustering
All portions of texts that belong to the same cluster concern the same topic but are part of
the speeches of different presidents that, in they turn, reflect different orientations and
opinions. In order to distinguish whether different orientations emerge among discourses,
we can take into consideration a new reduced version of the presidents’ speech that include
only the portions of the same cluster and discard all the rest of the speech. Text clustering
(Berry 2004) is a specific kind of unsupervised document classification aimed at grouping
similar texts to form consistent clusters and separating dissimilar texts into distinct clusters.
To group texts, we need a distance, i.e., a (dis)similarity measure able to assess to what
extent each speech may be considered similar to (or different from) another. Among
hundreds of available measures (Rudman 1998) we propose Labbé’s intertextual distance
(Labbé and Labbé 2001; Labbé 2007; Pauli and Tuzzi 2009; Tuzzi 2010; Cortelazzo et al.
2013).
The list of words with the number of corresponding occurrences mirrors the lexical
profile of each speech. Labbé’s distance is based on a sum of differences between the
frequencies of words in two texts. Given a pair of speech A and B of size NA and NB with
NA B NB, their distance d is:
dðA; BÞ ¼
P
i2VA[B jfi;A  f

i;Bj
2NA
;
where VA[B represents the vocabulary of A and B (as a whole) and the frequency fi,B of
each words i in the larger speech B is reduced according to the size of the shorter speech A
by means of a simple proportion:
f i;B ¼ fi;B
NA
NB
:
The distance between A and B is the same as the distance between B and A, that is, the
distance is symmetrical, and the distance between each speech and itself amounts to zero
and, more generally, if the speeches of two presidents contain the same words with the
same frequency, their distance amounts to zero. If two speeches have no words in common,
they are separated by a distance amounting to one (maximum theoretical distance).
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
Most common algorithms for text clustering include instructions to summarize some
textual features as simple quantitative measures and use them to recognize the degree of
similarity (or dissimilarity) among texts (Grieve 2007; Koppel et al. 2009; Stamatatos
2009). When expert-based information on correct classification is not available, reference
can be made to unsupervised classification of their speeches without reference to external
information. The intertextual distances calculated for all pairs of speeches were evaluated
through an agglomerative hierarchical cluster algorithm with complete linkage (Everitt
1980), i.e., the distance between pairs of clusters was obtained as the maximum distance
among all pairs of elements of the two clusters; pairs of clusters with minimum distance
were aggregated. The dendrogram represents the distances by means of a tree graph in
which the leaves (speeches) hanging from the same branch form clusters of the closest
speeches and branches originating from the same forks represent groups of similar
orientations.
3.3 Content mapping
As a final output, we aimed at achieving a map of the main contents expressed by the
discourses of each president. To interpret the different presidents’ orientations, a content
analysis of the lexical profiles of the speeches delivered by the same president was con-
ducted by means of a classical (lexical) CA. CA (Greenacre 1984, 2007; Murtagh 2005;
Lebart et al. 1984; Tuzzi 2012) is a special case of the principal component analysis of the
rows and columns of a table, i.e., it is applicable to a contingency table words 9 texts
(speeches), and is based on singular value decomposition (eigenvalues/eigenvectors). CA
is aimed at transforming the frequencies of words in coordinates on a multidimensional
Cartesian axes system: it displays the groups and words in a low-dimensional space by
mapping an appropriate distance (the v2 distance) into a specific Euclidean distance
(Murtagh 2005) and, then, into Cartesian planes. CA is based on the lexical profiles of the
presidents and is aimed at highlighting the relations among topics and words. Words who
are plotted in the same quadrant of the plane mirror the same topics: by means of their
mutual positions, the main contents being conveyed may be effectively reconstructed on a
map.
4 Results
4.1 Lexical worlds
The first important aspect revealed by Reinert’s method8 is the clear-cut existence of four
different topics, i.e., lexical worlds. Our speeches were fragmented in 2896 portions
(elementary context units including 35 words on average) and the classification procedure
produced four clusters (Fig. 2).
These four clusters together represent the 97 % of the units. This percentage indicates
that the classification is robust, since only few units are discarded (3 %). In order to
describe the main topic of each cluster, we resorted to the list of most significant words.
8 Available in the Iramuteq software (Ratinaud and Marchand 2012).
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
The first cluster (cluster No. 1, 27.9 % of units) contains words9 mainly related to a
number of regulatory sectors and issues:
net (rete, 367), band (banda, 152), large band (banda larga, 129), fiber (fibra, 71),
optical fiber (fibra ottica, 49), infrastructure (infrastruttura, 44), access (accesso, 162),
investment (investimento, 93), technology (tecnologia, 16), digital (digitale, 213), internet
(internet, 158), mobile (mobile, 145), service (servizio, 175).
The second and smaller cluster (cluster No. 2, 21.4 % of units) contains words referred
to a lexical world in which presidents tell about the economic markets in communications
sectors and their mains elements:
incoming (ricavi, 45), euro (euro, 74), Italy (Italia, 269), growth (crescita, 86), market
(mercato, 197), Europe (Europa, 105), increment (incremento, 38), price (prezzi, 91), rate
(tasso, 32), revenue (fatturato, 16), percentage (percentuale, 21).
The third cluster (cluster No. 3, 27.3 % of units) contains words mainly linked to the
regulation:
Law (legge, 186), discipline (disciplina, 85), principle (principio, 39), par condicio (par
condicio, 27), to adopt (adottare, 76), norm (norma, 45), regulation (regolazione, 55), rule
(regolamento, 52), pluralism (pluralismo, 87), violation (violazione, 25), consultation
(consultazione, 38), investigation (istruttoria, 21), normative (normative, 37).
The last cluster (cluster No. 4, 23.4 % of units) contains words mainly related to the role
of authority and the policy target, i.e., the most interesting lexical world of our speeches
because the vocabulary contains the words we have used in the first qualitative analysis to
build the category ‘‘consumers and social beneficiaries’’:
Authority (autorità, 596), role (ruolo, 81), committee (comitato, 38), activity (attività,
104), institution (istituzione, 33), relationship (relazione, 88), guarantee (garanzia, 63),
consumer (consumatore, 73), functions (funzioni, 64), independence (indipendenza, 58),
dispute (controversia, 23), resolution (risoluzione, 24).
The first step of our analysis highlights that four different lexical worlds coexist in our
speeches, and these worlds show a specific vocabulary that proves relevant from a previous
research. Moreover, the classification helped us to identify four main topics and they
Fig. 2 Percentage of units for
the four clusters detected in the
corpus
9 Words in the lists are translated in English and ordered by decreasing values of v2. The Italian version and
the frequency in the whole corpus of each word are in brackets.
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
mirror the main parts of them, despite information about these topics are spread out all over
in the speeches.
4.2 Extraction of sub-corpus and automatic classification of discourses
In the second step of the analysis, we took into consideration only the fourth cluster in
order to compare and contrast the results of previous analysis focusing on consumers and
social beneficiaries. The subcorpus that include only the 665 units of the fourth cluster
contains V = 4430 words and N = 22,864 occurrences. The selection of units included in
cluster No. 4 led to a reduction of the speeches (Fig. 3).
The selection of the portions of cluster No. 4 reduced the length of speeches and
discarded portions where presidents talked about other topics, and shows that the attention
to the issue of the protection of consumers and social beneficiaries of telecommunication
services has increased. In analogy with the concept of IRAs media coverage analysis
(Maggetti 2012) we use the term ‘‘annual coverage’’ to indicate the degree of attention
enjoyed by the issue of users and consumers protection on the total issues dealt by the
annual speeches. As shown in Fig. 3, in the first annual report the 10 % of the speech is
related to consumers, while in the following years the coverage increased, reaching overall
average values of above 13 %, i.e., the annual report coverage of the topic of consumer
protection has augmented over time.
The intertextual distance was calculated for all pairs of speeches and expressed by a
15 9 15 square matrix. The total number of (non-redundant, non-identical) pairs to be
considered is 105, given by the formula (15 9 14)/2. The square matrix reports data on
similarities (and differences) between (reduced) speeches and has been evaluated through
an agglomerative hierarchical cluster algorithm with complete linkage.
The results of the clustering procedure are represented by means of a dendrogram
(Fig. 4) and three main groups of speeches are highlighted. The cluster analysis of spee-
ches clearly differentiate among three presidents’ lexical profiles.
4.3 Correspondence analysis
Results of the cluster analysis of speeches differentiate three lexical profiles that mirror the
three presidents’ orientations on consumers and social beneficiaries. CA maps similarities,
differences and dichotomies among speeches in term of contents. Starting from the con-
tingency table that reports the frequencies of words in the speeches grouped by presidents,
the graphs of CA shows the three lexical profiles on the first factorial plan.
Lexical profile of Cheli (2000–2004) is related to the extremely various authority
functions such as liberalization (liberalizzazione), protection (tutela, protezione), pluralism
(pluralismo), legislation (normativo), and on organizational aspects of authority (autorità):
structure (struttura), organizational (organizzativo), office (ufficio), human resource (per-
sonale). Consumer (consumatore) is distant from the words authority (autorità) and pro-
tection (tutela), and it indicates that the authority has not yet taken the goal of consumer
protection as one of its strategic regulative priorities. On the contrary, Cheli focuses on the
authority’s legitimacy and certification processes, and the main aim of the institutional
leadership is the strengthening AGCOM identity and activity. This does not include the
consumers as a specific and central issue in the regulative institutional agenda (Fig. 5).
Moving from the Cheli to the Calabrò presidency (2005–2011), the distinction between
a number of regulatory issues, such as internet (internet), mobile phones (cellulare), access
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
Fig. 3 Length of speeches in terms of occurrences before and after the selection of portions included in
cluster No. 4
Fig. 4 Dendrogram of the speeches. Hierarchical cluster analysis with complete linkage based on Labbé’s
intertextual distance
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
(accesso), phone services (telefonia), television (televisione), users (utente), consumer
(consumatore) is much more clear (Fig. 6).
Differently from previous years, a predominant semantic area related to consumer
protection in telecommunication market emerges, and emphasizes the progressive regu-
lative attention and intervention by the authority to beneficiaries of regulation both as
individuals and consumer associations (associazione dei consumatori).
Finally, during the current presidency of Cardani (2012–2015), consumer protection is
not only a part of the ordinary activities, but has become a priority and a specific issue and
sector of intervention (Fig. 7).
The field of regulation (regolamentazione) reveals that consumer (consumatori), con-
sumer protection (tutela dei consumatori), authority (autorità), are extended to guarantee
(garanzia) and rights (diritti), interest (interesse), social (sociale), education (educazione),
citizen (cittadino), users (utente). What it is even more important is that these words
clearly identify a president’s lexical profile where the topic ‘‘consumers’’ assumes a central
position in the very ambit of protection of the authority. The theme of the consumers and
their protection is thus expanding markedly, and affects not only the regulators, the
Fig. 5 Correspondence analysis. Principal factor plan (82 % inertia explained). Full words in the speeches
of President Cheli (2000–2004)
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
regulated and the ultimate beneficiaries, but also a broader constituency of citizens and
stakeholders through public consultation.
5 Discussion and conclusions
We aimed to contribute to the DI research agenda by connecting the changes of insti-
tutional leaders to the changes in ideas used in the public discourses that in turn reflect
change of the regulatory strategies pursued. The present study reports an attempt to
assess and enrich the results of an exploratory research on consumer protection and
beneficiaries in the TLC sector in Italy (Righettini and Sbalchiero 2015). We have chosen
consumer protection policy because political delegation in this subject area is quite
stable over time, not shared with other institutions and, for these reasons, the discretion
and role of institutional actors in developing and steering regulatory policies should be
easier to detect (Righettini and Nesti 2014). In the present new study, the corpus of
speeches has been explored in the frame of statistical analyses of textual data, in order to
Fig. 6 Correspondence analysis. Principal factor plan (74 % inertia explained). Full words in the speeches
of President Calabrò (2005–2011)
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
compare and contrast results and evaluate the opportunity of integrating different
approaches. The quantitative techniques we used allowed us to explore the latent contents
of institutional texts in order to focus on the relevance achieved by the consumer pro-
tection issue in the overall institutional activities. Without any a priori information, a first
step permitted to automatically identify portions of texts concerning the topic ‘‘consumer
protection and social beneficiaries’’. The following clustering procedure permitted to
classify into three groups of texts the portions of speeches, again without any a priori
information about their membership, and the results clearly differentiated the three
presidents on the basis of their lexical profiles. Finally, the results of CA detailed the
main lexical content of each presidents and highlighted the existence of different lexical
profiles meant as size of speeches, words occurrences, and different orientations and
relevance given to the consumer protection issue. What we see is that, on one side,
institutional leadership contributes to define the frame of IRA regulative goals by
selecting ideas and values that guide regulation. On the other hand, changing in insti-
tutional leadership lexical profiles mirror changes on the ground of the regulative agenda
meant as length of speeches referred to consumer protection. Length of speeches can be
Fig. 7 Correspondence analysis. Principal factor plan (92 % inertia explained). Full words in the speeches
of President Cardani (2013–2015)
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
considered a measure of institutional attention given to the consumer protection issues.
The findings of the present quantitative analysis are consistent with the ones of the
previous study, but also add interesting conclusions from the empirical analysis in order
to assess the role of institutional leadership in adapting goals, strategy and tools in a
given regulatory field. In fact, computer-aided content analysis of speeches showed that
changes in institutional leaders cause changes in the relevance given to the consumer
protection issue. Moreover, one methodological innovation of this article is that the
content analysis supplements the policy process analysis and ease the interpretation of
institutional variables in policy change. This method reduces the interference of analyst’s
biases given that all the ‘‘data crunching’’ is performed by computer. The advantages of
these approaches concern the opportunity of (a) quickly and cheaply investigate huge
amounts of data in a systematic way, (b) explore latent patterns, (c) improve and enrich
the robustness of results, (d) provide effective tools for the representation of models and
visualization of contents of institutional documents, and (e) could ease a cross-country
comparison of institutional variables. In conclusion, the present study supports the idea
that no operating philosophy or procedure may be said to be preferred a priori or in
absolute terms. It proposes a repeatable procedure useful to achieve a more thorough
understanding of social and political phenomena in a comparative perspective, and
suggests to what extent quantitative methods might become useful when available corpus
of texts increase in number and size.
References
Bara, J., Weale, A., et al.: Analysing parliamentary debate with computer assistance. Swiss Polit. Sci. Rev.
13(4), 577–605 (2007)
Baumgartner, F.R., Jones, B.D., Mortensen, P.B.: Punctuated equilibrium theory: explaining stability and
change in public policymaking. In: Sabatier, P.A., Weible, C.M. (eds.) Theories of the Policy Process,
pp. 59–103. Westview Press, Boulder (2014)
Berelson, B.: Content Analysis in Communication Research. The Free Press, Glencoe (1950)
Bernard, H.R., Ryan, G.W.: Analyzing Qualitative Data: Systematic Approaches. Sage, Los Angeles (2010)
Berry, M.W. (ed.): Survey of Text Mining. Clustering, Classification, and Retrieval. Springer, New York
(2004)
Bolasco, S.: L’analisi automatica dei testi. Fare ricerca con il text mining. Carocci, Rome (2013)
Bolasco, S., Galli de’ Paratesi, N., Giuliano, L.: Parole in libertà. Un’analisi statistica e linguistica. Man-
ifestolibri, Roma (2006)
Bolasco, S., Baiocchi, F., Morrone, A.: Taltac2: Trattamento Automatico Lessicale e Testuale per l’Analisi
del Contenuto di un Corpus [Lexical and Textual Automatic Treatment for Content Analysis of a
Corpus] (ver.: 2.8.0.2) [software]. Rome. http://www.taltac.it (2010). Accessed Dec 2015
Braun, V., Clarke, V.: Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 3(2), 77–101 (2006)
Bryman, A., Burgess, R.G. (eds.): Analyzing Qualitative Data. Routledge, London (1994)
Caeser, J.W.: Rhetorical presidency revisited. In: Marc, K.L. (ed.) Modern Presidents and the Presidency,
pp. 15–34. Lexington Books, Lexington (1985)
Corbetta, P.: Metodologia e tecniche della ricerca sociale. Il Mulino, Bologna (1999)
Cortelazzo, M.A., Gambarotto, F. (eds.): Parole, economia, storia. I discorsi dei presidenti di Confindustria
dal 1945 al 2011. Marsilio, Venezia (2013)
Cortelazzo, M.A., Tuzzi, A. (eds.): Messaggi dal Colle. I discorsi di fine anno dei presidenti della
Repubblica. Marsilio, Venezia (2007)
Cortelazzo, M.A., Nadalutti P., Tuzzi A.: Improving Labbé’s intertextual distance: testing a revised version
on a large corpus of Italian literature. J. Quant. Linguist. 20(2), 125–152 (2013). doi:10.1080/
09296174.2013.773138. ISSN 0929-6174
Creswell, J.W.: Educational Research: Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating Quantitative and Qualitative
Research. Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River (2002)
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
Creswell, J.W.: Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches. Sage,
Thousand Oaks (2012)
Creswell, J.W.: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches, 4th edn. Sage, Thousand Oaks
(2013)
Edwards, G.C.: The Public Presidency: The Pursuit of Popular Support. St. Martin’s, New York (1983)
Everitt, B.: Cluster Analysis. Halsted Press, New York (1980)
Green, B.F.: The general inquirer: a computer approach to content analysis. Book review. Am. Educ. Res. J.
4(4), 397–398 (1967)
Greenacre, M.J.: Theory and Application of Correspondence Analysis. Academic, London (1984)
Greenacre, M.J.: Correspondence Analysis in Practice. Chapman and Hall, London (2007)
Grieve, J.: Quantitative authorship attribution: an evaluation of techniques. Lit. Linguist. Comput. 22(3),
251–270 (2007)
Hall, P.A.: Policy paradigms, social learning, and the state: the case of economic policymaking in Britain.
Comp. polit. 275–296 (1993)
Hart, R.P.: The Sound of Leadership: Presidential Communication in the Modern Age. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago (1987)
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J., Turner, L.A.: Toward a definition of mixed methods research. J. Mixed
Methods Res. 1(2), 112–133 (2007)
Kernell, S.: Going Public: New Strategies in Presidential Leadership. Congressional Quarterly, Washington,
DC (1997)
Koppel, M., Schler, J., Argamon, S.: Computational methods in authorship attribution. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol. 60, 9–29 (2009)
Krippendorff, K.: Content Analysis. An Introduction to Its Methodology. Sage, Beverly Hills (1980)
Labbé, D.: Experiments on authorship attribution by intertextual distance in English. J. Quant. Linguist. 14,
33–80 (2007)
Labbé, C., Labbé, D.: Inter-textual distance and authorship attribution Corneille and Moliére. J. Quant.
Linguist. 8, 213–231 (2001)
Lasswell, H.D., Casey, R.D., Smith, B.L.: Propaganda and Promotional Activities; An Annotated Bibli-
ography. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (1935)
Lasswell, H.D., et al.: The politically significant content of the press: coding procedures. Journal. Q. 19(1),
12–23 (1942)
Lasswell, H.D., Leites, N., et al.: Language of Politics: Studies in Quantitative Semantics. The MIT Press,
Cambridge (1949)
Laver, M.: Party policy in Britain, 1997: results from an expert survey. Polit. Stud. 46(3), 336–347 (1998)
Lebart, L., Morineau, A., Warwick, K.M.: Multivariate Descriptive Statistical Analysis. Correspondence
Analysis and Related Techniques for Large Matrices. Wiley, New York (1984)
Lebart, L., Salem, A., Berry, L.: Exploring Textual Data. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht (1998)
Lowi, T.J.: The Personal President, Power Invested, Promises Unfulfilled. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
(1985)
Maggetti, M.: The media accountability of independent regulatory agencies. Eur. Polit. Sci. Rev. 4(3),
385–408 (2012)
Marchand, P., Ratinaud, P.: L’analyse de similitude appliquée aux corpus textuels: les primaires socialistes
pour l’élection présidentielle française (septembre–octobre 2011). In: Actes des 11eme Journées
internationales d’Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles. JADT 2012, pp. 687–699. Liège, Bel-
gique (2012)
Maxwell, J.A.: Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive Approach, 3rd edn. Sage, Thousand Oaks
(2012)
Muller, C., Brunet, E.: La statistique r ´esout-elle les probl‘emes d’attribution?? Strumenti critici 3(3),
367–387 (1988)
Murtagh, F.: Correspondence Analysis and Data Coding with Java and R. Chapman and Hall/CRC, London
(2005)
Pauli, F., Tuzzi, A.: The end of year addresses of the presidents of the Italian Republic (1948–2006):
discoursal similarities and differences. Glottometrics 18, 40–51 (2009)
Peters, B.G.: Institutional Theory and Political Science. The New Institutionalism, Bloomsbury, Continuum
(2011)
Peters, B.G.: Governance as political theory. In: Levy-Faur, D (ed.) Oxford Handbook of Governance,
pp. 19–32. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2012)
Popescu, I., Mačutek, J., Altmann, G.: Aspects of Word Frequencies. Studies in Quantitative Linguistics.
RAM-Verlag, Ludenscheid (2009)
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (Ver. 2.8.1)
[Software]. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna. http://www.r-project.org (2010). Acces-
sed Dec 2015
Ratinaud, P.: IRaMuTeQ: Interface de R pour les Analyses Multidimensionnelles de Textes et de Ques-
tionnaires. www.iramuteq.org (2009). Accessed Dec 2015
Ratinaud, P., Déjean, S.: IRaMuTeQ: implémentation de la méthode ALCESTE d’analyse de texte dans un
logiciel libre. Modélisation Appliquée aux Sciences Humaines et Sociales (MASHS2009). Le Mirail,
Toulouse (2009)
Ratinaud, P., Marchand, P.: Application de la méthode ALCESTE à de ‘‘gros’’ corpus et stabilité des
‘‘mondes lexicaux’’: analyse du ‘‘CableGate’’ avec IRaMuTeQ. In: Actes des 11eme Journées inter-
nationales d’Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles, pp. 835–844. Liège, Belgique (2012)
Reinert, M.: Une methode de classification descendante hierarchique: application a l’analyse lexicale par
contexte. Les Cah. l’Anal. Donnees 8(2), 187–198 (1983)
Reinert, M.: Alceste, une méthodologie d’analyse des données textuelles et une application: Aurélia de
Gérard de Nerval. Bull. Méthodol. Sociol. 26, 24–54 (1990)
Reinert, M.: Les «mondes lexicaux» et leur «logique» à travers l’analyse statistiqued’un corpus de récits de
cauchemars. Lang. Soc. 66, 5–39 (1993)
Reinert, M.: Quelques interrogations à propos de l’«objet» d’une analyse de discours de type statistique et de
la réponse «Alceste». Lang. Soc. 90, 57–70 (1999)
Reinert, M.: Alceste, une méthode statistique et sémiotique d’analyse de discours. Application aux
«Rêveries du promeneur solitaire». La Rev. Française Psychiatrie Psychol. Méd. Tome V, 49(10/
2001), 32–36 (2001)
Righettini, M.S., Nesti, G.: Indipendenza e credibilità. Istituzioni, imprese e consumatori nella regolazione,
Roma, Carocci (2014)
Righettini M.S., Sbalchiero, S.: A discursive approach to regulation between continuity and change. The
case of consumer protection in telecommunications. In: ICPP—International Conference on Public
Policy, Milan (2015)
Roberts, C.W.: A conceptual framework for quantitative text analysis. Qual. Quant. 34, 259–274 (2000)
Rudman, J.: The state of authorship attribution studies: some problems and solutions. Comput. Humanit. 31,
351–365 (1998)
Sbalchiero, S., Tuzzi, A.: Scientists’ spirituality in scientists’ words. Assessing and enriching the results of a
qualitative analysis of in-depth interviews by means of quantitative approaches. Qual. Quant. (2015).
doi:10.1007/s11135-015-0208-y. ISSN 0033-5177
Schmidt, V.A.: Democracy and discourse in an integrating Europe and a globalising world. Eur. Law. J. 6,
277–300 (2000). doi:10.1111/1468-0386.00108
Schmidt, V.A.: Taking ideas and discourse seriously; explaining change through discursive institutionalism
as the fourth ‘new institutionalism’. Eur. Polit. Sci. Rev. 2(1), 1–25 (2010)
Schonhardt-Bailey, C.: Measuring ideas more effectively: an analysis of Bush and Kerry’s national security
speeches. Polit. Sci. Polit. 38(3), 701–711 (2005)
Smith, R.M.: The timing of presidential speeches: Can the president be an effective teacher? In: Robert,
Y.S., Martha, J.K., Lawrence, R.J. (eds.) Presidential Power: Forging the Presidency for the Twenty-
First Century, pp. 78–104. Columbia University Press, New York (2000)
Stamatatos, E.: A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60,
538–556 (2009)
Stone, P.J.: Thematic text analysis: new agendas for analyzing text content. In: Roberts, C.W. (ed.) Text
Analysis for the Social Sciences: Methods for Drawing Statistical Inferences from Texts and Tran-
scripts, pp. 35–54. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, Mahwah (1997)
Stone, P.J., Dexter, C.D., Marshall, S.S., Daniel, M.O.: The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to
Content Analysis. MIT Press, Cambridge (1966)
Strauss, A., Corbin, J.: Basics of Qualitative Research. Sage, Newbury Park (1990)
Tashakkori, A., Teddlie, C. (eds.): Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioral Research. Sage,
Thousand Oaks (2003)
Tulis, J.K.: The Rhetorical Presidency. Chatham House, Chatham (1987)
Tulis, J.K.: Revisiting the rhetorical presidency. In: Martin, J.M. (ed.) Beyond the Rhetorical Presidency,
pp. 3–14. Texas A&M University Press, College Station (1996)
Tulis, J.K.: Reflections on the rhetorical presidency in American political development. In: Richard, J.E.
(ed.) Speaking to the People: The Rhetorical Presidency in Historical Perspective, pp. 211–222.
University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst (1998)
Tuzzi, A.: What to put in the bag? Comparing and contrasting procedures for text clustering. Ital. J. Appl.
Stat. Stat. Appl. 22(1), 77–94 (2010)
Rhetorical manifestation of institutional transformation
123
Tuzzi, A.: Reinhard Köhler’s scientific production: words, numbers and pictures. In: Naumann, S., Grzybek,
P., Vulanović, R., Altmann, G. (eds.) Synergetic Linguistics. Text and Language as Dynamic Systems,
pp. 223–242. Praesens Verlag, Vienna (2012)
Tuzzi, A., Popescu, I.-I., Altmann, G.: Quantitative Analysis of Italian Texts. RAM-Verlag, Lüdenscheid
(2010)
Weber, R.P.: Basic Content Analysis. Sage, Beverly Hills (1990)
S. Sbalchiero, M. S. Righettini
123
