 1
Automated Characterization and Identification of Schizophrenia in Writing 
 
Rael D. Strous,1,2 Moshe Koppel,3 Jonathan Fine,4 Smadar Nahaliel,1 Ginette Shaked,1 
Ari Z. Zivotofsky5 
 
1Beer Yaakov Mental Health Center, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
3Dept. of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, 4Dept. of English, Bar-Ilan University, 
5Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University 
 
Abstract 
Prominent formal thought disorder, expressed as unusual language in speech and writing, 
is often a central feature of schizophrenia. Since a more comprehensive understanding of 
phenomenology surrounding thought disorder is needed, this study investigates these 
processes by examining writing in schizophrenia by novel computer-aided analysis. 
Thirty-six patients with DSM-IV criteria chronic schizophrenia provided a page of 
writing (300-500 words) on a designated subject. Writing was examined by automated 
text categorization and compared with non-psychiatrically ill individuals, investigating 
any differences with regards to lexical and syntactical features. Computerized methods 
utilized included extracting relevant text features, and utilizing machine learning 
techniques to induce mathematical models distinguishing between texts belonging to 
different categories. Observations indicated that automated methods distinguish 
schizophrenia writing with 83.3% accuracy. Results reflect underlying impaired 
processes including semantic deficit, independently establishing connection between 
primary pathology and language.  
 
Keywords: schizophrenia, thought disorder, writing, automated text categorization 
 
 
 2
Introduction 
Schizophrenia is a chronic neuro-psychiatric disorder consisting of a range of 
phenomenological expression. While the disorder is most prominently associated with 
“positive symptoms” consisting of delusions, hallucinations and disorganized behavior, 
the disorder is also associated with negative symptoms (amotivation, apathy, avolition) 
and neuro-cognitive dysfunction. Prominent thought disorder of “form” (as opposed to 
content), often expressed as unusual language, is a central feature of all these clusters of 
symptoms.  
A more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenology surrounding thought 
disorder is however required to fully understand the illness. This paper shows that (1) 
some of the underlying processes in schizophrenia are evident in writing, thus 
demonstrating that oral language that sounds “schizophrenic” represents fundamental 
underlying impairments in cognitive and language processing rather than processing 
related to the pressure of on-line production of verbal material, environmental stimuli or 
interpersonal interaction, (2) automated classification of schizophrenia writing samples is 
possible, demonstrating the consistency in the differences between schizophrenia and 
non-schizophrenia writing and perhaps oral productions, and (3) the automatically 
identified characteristics of schizophrenia writing are closely related to the clinical 
description of the disorder. 
It has been well described that patients with schizophrenia exhibit unusual language 
impairments with wide ranging evidence and literature on the subject since the 19th 
century. These impairments include abnormalities at the level of phonology, morphology, 
syntax, semantics, and pragmatics (Chaika 1990, Covington et al. (2005), Fine (2006), 
Fraser et al. 1986), Ribiero (1994), Rochester & Martin (1979), Rodriguez-Ferrera et al. 
(1986).  
 
In fact, a number of the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are based in language (e.g., 
clang associations, alogia, looseness of associations, poverty of speech, derailment, 
disorganized speech). Therefore language plays an important role in defining the disorder 
(Fine 2006). While general intellectual impairment appears to be an important 
 3
determinant of poor language test performance in schizophrenia, some believe that 
presence of formal thought disorder probably contributes to an equal if not greater extent 
(Rodriguez-Ferrera et al. 2001). A higher-order semantic deficit may be particularly 
relevant to the impairments of both linguistic dysfunction and formal thought disorder. 
Formal thought disorder is robustly associated with impaired executive functioning and 
with impaired processing of semantic information, though it remains controversial 
whether this is necessarily indicative of impairment within the language production 
system in schizophrenia (Kerns & Berenbaum 2002). Docherty et al. (2006) have shown 
that cognitive sequencing skills, especially the more complex ones, are related to 
language impairments that cross clauses in schizophrenia but that more lexically based 
impairments are not associated with such underlying sequencing skills. Impaired 
sustained attention contributes to the more lexical, non-structural impairments. The 
semantic quality of clauses, rather than the syntactic quality, is associated with the 
expansion of speech in the conversation of patients with schizophrenia (Chen 2007).  
While thought disorder is prominently noted in speech and is striking in its effect on 
social interaction, the same underlying processes may also be expressed in writing and 
therefore may be precisely evaluated by computer-aided analysis. Thus our first question 
has to do with the parallel of markers of schizophrenia in speaking and writing. As noted, 
there has been significant work and significant automated study of the spoken language 
in schizophrenia. The current study of writing would assist in uncovering underlying 
processes in schizophrenia, particularly if there is a parallel between the language 
characteristics in speaking and writing. 
Our second issue is the automated classification of texts. Over the past decade or so there 
has been a major increase in research investigating automated text categorization. This 
refers to the analysis of a set of two or more categories and examples of texts in each 
category, the results of which may be used to accurately categorize and classify other 
“blinded” texts. Computerized methods utilized in this procedure include extracting 
potentially relevant features from a text, representing them in an appropriate formal 
manner and using techniques from machine learning to induce mathematical models that 
distinguish between texts belonging to different categories (Sebastiani 2002). Automated 
 4
methods have also been used recently in the investigation of clinical populations. Cohen 
et al. (2008) investigated negative symptoms in schizophrenia speech samples and found 
that “computer-based inflection and speech rate measures significantly discriminated 
patients with flat affect from controls, and the computer-based measure of alogia and 
negative emotion significantly discriminated the flat and non-flat patients”. 
 
Argamon et al. (2008) have noted differences in writing style in several large corpora 
according to various aspects of author profile including age, gender and native language. 
These differences have included variation in frequency of use of various lexical features 
and parts of speech. Similarly, differences along the psychotic-non-psychotic dimension 
may have interesting relationships with differences, or similarities in the writing 
dimension. In fact, similarities between spoken language and written language across the 
psychotic/non-psychotic dimension may even elucidate features of the underlying 
mechanisms of the psychosis.  
While the writing of the non-psychiatrically ill population has been investigated and 
analyzed, limited investigation exists exploring the writing of subgroups of 
psychiatrically ill individuals, including patients with schizophrenia. This study 
investigates aspects of thought disorder in relatively standardized writing samples of a 
group of patients with schizophrenia and compares these writing specimens with those of 
non-psychiatrically ill individuals. The intention is to explore the nature of any specific or 
unique aspects of writing in schizophrenia patients by means of computer generated 
automated text categorization techniques. The benefits of a computer analysis is that the 
computer is faster than a human analyst and remains free from bias since computer 
analyses are perfectly reproducible.  
 
Our third issue is the investigation of  differences between schizophrenia and non-
psychotic individuals that point to underlying processes of the disorder (eg., Rochester 
and Martin 1979, Fine 2006) and can show that the differences can be found objectively, 
potentially reflecting the features of language that (1) make these individuals sound 
different/impaired, and (2) may form part of the diagnostic picture of the disorder. That 
 5
is, the method can provide some of the indicators and even definitional elements of the 
disorder. 
 
Method 
Study Population  
The study population consisted of inpatients and outpatients at a large state psychiatric 
referral institution all diagnosed with schizophrenia according to DSM-IV criteria 
between the ages of 18-70 years. Patients were evaluated with the Clinical Global 
Impression rating scale (CGI) (Guy 1976) in order to obtain some indication of illness 
severity. In addition, writing samples were obtained from a control group of persons 
without schizophrenia. Prior to study entry, subjects provided written informed consent 
after receiving a full explanation regarding its nature. The study was approved by the Beer 
Yaakov Mental Health Center Institutional Review Board.  
  
Writing Specimens 
All subjects were instructed to provide at least a page of Hebrew writing (300-500 words) 
on a designated subject namely “an important person in my life”. The subject was 
maintained as open and broad as possible in order to encourage “free” writing. No time 
limit was stipulated within which the task was to be completed.  
 
Representation of Writing Specimen 
Each document in the corpus was represented in terms of three types of document 
features comprising a total of 60 individual features. The features are as follows: 
1. Common words – The 25 most common words in the corpus were chosen (see 
Table 1). As can be seen, these are primarily function words, though some are 
content words relevant to the domain. For each document the frequency 
(occurrences/document length) of each of these words was recorded. 
2. Letter tri-grams – The 20 most common three letter sequences were chosen. 
Hebrew has a rich morphology and these features mostly capture grammatical 
 6
affixes that either indicate declensions or play the role of certain English function 
words. For each document the frequency (occurrences/document length) of each 
of these tri-grams was recorded. 
3. Word repetitions – The average number of word repetitions in a window of size 
k. This is measured for each k from 2 to 15.  
 
Results 
Study Sample 
Thirty-six patients with DSM-IV criteria chronic schizophrenia consented to participate 
and were included in analysis. Of these, 25 were male and 11 were female; the average 
age was 36.2 years (standard deviation of 10.3 years). All patients included in the study 
were diagnosed with schizophrenia of severity “mild to moderate” according to the CGI 
scale. In the control group 2/3 were female; and their average age was 28.3 years with 
standard deviation of 13.1.  
 
Differences in Writing Style 
In Table 1, we show the average frequencies (per 10,000 words of text) of the 25 most 
frequent words in the corpus for schizophrenic and non-schizophrenic writers, 
respectively. Several patterns are immediately evident. Among the words that are 
markers of schizophrenic writing are first person pronouns, the third person objective 
pronoun to_him (לו), and the intensifier very. Differences in usage of I, me and to_me are 
significant at p=0.01. Words that are markers of non-schizophrenic writing include third 
person subjective pronouns, the definite object marker the (את), ordinary preposition such 
as on (על), of (של) and with ( םע ). Differences for the are significant at p=0.01 and for the 
prepositions on and of at p=0.05. 
 
In Figure 1, we show the number of word repetitions in windows of size k (k=2,…,15) 
for schizophrenic and non-schizophrenic writers, respectively. It is evident that at all 
window sizes, schizophrenic writing exhibits significantly more word repetition that non-
schizophrenic writing. All these differences are significant at p=0.05. 
 7
 
Differences in tri-gram usage mirror those of word usage. The tri-grams that are used 
significantly more (p=0.01) by writers with schizophrenia include the first person subject 
pronoun ani, the first person object form li (‘to me’), and the other first-person suffixes, 
ni and ti. The form t-h which is a proxy for et ha-, the definite object marker et preceding 
the definite marker for nominals, h, is used significantly more (p=0.01) by writers 
without schizophrenia. Thus, the writers without schizophrenia are more frequently 
introducing definite objects into their clauses. This interpretation is supported by the 
finding that these writers also use more of the third person objective pronoun to_him (לו). 
Linguistically, they are introducing an additional participant (person, object or place) into 
the discourse. It is also likely that this additional participant is encoded as known to the 
reader since it is in the definite form.  
 
Automatically Classifying Writing Samples 
Given writing samples from both schizophrenic and non-schizophrenic writers, one of the 
aims of the study was to use machine-learning techniques in order to construct classifiers 
that automatically categorize a new writing sample as schizophrenic or non-
schizophrenic. To achieve this, it is insufficient to note differences in average frequency 
of feature use; the distribution of feature use among the various writers in each class must 
be exploited.  
 
The learning methods that were used in this study are support vector machines (Joachims 
1998) and Bayesian regression (Genkin et al. 2007), both fully automated methods that 
have proved particularly effective in authorship studies. To test the effectiveness of 
classifiers obtained using these methods on out-of-sample data, 10-fold cross validation 
was used. This refers to the process by means of which the whole corpus is randomly 
divided into ten random sub-corpora with nine of these sub-corpora used to learn a 
classifier. The learned classifier is then tested on the held out sub-corpus. This is repeated 
ten times, each time a different sub-corpus being held out.  
 
 8
For each learning algorithm, this procedure resulted in 83.3% of out of sample 
documents correctly classified. In all, 32 of 36 non-schizophrenic writers (88.9%) and 28 
of 36 schizophrenic writers (77.7%) were correctly categorized.  
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
Our first issue was the examination of specifically written language of patients with 
schizophrenia. The written mode has not been previously investigated for such patients. 
There is considerable compatibility of the results for writing to results obtained for oral 
samples from patients with schizophrenia. That the schizophrenia patients use more first 
person reference of various kinds, including independent words (ani (‘me’), sheli 
(‘mine’), li (to ‘me’), less third person subject reference, less definite marking, but more 
lexical repetition all point to their more concrete use of language and difficulty in 
drawing the identities of objects and people through the text. That the writers with 
schizophrenia used fewer prepositions suggests that they are not adding circumstantial 
information of time (“I saw them in the morning”) and place (“We hid near the store”) 
and information about nouns that represent the “things” of the world (“The cow in the 
picture”). The discourse of the writers with schizophrenia is diminished in content is 
several ways. It has more emphasis on the writer himself or herself, but regularly less 
information about the people, places and objects that are introduced and, in fact, fewer of 
these definite people, places and objects at least in the object position where they can be 
readily identified. 
 
These are well established findings in the oral language of speakers with schizophrenia. 
That such patterns occur in the written language of patients with schizophrenia reinforces 
the interpretation of such patterns as relecting underlying processing problems in the 
disorder. We can also exclude hypotheses that could suggest that the atypicalities thus far 
found in the oral language are the result of on-line processing problems perhaps related to 
 9
short term memory difficulties or to information processing under the very short time 
constraints of social interaction. Rather, the impairment in tracking and presenting the 
identities of people and objects and the semantic reduction in the texts point to possibly 
core processing impairments in schizophrenia. If we interpret schizophrenia as a 
disconnection with reality, then we can clearly interpret the over-representation of the 
first person as an attempt to write about the familiar, the concrete,  the writer as centre of 
focus. Correspondingly,  there is less information of the Participants (people, objects and 
places) introduced and perhaps fewer of these participants in general (certainly, fewer 
definite object nominals). The reality presented by the writers with schizophrenia is 
focused more on the writer and semantically diminished when it is not. 
 
The second issue in this paper is the automatic classification of texts. Similar to other 
findings in both clinical (Cohen et al. 2008; He 2007) and non-clinical (Argamon 2008) 
fields, texts are formed from recurent patterns of language that accurately reflect clinical 
or individual characteristics of writers. That is, lay and clinical listeners and readers who 
form impressions of a speaker/reader based on atypical language (such as negative 
symptoms (Cohen et al. 2008) and idea density in schizoprenia (He et al. 2007)) or 
stereotypical language (Argamon et al., 2008) are basing themselves on recurrent patterns 
that can also be detected by automated means.  
 
Our third issue is an extension of the second issue: do the features of language that are 
uncovered by automatic means in fact relate to the clinical description and understanding 
of schizophrenia? Parallel to both the automatic and manual analyses of the spoken 
language of patients with schizophrenia, the automated analyses of writing that we have 
presented do reflect clinical reality. The automatically discovered differences in reference 
reflect the clinical descriptions of derailment, “loose associations” and perhaps the 
concrete nature of conversation with an abundance of several first person forms of I and 
me. The decreased use of prepositions and definite object nominals both index  reduced 
semantic information. This clear reduction in semantic information found in more than 
one part of the semantic structure of the texts is compatible with poverty of speech, 
poverty of content of speech, alogia and perhaps even blocking. The increased repetition 
 10
also indexes reduced semantic information reflecting poverty of content of speech. It is 
important to emphasis that the automatic analysis and categorization  of the texts did not 
result in seemingly random features but rather characterized the texts according to 
features that correspond to the clinical reality of the disorder. The automatic analysis was 
paralleling human analysis of what sounds different in these texts from speakers with 
schizophrenia.  
 
Our three goals were then met in an interrelated way. The analysis of written texts 
produced findings that were similar to results for spoken texts, the automatic 
classification did successfully identify the texts from each group of writers and the 
automatic classification was based on the clinical description and understanding of 
schizophrenia, rather than on arbitrary characteristics of the written texts. Our 
understanding of schizophrenia is thus advanced in a number of ways. Both speaking and 
writing reflect similar underlying processing in schizophrenia and the disconnection from 
the context that schizophrenia reflects. The differences between writers with and without 
schizophrenia can be automatically learned and the texts identified. These differences 
correspond closely to the clinical description of the disorder. That is, the differences are 
learnable automatically and perhaps even in a way that is similar to how humans readily 
identify the language of speaker with schizophrenia. In humans this ability to identify the 
disorder through language is stable and key to reliability in diagnosis. In terms of 
understanding the picture that schizophrenia presents to the hearer and reader, the 
concreteness, poverty of speech, and poverty of content of speech are all indexed in the 
features automatically identified and largely found in both spoken and written texts. 
These features then point to characteristics of the disorder that are both disruptive to 
social interaction and reflect underlying processing impairments. 
 
Limitations of the study include the fact that the proportion of males in the schizophrenia 
group was greater than that in the control group. While this is a potential confound since 
it has been previously established that there are significant differences between female 
and male writing (Argamon et al. 2003), the differences found in that research do not at 
all approximate findings in this study.  
 11
 
While preliminary, results from this study, engaging the successful use of a sophisticated 
and advanced computer analysis paradigm, may identify aspects of schizophrenia 
function with regards to thought structure that may be amenable to cognitive 
rehabilitation. This is a factor considered today to be an important outcome challenge in 
schizophrenia (Kurtz 2003). Further research is mandated in order to definitely determine 
whether these findings may be generalizable to larger subpopulations of patients with 
schizophrenia as well as whether similar differences in writing samples exist within other 
subpopulations of patients with mental illness.  
 
 
 
 12
 
Table 1. Frequencies (per 10,000 words) of the 25 most common words in corpus for 
schizophrenia and non-schizophrenia writing, respectively. 
 
 
 
Non-
schizophrenia Schizophrenia
I 164.06 94.15 אני 
that I 59.56 38.56 שאני 
me 51.69 13.45 אותי 
to me 148.33 36.76 לי 
mine 89.9 37.66 שלי 
    
he 111.25 130.92 הוא 
she 93.27 113.88 היא 
him 32.59 31.38 אותו 
to him 43.83 20.62 לו 
    
with 44.95 57.39 עם 
of 74.17 130.02 של 
on 69.67 108.5 על 
also 47.2 57.39 גם 
because 34.84 31.38 כי 
    
the 113.5 192.79 את 
no 128.1 132.71 לא 
such 30.34 26 כך 
all 77.54 82.5 כל 
this 44.95 48.42 זה 
    
was 48.32 59.18 היה 
there is 33.71 24.21 יש 
    
what 31.46 31.38 מה 
    
always 31.46 29.59 תמיד 
very 51.69 30.49 מאוד 
    
person 13.48 50.22 אדם  
 
 13
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1 3 5 7 9 11 13
non-schiz
schiz
 
Figure 1. Number of word repetitions (y-axis) in windows of various sizes (x-axis) in 
schizophrenia and non-schizophrenia writing, respectively. 
 14
References 
Argamon S, Koppel M, Fine J, Shimoni AR (2003). Gender, genre, and writing style in 
formal written texts. Text, 23(3), pp. 321-346. 
Argamon S, Koppel M, Pennebaker J, Schler J (2008) Automatically profiling the author 
of an anonymous text. Communications of the ACM, in press 
Caplan R (1996) Discourse deficits in childhood schizophrenia. In JH Beitchman, NJ 
Cohen, MM Konstantareas and R Tannock (Eds), Language, learning, and behavior 
disorders: Developmental, biological, and clinical perspectives (pp. 156-177). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chaika E. (1990) Understanding psychotic speech: Beyond Freud and Chomsky. 
Sprondfield Il.: Charles Thomas. 
Chen O (2007) The flow of textual and structural features in schizophrenic language. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel. 
Cohen A, Murray Alpert M, Nienow TM, Dinzeo TJ and Docherty NM (2008) 
Computerized measurement of negative symptoms in schizophrenia.  Journal of 
Psychiatric Research 42: 827-83 
Covington MA, He C, Brown C, Naçi L, McClain JT, Fjordbak BS, Semple J, Brown 
(2005) J.Schizophrenia and the structure of language: the linguist's view. Schizophr 
Res. 77:85-98. 
Docherty NM, Strauss ME, Dinzeo TJ, St-Hilaire A (2006) The cognitive origins of 
specific types of schizophrenic speech disturbances. Am J Psychiatry 163:2111-8. 
Fine J (2006) Language in psychiatry: A handbook of clinical practice. London: Equinox. 
Fraser W, King KM, Thomas P and Kendell RE (2001) Language in schizophrenia and 
its relationship to formal thought disorder, Psychological Medicine 31, 197–205. 
Freedman R (2003) Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 349:1738-49. 
 15
Genkin A, Lewis DD, and Madigan D (2007). Large-scale Bayesian logistic regression 
for text categorization. Technometrics 49:291-304 
Guy W (1976). ECDEU assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology. US Dept Health, 
Education, and Welfare publication (ADM) 76-338. Rockville Md: National Institute 
of Mental Health. 
He C, Weinstein S and Covington MA (2007) Using Text Analysis Software in 
Schizophrenia Research, International Congress on Schizophrenia Research, 
Colorado Springs. 
Joachims T (1998). Text categorization with Support Vector Machines: Learning with 
many relevant features  in proceedings of Tenth European Conference on Machine 
Learning, 137—142 
Kerns JG, Berenbaum H (2002) Cognitive impairments associated with formal thought 
disorder in people with schizophrenia. J Abnorm Psychol. 111:211-24. 
Kurtz MM (2003) Neurocognitive rehabilitation for schizophrenia. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 
5:303-10. 
Ribiero BT (1994) Coherence in psychotic discourse. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Rochester SR, Martin JR (1979) Crazy talk: A study of the discourse of schizophrenic 
speakers. New York: Plenum. 
Rodriguez-Ferrera S, McCarthy RA, McKenna PJ (1986) The Diagnosis of 
Schizophrenia by Language Analysis, British Journal of Psychiatry 148:275-278. 
Rodriguez-Ferrera S, McCarthy RA, McKenna PJ (2001) Language in schizophrenia and 
its relationship to formal thought disorder. Psychol Med. 31:197-205. 
Sebastiani F (2002) Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing 
Surveys, 34(1).  
 
