Style Analysis of Academic Writing
Thomas Scholz and Stefan Conrad
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Institute of Computer Science,
Universitätsstr. 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
{scholz,conrad}@cs.uni-duesseldorf.de
http://dbs.cs.uni-duesseldorf.de
Abstract. This paper presents an approach which performs a Style
Analysis of Academic Writing in terms of formal voice, readability and
scientific language. Our intention is an analysis of academic writing style
as a feedback for the authors and editors. The extracted features of a
document collection are used to create Self-Organizing Maps which are
the interim results to generate reports in our Full Automatic Paper Anal-
ysis System (Fapas). To evaluate this method, the system has to solve
different tasks to verify the informative value of the generated maps and
reports.
Keywords: Text Mining, Linguistic Style Analysis, User Interfaces and
Visualization.
1 Motivation
The aim of this approach is a method which estimates style of writing. Today it is
very important to share your ideas and developments with other people. Besides
verbal presentations many new ideas are transferred by written texts. Therefore
improving writing skills is very interesting for people who write publications or
documentations. Furthermore, an automatic editorial department can be helpful
for education institutes or companies who create or handle a great amount of
written texts like publishers or press offices.
Also a qualitative style analysis can give hints for authorship identification
and verification tasks and as well can be used to categorize texts of web pages.
However, a major problem with this kind of application is the question: What
is style in a text and how can it be evaluated? We design an approach which
handles this problem in the specific domain of academic writing.
2 Related Work
In the field of analyzing style, some approaches [9,10] use lexical features to
represent style in a text. These features are covering average lengths of words,
token, sentences or word frequencies. By working with NLP techniques like Part-
Of-Speech tagging, syntactic features can be extracted. Stamatatos et. al. [9] e.g.
regard phrases like noun phrases, verbal phrases etc., while Stein and Meyer zu
R. Muñoz et al. (Eds.): NLDB 2011, LNCS 6716, pp. 246–249, 2011.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011
Style Analysis of Academic Writing 247
Eissen [10] are looking for frequent POS-tags. A quite different way is the cre-
ation of big taxonomies to determine the effect of the written word. These function
words are used by Koppel et. al. [1] to compute frequencies of their effects.
The most methods are trying to solve the authorship identification task [1,5,9],
but some papers also identify the gender of the authors [6], their nationality [1],
or deal with plagiarism detection [10]. But these approaches do quantify style
and not qualify it (not even in specific domains). For text readability early
approaches create indexes like [2] for the English language. These indexes are
still used, e. g. in tools like the Readability Test Tool (RTT)1.
3 Features for Style Analysis of Academic Writing
Now we present the feature set for our style analysis. Specialist literature about
academic writing [3,7,8] is considered to design these features. To sum up, aca-
demic writing should be formal, concise and precise.
Feature Set Formal Voice (ϕ): The formal language is represented by three
features. The System counts the usages of passive voice, subjective expressions
and questions. E. g. domain experts concur that passive voice and little use of
subjective words like “I”, “my” or “our” are leading to a more formal voice.
Feature Set Readability (ρ): A text is easier to understand if its parts are well
connected. So, the system identifies linking expressions like “furthermore” or “as
a consequence”. Also the average word count per sentence is computed and how
much the authors tend to use nouns and noun phrases in their texts because if an
author uses more long sentences and more nouns than verbs to explain processes,
the sentences become harder to understand [8]. Likewise the system computes
a staccato feature. This feature represents how much the author follows simple
sentence structures [7].
Feature Set Language (λ): First of all, the system computes the proportion
of academic words by identifying the most 200 words used in scientific texts (see
[3] for the complete list). The second feature shows how many times the author
uses hedging expression in contrast to statements. This shows how precise the
announcements of the text are. To measure how precise the choice of words really
is, the next feature counts the amount of synonyms and hyponyms of the words
[5]. The last feature simply counts the amount of non stop words, because this
is a another factor which expresses how concise the document is.
4 Implementation and Reports
Fapas generates Self-Organizing Maps [4] for a selected collection of analyzed
documents. After the training process every document is mapped to its next
output unit on the map. The red colour proportion of the unit stands for the
formal style, green for the readability and blue for the language. The reports tell
the user the differences between the style of a selected paper and area in detail.
1 http://www.read-able.com/
248 T. Scholz and S. Conrad
Fig. 1. A web interface shows the generated SOMs and reports
5 Evaluation
In the first task, 554 papers of 40 different authors were analyzed for authorship
attribution. To use the SOMs for classification, and the test set is classified by
a Nearest Neighbour Classifier on the output layer of the trained SOMs. Figure
2 (left) shows the accuracy results.
Fig. 2. Evaluations results: authorship attribution (left) and rating quality (right)
For the second task, we generate a corpus of 138 human rated documents.
Then Fapas and the RTT have to make their review (in 1545 document-to-
document comparisons). The RTT computes readability features like the Flesch
Kincaid Readabilty Reading Ease [2], which we took for our comparison as the
best index. The results are shown in figure 2 (right).
In the third task, the system has to classify documents as the right type and
to rate the 3 feature aspects in the right way: novels have to get a higher in score
Style Analysis of Academic Writing 249
Category Feature Set Number
Google Scholar Article ϕρλ 800
Web Page 800
Paper ϕλ 365
Novel ρ 365
High Cited ϕρλ 800
Low Cited 800
Scientific λ 800
Magazine ϕρ 800
Total 5530
Fig. 3. Classifying and rating style in different categories
in readability than scientific papers and so on. The strong feature aspects are
shown in figure 3 (right). The left side shows the well performance.
6 Conclusion
The results suggest that our approach can effectively order, visualise and rate
academic texts by style. Thus, the feedback can help to improve the user’s writing
abilities.
References
1. Argamon, S., Whitelaw, C., Chase, P., Hota, S.R., Garg, N., Levitan, S.: Stylistic
text classification using functional lexical features: Research articles. J. Am. Soc.
Inf. Sci. Technol. 58(6), 802–822 (2007)
2. Flesch, R.: A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology 32, 221–233
(1948)
3. Gillett, A., Hammond, A., Martala, M.: Successful Academic Writing. Pearson,
London (2009)
4. Kohonen, T., Schroeder, M.R., Huang, T.S. (eds.): Self-Organizing Maps. Springer-
Verlag New York, Inc, Heidelberg (2001)
5. Koppel, M., Akiva, N., Dagan, I.: Feature instability as a criterion for selecting
potential style markers: Special topic section on computational analysis of style. J.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 57(11), 1519–1525 (2006)
6. Mukherjee, A., Liu, B.: Improving gender classification of blog authors. In: EMNLP
2010, Morristown, NJ, USA, pp. 207–217 (2010)
7. Saran, A.: Sound - its importance in the short story. Writing Fiction (2009)
8. Skern, T.: Writing Scientific English. Facultas Wuv (2009)
9. Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., Kokkinakis, G.: Computer-based authorship attri-
bution without lexical measures. In: Computers and the Humanities, pp. 193–214
(2001)
10. Stein, B., Zu Eissen, S.M.: Intrinsic plagiarism analysis with meta learning. In:
SGIR 2007 (2007)
