Textual Fingerprinting with texts from
Parkin, Bassewitz, and Leander
Christoph Schommer
University of Luxembourg
Dept. of Computer Science - ILIAS Laboratory
6, Rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, 1359 Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Email: christoph.schommer @uni.lu
Conny Uhde
JW Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main
Dept. of Computer Science and Mathematics
Robert-Mayer-Str. 11-15, D-60486 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Email: uhde@cs.uni-frankfurt.de
February 15, 2008
Abstract
Current research in author profiling to discover a legal author’s fingerprint
does not only follow examinations based on statistical parameters only but in-
clude more and more dynamic methods that can learn and that react adaptable
to the specific behavior of an author. But the question on how to appropriately
represent a text is still one of the fundamental tasks, and the problem of which
attribute should be used to fingerprint the author’s style is still not exactly
defined. In this work, we focus on linguistic selection of attributes to finger-
print the style of the authors Parkin, Bassewitz and Leander. We use texts of
the genre Fairy Tale as it has a clear style and texts of a shorter size with a
straightforward story-line and a simple language.
1 What is it about?
The1. forensic linguistics is concerned with a verification process for the decryption
of texts and the analysis through pattern discovery. In this respect, verification
means the usage of existing and well-known stylistic attributes to discover an indi-
vidual (linguistic) fingerprint. However, it is still a controversial discussion, if such
1This work has been supported by the University of Luxembourg within the project TRIAS -
Logic of T rust and Reliability for Information Agents in Science
1
ar
X
iv
:0
80
2.
22
34
v1
  [
cs
.C
L
] 
 1
5 
Fe
b 
20
08
a linguistic fingerprint is a clear indication per se: stylistic tests assume that typ-
ical attributes are directly influenceable by the author and that a certain number
of attributes still keep constantly, even though the author changes consciously the
behavior or the own style [7]. However, following Dixon and Mannion to their eval-
uations to the texts of Oliver Goldsmith, it may be observed that an appropriate
selection of stylistic attributes take a risk: Goldsmith’s style is characterized by an
adaptive fluency, where he adapts his onw style in a reported speech of the respective
actor. To identify Goldsmith’s characteristic style attributes, Dixon and Mannion
compared his essays with those of four contemporary writers. They found out that
two of the four writers show a suspicious similarity with Goldsmith as they originate
from the same irish area, living in the english exile [14].
Additionally, stylistic attributes that are influenced by the genre may interfere the
individual style [3]. This leads to the conclusion that only texts of the same domain
are affiliated with each other. Using the texts of the Nijmegen-corpus, Baayen et
al. have analyzed the differences of diverse authors of the same genre as well as the
texts of authors who represent different genres: they have found out that texts of
the same genre are generally more similar than texts of the different genre that are
from the same author.
2 Style Discovery
Stylometry refers to the measurement of the style with the aim to fingerprint a text
following a certain number of linguistic attributes, to conclude the authorship of a
text and/or to order texts following their chronology [18]. The content, the meaning
and the correctness of the text is not concerned. The general ambition is to dis-
cover those attributes that difference texts sufficiently [17]. Generally, the data is
analyzed statistically taking numerical attributes into account but disregarding cat-
egorical attributes. Figure of speeches like metaphor and symbols are clear defined
indeed, but are not to be discovered automatically. In [18], Oakes writes that any
linguistic occurrence can be taken for the stylometric analyis as the attribute can be
expressed by a numerical attribute. However, it must be assured that the attribute
is relevant for other genres as well [16]. Another important aspect is the differentia-
tion of linguistic attributes of whether they are consciously controlled by the author
or not [13]. Many examinations take explicitly unconscious stylistic attributes as
the relevant discrimination criterion as they are a stronger sign of a stylistic finger-
print. However, this includes the existence of stylistic attributes that stay constantly
through the whole text and the existence of linguistic attributes that adapt [12]. In
this respect, we focus on a differentiation of conscious and unconscious stylistic at-
tributes, well noting that diverse authors differ more in their style than texts of
an individual author. Furthermore, texts of an individual authors differ more than
passages within a text [6]. We therefore conclude that an appropriate consistence of
2
a continuous usage of conscious and unconscious stylistic attributes must be gener-
ally secured. Very generally, linguistic attributes refer either to a statistic frequency
or to the differentiation of the vocabulary [20] - under the assumption that author
differ in their vocabulary and that they control their vocabulary rather limited than
specific. The vocabulary is then queried by habit, it is performed automatically and
therefore constant, appropriate for text classification [10].
Several examinations have shown that a few stylistic attributes are insufficient for
the differentiation of authors as they produce pairs of authors classifying in the
same category. [6] and [19] suggest a wider spectrum of attributes leading to a
better success and argue that the selected attributes can be ordered depending on
their significance in respect to a classification the genre.
The research on a stylistic analysis for author profiling has been started years ago,
when Mendenhall [23] and Mascol [4] examined literary verses of the New Testament
by considering aspects like frequency of words the length of sentences. They assumed
that authors produce different texts, with different style and features. Many statis-
tical examinations followed, for example to discover text features that may appear
constantly. Many attributes have been found and mathematical issues proven, for
example the Yules characteristics, Zipf’s law and the Hapax Legomena. [15] has
shown that a statistical relevance on a low number of textual data can be expressed
and computed by a Bayesian statistics, which makes it applicable for a contribution
to author profiling. However, to conclude that a text is written by a specific author
has not often clear and misclassifications has been done.
Since that time, many other attributes have been examined, for example the number
of words of a certain wordclass [1], [9], syntax analysis [2], [21] and word phrases [8],
and grammatical failures [11]. Many examinations combine some of these attributes
as well as different methods from statistics and machine learning, for example prin-
cipal component analysis, support vector machines, and cluster analysis [5].
3 About the evaluation environment
In this work, we understand Author Profiling as a way to identify authors by a
certain number of linguistic (numerical) attributes and to assign texts correctly to
them. In this respect, our hypothesis is that - based on the assumption that there
exists a potential style identification - an stylistic identification of authors can be
done with quality if we can find a sufficient number of expressive attributes, which
describe the author’s behavior in respect of characteristic and dissimilarity; and that
allows an application of machine learning methods for an demonstrative evaluation.
Nevertheless, to perform an empirical study in order to discover the author’s style
is mostly characterized by a linguistic detail, namely the principal use of attributes
that are applicable within a computer-based analysis. And an independence of these
attributes must be adjusted as well.
3
3.1 The genre we use
We focus on several texts from the genre Fairy Tale. The texts are in german lan-
guage. Fairy tales have been selected as they are per se an excellent differentiator to
other texts; they are distinguished by a clear style and author-independent. Mostly,
fairy tales are of shorter size, they are amusing stories with fantastic content without
a reference of time. The storyline is straightforward, the language simple.
Although common speech texts are more difficult to differentiate as they do not have
to follow a certain style per se, they are contradictory to the texts of a technical texts
serving the presentation and the critical discussion with specific contextual aspects.
Common speech texts are non-coded and of daily use, easy understandable, but
less syntactically defined. Technical texts are often related to science and therefore
underlie certain criterions. The understanding of a technical text is highly depending
on the style. Nevertheless, authors try to keep their individual style, taking into
account the correct use of orthography, syntax and punctuation. The text is often
impersonal and written in present tense. We have therefore started our examinations
with a comparison between selected texts from Fairy Tale and Common Speech and
Technical Language, respectively. Approximately 10 authors per each genre with 3-5
documents have been selected.
3.2 Attribute Selection
In concern of the attributes, we take into account linguistic attributes as much
as they significantly contribute to the author’s style, but filter those out that are
dependent from another. For the evaluations, we have used more than 30 attributes
from statistics or linguistics, for example
• Number of Words and Number of distinct words, where punctuation marks are
disregarded.
• Frequency of personal pronoun. Depending on the genre, the personal pronoun
is assessed; for example, the word I receives a higher weight in scientific texts
than in fairy tales since we may assume that scientific texts follow a more
neutral description (passive) or uses the We instead.
• The word with the highest frequency.
• Word length in average.
• Record length. We use this attribute although [22] mentions that the record
length is not expressive and applicable as a single attribute. The disadvantage
is the author’s control and capability to imitate, especially against the punctu-
ation. This makes it less suitable to older texts. [24] agree that the attribute
record length is a weak measurement for the author’s style but is useful when
focusing on their distributions.
4
• Yules characteristic value k. This value bases on the assumption that the
occurrence of a word is random and underlies the distribution of Poisson. The
more the words are repeated, the higher k.
• Hapax Legomena, the number of words that occur exactly once in the text.
This is to measure the author’s disposition to use or to avoid synonyms.
• Sentence Structure. This attribute describes the author’s disposition to prefer
main clauses or subordinate clauses. We measure this by the percentage of
hypotaxis in the text.
• Value of the the type-token proportion. Let n the number of tokens (words) in
the text and v the number of different tokens, then the type-token proportion
r is the fraction between v and n.
• The Entropy of the text. The length of each text source is set to a fixed
number of words.
Furthermore, we have concerned with stop words and calculated (per text) the num-
ber of words occurring exactly once, the stop word itself that occurs most frequently,
and its frequency and percentage. Using the thesaurus of the University of Leipzig2,
we additionally calculate the frequency class, which refers to how often a token
occurs in comparison to any occurrence.
3.3 Attribute Filtering
A problem in using the selected attributes is that some of them may dependent
from others. Furthermore, this depends on the genre very strict, so that attributes
of a genre must be preprocessed individually. We therefore have used the statistical
method of Plots to pairwise visualize the attribute’s behavior. For example, the
attributes Entropy, Type-Token Ratio, and Average word frequency are dependent
whereas Number of Hapax Legomena and Yules characteristics are not. Figure 1
shows the preprocessed filtering result of texts from the genre Fairy Tale, i.e., the
pairwise distribution of independent attributes. The presented plot is symmetric.
4 Selected Fingerprinting Results
We have enriched this calculation with diverse statistical methods like principal com-
ponent analysis or bivariate statistics to visualize and calculate the most interesting
and reliable attributes and have applied machine learning in a different way through
demographic clustering or a genetic algorithm. Some evaluations have been done
2see Wortschatz - http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/
5
Figure 1: Received list of independent attributes for the genre Fairy Tale, plotted
in a quadratic and symmetric comparison matrix.
with the IBM Intelligent Miner V8, some with the statistical program R, and Clus-
Gen: this a self-programmed genetic simulation to classify the whole text corpus to
classes. The idea focus on the assumption that a representative median vector for a
collection of texts - that come from the same author - dynamically exists; and that
the texts of one author are representative enough for all texts of the correspond-
ing author. We have initiated the process of fingerprinting while interpreting all
discovered results.
4.1 Fairy Tale against Common Speech and Technical Language
To get an overview of each genre per se and to characterize these texts as well,
Figure 2 shows the result of a bivariate statistics against the attributes Genre. We
observe that 42% of the text set are from Fairy Tale, 32% from Common Speech, and
26% from Technical Language. The variables are ordered following their chi-square
values, meaning that the discrepancy between the distribution of the corresponding
attribute inside a genre (inner ring for Genre, non-colorized distribution of the other
attributes) to the whole text population (outer ring for Genre, colorized distribution
of the other attributes) represents the significance and therefore position of an at-
6
tribute in each region: the more different the distribution the more it is positioned
to the left.
Figure 2: Bivariate Statistics with three variables against the genre (Fairy Tale
(top), Common Speech (middle), and Technical Language (bottom)).
In this respect, AnzHL represents the most important attribute to Fairy Tale (Märchen)
and is more significant to its region than in any other genre. Furthermore, the at-
tribute Number of Hapax Legomena (AnzHL) is characterized by a distribution of
high values in Technical Language, but is low distributed in Fairy Tale. On the
other side, the attribute Number of different tokens (AnzVerschWo) has a distri-
bution with high values in Technical Language but with lower values in Common
Language. Following this, we can assume that in Fairy Tale the words occur more
seldom only once (AnzHL); the number of different words (AnzVerschWo) is rather
low while having longer sentences (VarianzSaLä). Texts from Technical Language,
however, use a more extended vocabulary (AnzVerschWo), where words occur more
often only once (AnzHL).
With text clustering, we have observed several clusters representing only texts of an
individual genre. For Fairy Tale, relatively many attributes have a distribution that
is surprisingly higher than in all texts, for example the number of adjectives (An-
zAdjektive), the number of Hapax Legomena (AnzHL) and the Yules characteristics
(YulesK ); on the other side, the number of verbs (AnzVerben) and the frequency
class (HäufKla) are quite low distributed. Five authors share this cluster, the most
used words are ich and und. The number of parataxis are relatively lower, the
number of hypotaxis relatively higher. We may conclude that the general style is
descriptive and figurative, because many adjectives and synonyms are used. It is
explainable, since longer sentences exist that are often nested.
7
Generally, the tests have shown a controversial face. Within the selected texts, the
style of only some authors have been constantly, meaning that there exist a set of
attributes being equally distributed. This is for the authors Parkin and Bassewitz
as their texts have been selected within a textbook. On the other side, the texts
of Leander are widespread, although they are also taken from an individual text
collection.
4.2 Parkin’s Style
Figure 3 shows a cluster that only bases on texts from the author Parkin. We observe
a low number of adjectives (AnzAdjektive) in all the clustered texts, a high number
of parataxis (proParaTax ), and a high number of we’s (AnzWir). Parkin’s style is
further characterized by a high type-token ratio (TypeTokenRatio), a low number of
different words (AnzVerschWo), and a low number of Hapax Legomena (AnzHL).
He prefers parataxis, the averaged length of sentences is low as well as the number of
different words: he therefore tends to repeat words, favors nouns but not adjectives
at all.
Figure 3: The Parkin-Cluster, Genre Fairy Tale.
4.3 Bassewitz’s Style
The Figure 4 shows a snapshot of a demographic clustering result that bases on
• four texts of the authors Bassewitz, taken from Peterchen’s Mondfahrt
8
• six texts of the author Leander, taken from Träumereien an französischen
Kaminen
within the genre Fairy Tale. Bassewitz’s texts are characterized by a high-valued
frequency class (HäufKla) and a disproportionately high occurrence of verbs. Addi-
tionally, the word type of the longest word belongs almost to the same class as well
as the word type of the most frequently word, the most frequently stop word, and
the number of Hapax Legomena.
Figure 4: The Bassewitz-Cluster and the Leander-Clusters, Genre Fairy Tale.
4.4 Leander’s Style
The texts of Leander are more mixed, not aiming at an uniform style. We observe
that Leander’s texts are more different than those from Bassewitz - although both
are taken from textbook. Taking the genetic simulation program, we have received
classification rates by an adaptive calculation of a new median vector. With this,
the classification rates are above 90% for the whole test corpus. Inside the genres,
the classification rate for Fairy tail has been around 93% but for Common speech
and Technical language nearly 100%.
5 Conclusions
At first glance, it seems not even conceivable that an author’s style or even more, a
fingerprint, can be discovered: the number of evaluated texts is quite low and a legal
forecast therefore not feasible. But the evaluations prove that through the selection
of linguistic attributes, an author can be described within his texts; and even more,
9
the usage of texts within an author’s textbook like Bassewitz’s Peterchen’s Mond-
fahrt may certainly have its eligibility to characterize his style and to allow to score
texts in this microcosm. For the authors Parkin and Bassewitz this is be observed
as Parkin’s style is documented by a couple of attributes sharing an individual dis-
tributive behavior, whereas Bassewitz uses - for example - throughout words that
occur seldom.
To extend these tests to a larger text corpus, to enrich the given set of attributes by
subjective linguistic attributes, and to generalize our results to other text corpora
will be one of our next responsibilities. In this respect, we understand a subjective
linguistic attribute as a personal statement of the author himself, like for example
I believe that or I certainly agree to express the personal beliefs and intentions.
Furthermore, open questions arise like how representative these results are or how
appropriate a scoring engine - that assigns for example a text of Parkin correctly
- is not tested yet. Our next steps will concern these questions, we also follow up
on further examinations. Generally, we strongly believe in this way of style analysis
and author recognition, and hope to discover attributes that uniformly relies on our
hypothesis.
References
[1] G. Avneri, S. Argamon, M. Koppel: Routing documents according to their style. Intl.
Workshop on Innovative Internet Information Systems, 1998.
[2] T. F. Baayen, H. v. Halteren: Outside the cave of shadows: using syntactic annotation to
enhance authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, (3):121-130, 1996.
[3] H. Baayen, H. von Halteren, F. Tweedie: Outside the cave of shadows: using syntac-
tic annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
(3):121-130, 1996.
[4] C. Maskol: Curves of pauline and pseudo-pauline style i+ii. Unitarian Review 30:452460,
1988.
[5] D. Khmelev: Distributed authorship resolution using relative entropy for Markov Chain
of letters in texts. 4th Intl Conference on Quantitative Linguistics Association, 2000.
[6] F. Dimpel: Computergestützte textstatistische Untersuchungen an mittelhochdeutschen
Texten. Tübingen: Francke, 2004.
[7] P. Dixon, D. Mannion: Goldsmith’s Periodical Essays: A Statistical Analysis of Eleven
Doubtful Cases. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 8:1 19, 1993.
[8] : F. Smadja: Tge missing link. Journal of the Association for Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 4(3), 1989.
[9] D. Holmes, R. S. Forsyth: Features finding for text classification. Literary and Linguistics
Computing, 11(4):163-174, 1996.
[10] D. L. Hoover: Another Perspective on Vocabulary Richness. Journal on Computers and
the Humanities, Springer, pp. 151-178, 2004.
10
[11] J. Schler, M. Koppel: Exploiting stylistic idiosyncrasies for authorship attribution. In
Proceedings of IJCAI’03 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and
Synthesis, 2003.
[12] N. M. Laan: Stylometry and Method. The Case of Euripides. Oxford Journals, Literary
and Linguistic Computing, pp. 271-278, 1995.
[13] G. Ledger: Re-Counting Plato: A Computer Analysis of Plato’s Style. Clarendon Press.
1990.
[14] D. Mannion, P. Dixon: Authorship Attribution: the Case of Oliver Goldsmith. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society (Series D): The Statistician, 46:1-18, 1997.
[15] D. L. Wallace, F. Mosteller: Applied Bayesian and classical inference. Springer, 1984.
[16] T. Mcenery, M. Oakes: Authorship Identification and Computational Stylometry.
Handbook of Natural Language Processing. pp. 545-562, 2000.
[17] M. A. Queen: Literary Detection. How to prove Authorship and Fraud in Literature
and Documents. New York, 1978.
[18] M. P. Oakes: Statistics for Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh Textbooks in Empirical
Linguistics. Edinburgh University Press. 1998.
[19] J. Rudman: The State of Authorship Attribution Studies. Some Problems and Solu-
tions. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
[20] E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, G. Kokkinakis: Computer-based Authorship Attribution
Without Lexical Measures. Journal on Computers and the Humanities, Springer, 35:193-
214, 2001.
[21] G. Kokkinakis, E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis: Automatic text categorization in terms
of genre and author. Computational Linguistics, 26(4):471-495, 2000.
[22] M. W. Smith: Recent experience and new developments of methods for the determina-
tion of authorship. Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing Bulletin, 11:73-82,
1983.
[23] T. Mendenhall: The characteristic curves of composition. Science, pp. 214:237249. 1887.
[24] D. R. Tallentire: An appraisal of methods and models in computational stylistics, with
particular reference to author attribution. PhD Thesis, Univesity of Cambridge. 1972.
11
