 
 
USING DYNAMIC ADAPTIVE CASES TO BRING PRACTICAL  
EXPERIENCE INTO THE CLASSROOM 
 
Hans-Joachim Schramm 
Assistant Professor  
WU Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien  
- Vienna University of Economics and Business 
Department of Global Business and Trade, 
Institute for Transport and Logistics Management 
Welthandelsplatz 1 
1020 Vienna, Austria 
hschramm@wu.ac.at 
+43-1-31336-5981 
  
 
2 
 
USING DYNAMIC ADAPTIVE CASES TO BRING PRACTICAL  
EXPERIENCE INTO THE CLASSROOM 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper is based on the author’s teaching experience in the field of international logistics and 
supply chain management and his success with two types of dynamic adaptive cases. The first consists 
of decision-making scenarios in the field of road haulage, inland-navigation and/or logistics service 
provision based on effective cost calculation. The second is an assessment of a country environment or 
the customs treatment and packaging requirements of commodities being exported or imported in the 
context of the European Community. In both cases, publicly available resources are used to create ever 
new problem statements using current information for the students while remaining relatively easy for 
the teacher to administrate as well as preventing cheating to a large extent. The paper provides 
concrete examples and outlines key components of scenario design and their success factors. 
INTRODUCTION 
In higher education, teachers are increasingly bringing practical experience into the classroom in order 
to motivate students and boost their skills in acquiring and reproducing theoretical knowledge as well 
as applying it to solve real-world problems. One way to achieve this is experiential learning (Gentry, 
1990) and, more specifically, the use of case studies in the classroom (e.g. Barnes et al., 1994 or 
Erskine et al., 2003), with the students’ performance as part of their assessment. However, traditional 
case studies become rapidly outdated and particularly good ones tend to be used too often, running the 
risk that students will reuse knowledge from their predecessors. Consequently, there is a constant 
struggle for teachers to find new or rewrite existing cases. This in turn results in spending considerable 
time on the preparation of teaching material at the cost of research activities, etc. One way to 
overcome this challenge is to use dynamic adaptive cases, where a fixed scenario with a real-world 
problem can be kept up-to-date relatively easily while still minimizing the danger of students cheating.  
The present paper starts by discussing the foundation, extensions and further development of the 
traditional case study method. The focus then moves to student cheating in this context and suggests 
several remedies against this. Finally, the dynamic adaptive case approach is outlined using the 
experiential learning task structure of Design, Conduct, Evaluation and Feedback by Wolfe and Byrne 
(1975), and the key components of its design and its success factors are described. 
 
 
3 
 
THE CASE STUDY METHOD  
The case study method facilitates experiential learning, particularly if it is well designed using a 
problem-solving cycle (e.g. Knoop, 1984, Gross Davis, 1993 or Taylor, 1997). This addresses all four 
of the fields first outlined by Kolb (1984) and further developed by Svinicki and Dixon (1987) and 
Kolb and Kolb (2005) for classroom activities, namely, concrete experience (CE), reflective 
observation (RO), abstract conceptualization (AC) and active experimentation (AE). Kreber (2001) 
shows that, in the context of traditional case study teaching, (1) CE is fostered by reading the case, (2) 
AC by identifying and analyzing the problem, (3) RO (together with CE or AE) by generating, 
evaluating and selecting alternative problem-solving strategies, and (4) AE (in conjunction with AC) 
by developing an implementation plan. Of course, some group work is always recommended given 
that students have different learning styles, strengths and weaknesses (Kolb and Kolb, 2005).  
Extensions and further development 
In Table 1, typical case study variants are compared across the four phases of Wolfe and Byrne’s 
experiential learning task structure (1975; see also Gentry, 1990). This list is far from complete but 
shows clearly how the traditional case study method, as outlined by Barnes et al. (1994) and Erskine et 
al. (2003) – among others – can be extended to enhance in-class practical experience. For example, 
Siciliano and McAleer (1997) suggest using approaches such as the McAleer interactive case analysis 
(MICA) to increase student involvement. In this form of analysis, student teams manage assigned case 
studies by finding and taking action steps and monitoring in-class discussion themselves, allowing the 
instructor to have a more passive role. 
Another common problem of traditional case studies is that they become outdated easily (Gallagher, 
2007). Consequently, students question their relevance and tend to become bored quickly. One remedy 
against this is to ask students for reflective reports afterwards, as proposed by Rosier (2003). This not 
only encourages the students’ reflective learning but also helps to detect deficits in the case itself. 
Another approach is to avoid the specific dates usually stated in cases, but this is only a viable 
approach if the story can be left untouched. Instead of updating existing cases on a permanent basis, 
Reeves (2011) suggests an extended case study approach, where a written case study is used as a 
starting point for further inquiry and students are encouraged to update their knowledge about its 
context and protagonists with secondary desk-based research. He claims this works particularly well if 
the case is backed by theory which is general in scope and updated information is publicly available.  
 
 
4 
 
Method Design Conduct Evaluation Feedback 
Traditional case study: 
Barnes et al. (1994), 
Erskine et al. (2003) 
Cases selected  
or written by the 
instructor  
Case distributed to all or 
some of the students; 
coaching upon request 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class 
presentation and 
discussion 
In-class debriefing after 
presentation  
and discussion 
McAleer interactive case 
analysis (MICA): 
Siciliano and McAleer 
(1997) 
Cases selected  
or written by the 
instructor  
Case distributed to all or 
some of the students; 
further administration 
carried out by students; 
coaching upon request 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class 
presentation and 
discussion based on 
defined scoring criteria 
In-class debriefing after 
presentation  
and discussion led  
by students 
Traditional case study 
with reflective report: 
Rosier (2003) 
Cases selected  
or written by the 
instructor  
Case distributed to all or 
some of the students; 
coaching upon request 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class 
presentation, discussion 
(and reflective report) 
In-class debriefing, etc., 
followed by a reflective 
report by students about 
lessons learned 
Extended case study: 
Reeves (2011) 
Cases selected  
or written by the 
instructor; further 
inquiry for updated 
information  
is encouraged 
Case distributed to all or 
some of the students; 
secondary desk research 
needed to update 
information; coaching 
upon request 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class 
presentation and 
discussion 
In-class debriefing after 
presentation  
and discussion 
Current case study: 
Chapman (1995) 
Students research, 
develop and present a 
short live case based on 
their own work 
experience 
Teacher and students 
negotiate specific issues 
to write about 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class 
presentation, and 
discussion 
In-class discussion, 
followed by individual 
debriefing afterwards 
Student-written, 
instructor-facilitated 
(SWIF) case study: 
Bailey et al. (1997), 
Swiercz (1998),  
Vega (2013)  
Students develop, 
analyze and present case 
study based on an 
amalgam of team 
members’ collective 
experiences 
Interactive process 
between instructor and 
students of analyzing 
case studies developed in 
a team environment 
Submission of case study 
and analysis,  
in-class presentation and 
discussion 
Several feedback loops 
commenting on work-in-
progress and final case 
studies 
Web-based  
case study: 
Henson et al. (2003) 
 
Students analyze the 
problem of a company or 
brand based on 
secondary desk research 
Students find, analyze 
and present a current 
problem of a company  
or brand using publicly 
available information 
from the internet 
Submission of written 
case analysis and 
in-class presentation; 
evaluation by both 
instructor and students 
Feedback  
from both instructor  
and students  
Student authored cases: 
Lincoln (2006) 
Students research, 
develop and present a 
short live case based on 
field research and initial 
interviews with business 
clients who explain their 
problem 
Case study and solution 
is developed by students 
strictly along a problem-
solving cycle; can ask 
business clients for 
 further information  
Submission of case study 
and solution; in-class 
presentation and 
discussion 
In-class debriefing after 
presentation  
and discussion 
Live case study  
with local company  
in-class participation: 
e.g. Markulis (1985) 
Cases written by  
the instructor in 
collaboration with a 
local company  
Case distributed to all or 
some of the students; 
with local company  
in-class participation; 
further inquiry and 
coaching upon request 
Submission of written 
analysis, in-class presen-
tation and discussion  
(with or without the 
participation of a local 
company) 
In-class debriefing after 
presentation and discus-
sion (with or without  the 
participation of a local 
company) 
Live case study  
as a student’s project for 
a company client:  
e.g. Gentry (1990) 
Team-based experiential 
project centered on a real 
company problem 
Students work in real-
time with the client to 
help solve problems or 
seize opportunities 
Submission of written 
analysis and recom-
mendations for the 
company client and  
in-class presentation 
Feedback both by  
the instructor and 
company client 
Table 1: Design, Conduct, Evaluation and Feedback for different types of case studies 
 
5 
 
Another criticism often mentioned in connection with traditional case studies is that students want to 
work “with real problems, real information, and real people in real time” (Lincoln, 2006), whereas 
traditional case studies merely reflect past, second-hand experience. To alleviate such a lack of 
realism, live case studies (sometimes also called “living cases”) have been recommended, which range 
across diverse settings from instructor-authored traditional case studies with local company in-class 
participation (e.g. Markulis, 1985; Fawcett and Fawcett, 2011) to small-scale student-consultancy 
projects in real-life interaction with a client organization (e.g. Gentry, 1990; Richardson and Ginter, 
1998; LeClair and Stöttinger, 1998; Elam and Spotts, 2004, Roth and Smith, 2009). However, the 
preparation of such live case studies is a very demanding, time-consuming task and needs a high level 
of commitment from the corporate clients, who have to spend considerable time with students in class, 
in field work or as interview partners. 
Bridging traditional and live case studies, the literature also proposes some hybrid approaches such as 
current case studies (Chapman, 1995), student-written,  instructor-facilitated (SWIF) case studies 
(Bailey et al., 1997, Swiercz, 1998, Vega, 2013), web-based case studies (Henson et al., 2003), or 
student-authored cases (Lincoln, 2006), which try to find a balance between the two extremes. These 
hybrid approaches included in Table 1 share a common feature, namely, that students are not only 
given a written case to analyze but must also develop and/or solve their own case study based on 
secondary desk research, field research, and/or personal interviews.  
Cheating issues 
In addition to addressing issues such as motivating students, enhancing reflective learning, remaining 
up-to-date and offering more realism, teachers using the case study method are increasingly having to 
deal with cheating (Zobel and Hamilton, 2002; Park, 2003). First and foremost, there is always a 
danger of plagiarism and/or patch writing (Howard, 1995, Park, 2003; Zobel and Hamilton 2002; Li 
and Casanave, 2012). Both forms are unacceptable as the resulting submissions are not original work 
but either (1) partly or fully copied exactly from the work of someone else (plagiarism) or (2) the work 
of someone else paraphrased with minor changes such as deleting words, altering the text’s 
grammatical structure and/or using substitute synonyms (patch writing). Whereas plagiarism is a clear 
incident of cheating, patch writing may indicate that the student has struggled with the case or 
assignment. This is often the case in classes where the language of instruction is not their mother 
tongue and students cannot fully follow the words and ideas used (Park, 2003, Li and Casanave, 2012, 
Stapleton, 2012). Another aspect is social loafing (the so-called free rider problem) which occurs 
when individual group members do not contribute as much as expected to the team effort (Bailey et 
al., 2005). 
 
6 
 
Some remedies 
There are several remedies against cheating (e.g. Zobel and Hamilton, 2002) which can be briefly 
summarized as follows: 
1. Plagiarism checks should be used to test students’ submissions against internet sources (global 
plagiarism) as well as any available work by former students (local plagiarism). Many 
detection tools are available for checking digital text submissions against plagiarism, some of 
them are also tested on a regular basis (Gollub et al., 2013). Although not all of these tools 
allow the detection of local plagiarism and patch writing to the same extent as global 
plagiarism, recent studies show that their use has a deterrent effect on plagiarism activity 
generally (Stapleton, 2012).  For assignments including spreadsheets, Singh et al. (2012) 
suggest taking measures such as hiding unique content manually. This can be done by using a 
digital watermark or by automatically logging file name changes, thus making it possible to 
track a spreadsheet’s path before submission. These measures can be implemented easily by 
integrating functionalities into standard spreadsheet software. 
2. Individualizing case design is another approach. It is possible to generate individual 
assignments automatically, as shown in an interesting approach by Goldwater and Fogarty 
(2007). Nevertheless, it usually requires substantial manual work (Goldwater and Fogarty, 
2007; Singh et al., 2012), even if only a few figures or names are changed and each student or 
work group receives a different but identifiable version.  
3. Using a signatory code, where each group member has to sign the final submission after 
gaining approval by the others, can help to prevent social loafing in group work to a large 
extent (Bailey et al., 2005). Of course, the instructor can rely on known group dynamics 
and/or balance individual and group work contributions in the overall course evaluation. 
However, implementing a signatory code seems to be more effective, as it gives real evidence 
that each group member contributed enough to the group work for all other group members to 
allow him/her to sign and obtain credits for that submission. This in turn allows a team to 
punish a group member if they feel he/she has been a free rider. 
THE APPROACH OF DYNAMIC ADAPTIVE CASES 
Taking all the problems associated with the traditional case study method into account, it becomes 
clear that (1) cases require more realistic and up-to-date information; (2) tasks should be essentially 
individual for each student or group; and (3) case design should discourage cheating, while (4) 
remaining relatively easy for the teacher to administrate. The following section proposes the use of 
dynamic adaptive cases as a means to address all four issues.  
 
7 
 
Firstly, it should be noted that there is a general lack of well-written traditional case studies in the 
fields of international logistics and supply chain management, particularly from a more operational 
perspective (i.e., focusing more on trade facilitation and transport management than on high-level 
strategic management issues) and in transport, logistics and supply chain accounting and controlling. 
In addition, those available in textbooks such as Taylor (1997), Dornier et al. (1998), Arlbjørn et al. 
(2006), Mangan et al. (2011) or  from repositories run by CSCMP or The Case Centre rapidly become 
outdated. This observation led to the author’s development of his own material, which was designed to 
foster experiential learning and could also be used for student assessment. This resulted in two types 
of dynamic adaptive cases (see Table 2):  
(1) Calculative cases Group assignments with decision-making scenarios in road haulage, inland 
navigation and/or logistics service provision based on effective cost calculation (see Appendix 
A1/A2 for a case sample and corresponding teaching note). The main learning outcomes for this 
sort of case are the demonstration of cost calculation skills and gaining experience in fact-based 
decision-making as part of a team. 
(2) Structured reports Individual working assignments assessing country environments or the customs 
treatment and packaging requirements of commodities being exported or imported in the context 
of the European Community (see Appendix B1/B2 for an assignment sample and corresponding 
teaching note). Learning outcomes center on training information acquisition, analysis and 
accurate reporting. 
In all cases, publicly available resources are exploited to create problem statements which are always 
new but require little effort to keep them up-to-date. In addition, the case design impedes cheating to a 
large extent as plagiarism, patch writing and social loafing can be detected relatively easily. The 
author has already used all three variants in various environments from bachelor to master level with 
full-time as well as part-time students at WU Vienna University of Economics and Business, the 
University of Applied Sciences bfi Vienna and Sup De Co, Amiens, Picardie. In all cases/institutions, 
the feedback at the end of the course was always very positive with students greatly appreciating the 
cases’ realism and practicality. Indeed, some even adopted the template spreadsheets from the 
calculative cases for their own work, while others drew on the sources provided in the assignments for 
subsequent seminar papers or theses. 
Calculative cases 
Here, students receive a short case study of about three pages describing a well-defined decision-
making scenario such as (re)investment in vehicles, calculation of freight costs, submission of a 
proposal for logistics service provision, etc. The case ends with a couple of specific questions which 
 
8 
 
ask for a calculation of effective costs for the provision of the vehicle, transport or logistics service in 
question, followed by slight adaptations or revisions of the initial scenario (e.g., the impact of different 
truck-trailer combinations or countries of registration for trucks or water levels in inland navigation) as 
well as some follow-up questions to foster deeper understanding (e.g., suggestions for improving their 
solution). To ease the necessary calculation tasks and limit the variety of possible outcomes, a generic 
Excel spreadsheet is always attached to the case. For calculations in road haulage and logistics service 
provision, it is pre-programmed in such a way that the personnel costs of drivers and dispatchers are 
derived from current collective agreements from the goods transportation and freight forwarding 
sector (including diverse rules about working hours, monthly payments, social benefits, etc.). It also 
includes road charges and vehicle tax for trucks and trailers so that students can click through and fill 
in the Excel sheet using the information outlined in the decision-making scenario. In the inland 
navigation case, a similar effective cost calculation from via donau (2007) is adopted, which explicitly 
includes vessel-operating costs and loading characteristics of different types of inland navigation 
vessels (and combinations thereof). Usually, all cells are non-protected, as part of the students’ task is 
to adapt this generic Excel spreadsheet to the specific situation given in their decision-making 
scenario. 
Method Design Conduct Evaluation Feedback 
Calculative  
cases 
 
Decision-making 
scenarios must be  
solved with the help  
of a generic Excel 
spreadsheet for 
calculations, accom-
panied by specific 
questions 
Case is distributed with  
a generic Excel 
spreadsheet as the basis 
for calculations;  
FAQ upon request 
Electronic submission  
of calculation sheet and 
written answers as group 
work 
In-class discussion, 
commenting on/ranking  
solutions in general 
Individual feedback 
given on marked and 
commented paper copies 
Country  
assessment  
report 
Structured report 
containing facts and 
figures as well as brief 
commentaries about a 
country environment of 
choice 
Assignment distributed 
with a template 
document serving  
as an example; 
FAQ upon request 
Electronic submission  
of written report; 
 in-class discussion 
In-class discussion 
showing exemplary 
country differences 
Individual feedback 
given on marked and 
commented paper copies 
or comments via 
learning platform 
Commodity  
assessment  
report 
Structured report 
containing commodity- 
and country-specific  
data about export/ import 
flows, trade restrictions, 
duty levels, preference 
rules, as well as pack-
aging needs and trans-
portation requirements 
Assignment distributed 
with an introduction 
explaining how to access 
secondary data from 
publicly available 
databases; 
FAQ upon request  
Electronic submission  
of written report; 
in-class discussion 
In-class discussion, 
giving an overview of 
findings about different 
duty levels, trade restric-
tions and preference 
rules  
Individual feedback 
given on marked and 
commented paper copies 
or comments via 
learning platform 
Table 2: Design, conduct, evaluation and feedback for dynamic adaptive cases 
 
9 
 
The case is then implemented in the course structure as follows. In the first session, spreadsheet 
functionalities are illustrated using a simple case of effective cost calculation and the class must 
choose one of several different scenarios to prepare as group work for the next session. The selected 
scenario is then briefly outlined and distributed electronically with the same generic Excel spreadsheet 
shown in class. The students are then asked to team up in groups, work on the case and submit their 
results electronically. In the session following the deadline for submission, their results are compared 
and common mistakes are discussed in class. Finally, each group receives a marked paper copy of its 
submission with further feedback. Usually, results differ considerably between the groups due to their 
individual approaches to problem-solving. Furthermore, given the overall complexity of the decision-
making scenarios, the debriefing and discussion in this second session can be highly interactive. At the 
same time, cheating is prevented to a large extent. The combination of different scenarios and the 
generic Excel spreadsheet makes it very difficult to use other students’ solutions since they will 
always differ due to updates in collective agreements, road charges, vehicle taxes etc. Furthermore, if 
the scenario asks for the calculation of freight costs or the submission of an offer, a competitive 
environment usually evolves among the groups, which further discourages local plagiarism.  
Structured reports 
The second type of dynamic adaptive cases is a highly individual working assignment mainly focusing 
on information acquisition and analysis as the first steps of a decision-making process. This design 
somewhat lacks the story-telling component which is usually part of a case study. However, as there 
are many real-world situations where such desk research is required, this is generally not regarded as 
problematic and so far has not been greatly missed by the students. 
Country assessment report 
In the case of a country assessment report, a country’s environment should be described using 
Ghemawat’s (2001) CAGE framework analyzing the cultural, administrative, geographic and 
economic distances between countries considering/engaged in foreign trade. Accordingly, students’ 
submissions should consist of about 5 pages structured along sections titled (1) general overview, (2) 
culture and people, (3) infrastructure, (4) economic activity and trade flows, and (5) business 
environment. In each section, a couple of key figures for the country of choice must be collected, 
explicated (if necessary) and compared to the averages of all European Union Member States, all 
countries worldwide, and/or other countries stated in the template document. To complete this 
assignment, students need to access publicly available reports and statistical resources from Eurostat, 
the World Bank, the CIA Factbook, etc., all of which can be retrieved easily by using the search 
functions of their web browsers and PDF viewers. Due to the richness of information and some 
 
10 
 
overlaps in country choice, it is not recommended that students present their results individually. 
Instead, it is better to hold in-class discussions showing exemplary country differences. Finally, more 
detailed feedback can be given by returning the marked and commented paper copies or by 
distributing comments via an e-learning platform. 
Commodity assessment report 
In the commodity assessment report, students are asked to choose a commodity with a specific 
Combined Nomenclature (CN8) classification used for both customs and external trade statistics 
purposes. They are then asked to research its export/import flows, customs treatment, or packaging 
and transportation requirements in the context of the European Union. More specifically, this should 
result in a written report of about five pages containing information about (1) the quantity and value of 
exports (imports) from (to) a country as stated in the assignment, according to country of destination 
(origin) from the statistics section of the EC Market Access Database; (2) duties / restrictions / 
preference rules for imports of this commodity originating from major third countries outside of the 
European Union from the TARIC Database; and (3) special requirements in terms of packaging and 
transportation as listed in the TIS-GDV cargo information system. The individual working assignment 
includes a step-by-step introduction with screenshots showing how to access and interpret data from 
these publicly available sources, using the example of bananas. In rare cases, additional resources can 
be employed upon request. During an in-class discussion after the submission of the written reports, 
each student briefly reports on his or her main findings orally and the instructor puts them together to 
provide an overview of the different trade restrictions, duty levels and preference rules in the context 
of the European Union. It is also highly recommended to include a rough classification (1) by third 
country duty level (e.g., nil, up to 6% and more than 6%) as well as reductions granted based on 
preferential origin or specific use and (2) whether special rules like restrictive quotas, quality criteria 
and/or import unit price systems are established and to map them on a flipchart or whiteboard. 
Afterwards, individual feedback is given using the marked and commented paper copies or comments 
posted via an e-learning platform. 
Key components of design and success factors  
With regard to the aims outlined above, the design of these two types of dynamic adaptive cases 
allows:  
(1) More realistic and up-to-date information: In the case of the scenario-driven calculative cases, the 
accompanying generic Excel spreadsheet is constantly updated as a result of changes in personnel 
costs and the regulatory environment. Furthermore, publicly available resources which have to be used 
 
11 
 
in the structured reports such as the TARIC Database deliver real, current information and are usually 
updated on a daily basis. 
(2) Individual tasks for each student or group: Both types of structured reports require students to 
choose their object of investigation themselves, which strengthens their identification with and interest 
in retrieving the online resources suggested. In the case of the calculative cases, not everything is 
predefined in detail so group discussions regularly result in different approaches to problem-solving as 
well as differing outcomes.  
(3) Prevention of cheating: In the calculative cases, changing the scenarios slightly and always using 
up-to-date generic Excel spreadsheets has proved to be a highly/largely successful counter-measure 
against the reuse of past submissions. In addition, the measures proposed by Singh et al. (2012) or 
Bailey et al. (2005) to solve the remaining issues of patch writing as well as social loafing are 
generally effective. In the structured reports, having a choice of country or commodity (in connection 
with its CN8 classification) makes it possible to specify the object of investigation in such an exact 
way that reusing former submissions or patch writing from other resources can be easily detected by 
the instructor with or even without using special anti-plagiarism tools.  
(4) Easy administration: The updating effort in particular is minimized as both case designs regularly 
generate different situations. Of course, it is important to check generic Excel spreadsheets for 
calculative cases, step-by-step introductions, and links to resources for structured reports before being 
distributed to minimize coaching needs. However, this is certainly much less work than writing or 
looking for completely new case studies or rewriting old ones. 
In addition, this dynamic adaptive case approach not only addresses practicality issues in daily 
teaching activities, but extends the traditional case study method at least in two ways:  
(1) Its dynamic design component always confronts students with realistic and up-to-date information. 
As these publicly available sources are always current and change over time, they simply cannot 
become outdated. With the calculative cases, a combination of decision-making scenarios and generic 
Excel spreadsheets create a multiplicity of ever new problems. Furthermore, the sources which have to 
be used for the structured reports, such as the TARIC Database, collect all necessary information on a 
specific commodity level used by customs authorities and declarants doing their daily work. In fact, 
two students can write a structured report about the same commodity with deviating results for the 
customs treatment because they were on the TARIC Database on different days in the same week. 
(2) Its adaptive component makes it possible to create essentially individual tasks for each student or 
group. This is especially the case for the structured reports as students are pushed to select, for 
 
12 
 
example, a commodity of their choice based on CN8. Individual choices always lead to a wide variety 
of commodities being written about, with some like certain fruits, vegetables, coffee, tea, cocoa or 
spices being quite popular. Group members’ professional background or prior job experience has very 
often turned out to make a notable difference while dealing with the decision-making scenarios in the 
calculative cases. However, this variety also contributes to making the cases more interesting and 
more individual for the students. Moreover, as some information, such as the inflation rate or revenue 
margin, is deliberately missing, the students must build on existing knowledge or make a guess, which 
again fuels individuality. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This contribution discussed common problems of teaching the case study method and outlined an 
approach using dynamic adaptive cases which makes it possible to offer (1) more realistic und up-to-
date information; (2) tasks which are essentially individual for each student or group; and (3) a case 
design which discourages cheating. So far, both the (1) calculative cases and (2) structured reports 
have proved to be an excellent way of motivating students and giving them practical experience 
through experiential learning while remaining relatively easy for the teacher to administrate and renew 
them each semester.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author thanks his kind colleague Miya Komori for proofreading and the two anonymous reviewers 
for their helpful comments on his first submission.  
REFERENCES 
Arlbjørn, J. S., Halldórsson, Á., Jahre, M., Spens K. and Stefansson, G. 2006. Nordic case reader in 
logistics and supply chain management. Kolding: University Press of Southern Denmark. 
Bailey, J.R., Saparito, P., Kressel, K., Christensen, E. and Hooijberg, R. 1997. “A Model for 
Reflective Pedagogy.“ Journal of Management Education 21 (2): 155-167. 
Bailey, J., Sass, M., Swiercz, P.M., Seal, C. and Kayes, C.D. 2005. “Teaching with and through 
Teams: Student-Written, Instructor-Facilitated Case Writing and the Signatory Code.“ Journal 
of Management Education 29 (1): 39-59. 
Barnes, L.B., Christensen, C.R. and Hansen, A. 1994. Teaching and the Case Method (3rd ed.). 
Boston, MS: Harvard Business Press Books. 
Butakov, S. and Scherbinin, V. 2009. “The Toolbox for Local and Global Plagiarism.” Computers and 
Education 52 (4): 781-788 
Byrne, E.T. and D. E. Wolfe, D.E. 1974. “The Design, Conduct and Evaluation of a Computerized 
Management Game as a Form of Experiential Learning.“ National Conference on Business 
Gaming and Experiential Learning. April, 1974. 
 
13 
 
Chapman, R. 1995. “Current Case Study Presentations in MBA Marketing Courses“ Marketing 
Education Review 5 (1): 53-59. 
Dornier, P.P., Ernst, R., Fender, M. and Kouvelis, P. 1998. Global Operations and Logistics – Text 
and Cases. John Wiley & Sons.  
Elam, L. and Spotts, H. 2004. “Achieving Marketing Curriculum Integration: A Live Case Study 
Approach.“ Journal of Marketing Education 26 (1): 50-65. 
Erksine, J.A., Leenders, M.R. and Mauffette-Leenders, L.A. 2003. Teaching with cases. Ontario, 
Canada: Ivey Publishing. 
Fawcett, S.E. and Fawcett, A.M. 2011. “The “Living” Case: Structuring Storytelling to Increase 
Student Interest, Interaction, and Learning.“ Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative 
Education 9 (2): 287-298. 
Gallagher, J. 2007. “Trigger Questions: Their Role In Problem Based Learning; Do They Add To The 
Quality Of Interactive Business Case Study Solutions?“ Journal of Business Case Studies 
3(4): 9-22. 
Gentry, J.W. 1990. “What is Experiential Learning?“ In Guide to business gaming and experiential 
learning, edited by W. James, 9-20. Gentry, East Brunswick: Nichols / GP Publ. 
Ghemawat, P. 2001. “Distance Still Matters. The Hard Reality of Global Expansion.“ Harvard 
Business Review 79 (8): 137-147. 
Goldwater, P.M. and Fogarty, T.J. 2007. “Protecting the Solution: A „High-Tech.“ Method to 
Guarantee Individual Effort in Accounting Classes.“ Accounting Education: An International 
Journal 16 (2): 129-143. 
Gollub, T., Potthast, M., Beyer, A., Busse, M., Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Stamatatos, E. and Stein, B. 
2013. “Recent Trends in Digital Text Forensics and its Evaluation.” Information Access 
Evaluation meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Visualization, edited by P. Forner, H. 
Müller, R. Paredes, P. Rosso, and B. Stein, Springer. ISBN 978-3-642-40801-4. 
Gross Davis, B. 1993. Tools for Teaching. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Heckler, N.C., Forde, D.R. and Hobson Bryan, C. 2013. Using Writing Assignment Designs to 
Mitigate Plagiarism.” Teaching Sociology 41(1): 94-105.  
Henson, S.W., Kennett, P.A. and Kennedy, K.N. 2003. “Web-Based Cases in Strategic Marketing.“ 
Journal of Marketing Education 25 (3): 250-259. 
Hoover, J.D. 1977. “A “Live-Case“ Approach to the Business and Society Courses.“ New Horizons in 
Simulation Games and Experiential Learning, edited by C.C. Nielsen, 159-165. Wichita, KS: 
College of Administration, University of Oklahoma. 
Howard, R. M. 1995. “Plagiarisms, authorships, and the academic death penalty.“ College English. 57 
(7): 788-806. 
Knoop, R. 1984. Case studies in Education, St. Catharines, Ontario: Praise Publishing. 
Kolb, D. A. 1984. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Kolb, A.Y. and Kolb, D.A. 2005. “Learning Styles and Learning Spaces: Enhancing Experiential 
Learning in Higher Education.“ Academy of Management Learning and Education 4 (2): 193–
212. 
Kreber, C. 2001. “Learning Experientially through Case Studies? A Conceptual Analysis.“ Teaching 
in Higher Education 6 (2): 217-228. 
LeClair, D. T. and Stottinger, B. 1999. “Using an Intensive Living Case in Graduate Marketing 
Courses: Experiences from an International Project.“ Marketing Education Review 9 (3): 31-
40. 
Li, Y. and Casanave, C.P. 2012. “Two first-year students’ strategies for writing from sources: 
Patchwriting or plagiarism?“ Journal of Second Language Writing 21:165-180. 
 
14 
 
Lincoln, D. 2006. “Student Authored Cases: Combining Benefits of Traditional and Live Case 
Methods of Instruction.“ Marketing Education Review 16 (1): 1-7. 
Mangan, J., Lalwani, C., Butcher, T., and Javadpour, R. 2011. Global Logistics and Supply Chain 
Management. John Wiley & Sons. 
Markulis, P.M. 1985. “The live case study: Filling the gap between the case study and the experiential 
exercise.“ In: Developments in business simulation and experiential exercises, Vol. 12, edited 
by J. Gentry and A. Burns, 168-171. Orlando, FL: Association for Business Simulation and 
Experiential Learning. 
Park, C. 2003. “In Other (People’s) Words: Plagiarism by university students- literature and lessons.“ 
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 28 (5): 471-488. 
Reeves, P. 2011. “The extended case study method of assessment in marketing education.” In: 
Education in a Changing Environment (ECE) 6th International Conference : Creativity and 
Engagement in Higher Education, 6 - 8 July 2011. Manchester, UK: University of Salford. 
Richardson, W.D. and Ginter, P.M. 1998. “Using Living Cases to Teach the Strategic Planning 
Process.“ Journal of Education for Business 73 (5): 269-273. 
Rosier, G. 2003. “Using reflective reports to improve the case method.“ Journal of Management 
Development 21 (7-8): 589-597. 
Roth, K.J. and Smith C. 2009. “Live Case Analysis: Pedagogical Problems and Prospects In 
Management Education”, American Journal of Business Education 2 (9): 59-66. 
Siciliano, J. and McAleer, G.M. 1997. “Increasing Student Participation in Case Discussions: Using 
the MICA Method in Strategic Management Courses.“ Journal of Management Education 21 
(2): 209-220. 
Singh, A., Mangalaraj, G. and Taneja, A. 2011. “An approach to detecting plagiarism in spreadsheet 
assignments: A digital answer to digital cheating.“ Journal of Accounting Education 29 (2-3): 
142-152. 
Stapleton, P. 2012. “Gauging the Effectiveness of Anti-plagiarism Software: An Empirical Study of 
Second Language Graduate Writers.” Journal of English for Academic Purposes 11 (2): 125-
133 
Svinicki, M.D. and Dixon, N.M. 1987. “The Kolb Model modified for classroom activities.“ College 
Teaching 35 (4): 141-146. 
Taylor, D.H. 1997. Global cases in logistics and supply chain management. London: Thomson 
Learning. 
Vega, G. 2013. “The Undergraduate Case Research Study Model.” Journal of Management Education 
34 (4): 574-604. 
via donau 2007. Handbook of Danube Navigation, Vienna: via donau. 
Zobel, J. and Hamilton, M. 2002. “Managing student plagiarism in large academic departments.“ 
Australian Universities Review 45 (1): 23-30. 
