AUTHORSHIP ATTRIBUTION FOR CHINESE TEXT BASED ON SENTENCE 
RHYTHM FEATURES 
Shaokang Wang1, 2, Baoping Yan1
1. Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China 100190 
2. Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 100049 
skwang@cnic.cn, ybp@cnic.cn 
ABSTRACT
Authorship attribution, i.e., identifying the authorship of a 
piece of disputed text, is an important problem due to the 
increased concerns on copyright violations. While various 
authorship attribution algorithms have been proposed to 
identify the authorship of articles, they fail in several 
situations. This paper proposes a new authorship attribution 
algorithm for Chinese text using the sentence rhythm 
features of articles. In our algorithm, a rhythm feature 
matrix is proposed to depict the sentence rhythm of Chinese 
text. In order to determine the similarity of rhythm feature 
matrices, we compare two definitions of similarity based on 
Euclidean distance and improved Kullback-Leibler 
Divergence, respectively. Experimental results show that 
our algorithm achieves a success rate of 80%. 
Keywords—authorship attribution, text similarity, 
rhythm feature, multi-dimensional matrix
1. INTRODUCTION 
As copyright violation becoming a serious concern due to 
the revolution of Internet, authorship attribution (AA) is 
more and more important.  
It is well known that an author’s writing style, such as 
the grammar, vocabulary and rhetoric used, is often unique 
to the author and can be used to infer the authorship of a 
piece of disputed text. Various authorship attribution 
algorithms have been proposed to analyze the authorship of 
articles based on various stochastic characteristics of the 
authors’ known collections. In terms of writing style 
features, the vocabulary richness, the lexical repetition, the 
syntactic analysis, the grammatical errors and many other 
linguistic styles are taken into account; in terms of 
techniques, support vector machines (SVMs), neural 
networks, decision trees, linear discriminant analysis, etc. 
are applied to the task. 
However, these traditional algorithms face several 
challenges in reality. First, in today’s Internet-scale 
applications, it is commonly required that authorship 
attribution algorithms should be simple, efficient and 
scalable because there are often too many potential writers 
to compare with in an application. For example, in order to 
determine the use of unauthorized paragraphs in students’ 
dissertation in the whole department, a large database needs 
to be built for every potential writer in the field. Second, 
since copyright violators may simply replace words to their 
synonyms, a lot of word-based authorship attribution 
algorithms may fail. For example, if someone uses software 
to replace the word “fast” into “quick” in the disputed text, 
some authorship attribution algorithms may fail since the 
frequency of words has been changed.  
This paper proposes a novel authorship attribution 
algorithm for Chinese text by identifying the authorship 
through sentence rhythm. Compared with traditional 
algorithms, our algorithm has the following contributions: 
1. Our algorithm is simple and efficient. For every 
author, we only need to store a simple matrix as a 
signature, which costs only a few bytes in the 
database.  
2. Even if the copyright violators randomly replace 
words to synonyms in the text, our algorithm still 
gives a reasonable result.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we discuss the related works. Section 3 defines 
our rhythm feature matrix. Section 4 presents our authorship 
attribution algorithm. Section 5 demonstrates our empirical 
results. Section 6 and Section 7 are conclusion and 
acknowledgements. 
2. RELATED WORK 
Authorship attribution has long been attracting the interests 
of different scholars who have made their research on this 
topic from different perspectives and thus proposed 
different algorithms. Smith et al. use the average word 
length, the average sentence length, the use of phrases and 
the position of words in the sentences as authorship 
characteristics and use Chi-square test to determine the 
___________________________________ 
978-1-4244-8886-5/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE  
  
difference between works of Shakespeare and Marlowe [1]. 
Farringdon et al. propose a Cumulative Sum-Cusum method 
for authorship attribution [2]. Soboroff et al. demonstrate a 
visualized way of authorship attribution [3]. Vel et al. use 
the information of the content and structure to identify 
authorship of e-mails [4].  
For Chinese text, Xiaoming Sun et al. use the 
grammatical words as identification metric and build vector 
space models for authorship attribution [5]. Yijiang Jin et al. 
make a research on the authentication of Internet writing 
style, and take the frequency distribution of Chinese 
function words as an authorship characteristic for the first 
time [6]. Xiaochun Wu et al. propose a new similarity 
evaluation method based on semantic analysis [7]. A review 
of other important algorithms is available in [8]. 
3. RHYTHM FEATURES OF SENTENCES 
Rhythm is the timing patterns among the words in the text. 
Articles from different authors commonly have different 
rhythm patterns.  
We observe that the rhythm of an article almost 
uniquely reflects an author’s personal styles in his writings. 
In this paper, we use rhythm as a signature metric for 
authors in our authorship attribution algorithm. Specially, 
we define a rhythm feature matrix for every writer using 
stochastic information from his/her known collection of 
articles. For every article with an unknown authorship, we 
generate a rhythm feature matrix and compare it with the 
rhythm feature matrices of all known authors in the database 
and then make authorship attribution decisions based on the 
similarity values. We assume several definitions as follows. 
Definition 1 A stop punctuation is a punctuation which 
causes a stop in a sentence, such as a comma, a period, an 
exclamation mark, etc. Logically, a none-stop punctuation is 
defined as a punctuation which does not cause a stop in the 
text, such as quotation mark, the quotation mark. 
Definition 2 The definition of sentence rhythm. Stop 
punctuations divide an article into several segments. The 
sentence rhythm is defined as the distribution of the 
segments’ length. 
The length of a segment is the number of syllables in 
the segment. Every Chinese character in the text is assumed 
to contain one and only one syllable. When non-Chinese 
language words appear in the text, we treat every word as 
two syllables for simplicity. None-stop punctuations in the 
text are considered to have 0 syllables and thus are omitted 
when calculating the length.
We consider paragraphs in the text in a different way. 
For every notation that leads a new paragraph, we treat it as 
a special segment with a length of 0.  
Definition 3  A rhythm feature matrix is a m-
dimensional matrix, in which
mii
a ...1 is the element  at 
coordinate  ( miii ,..., 21 ), if each element miia ...1 of the 
matrix is equal to the frequency of the syllable length 
sequence mii ...1 in document D, then The matrix A is called 
the rhythm feature matrix of the document D. Defined as the 
following formula:
mii
aA ...1
 

Ac ii
ii
ii
m
m
p c
c
a
...
...
...
1
1
1
 (1) 
Where 
mii
c ...1  is the count of occurrences of syllable length 
sequence mii ...1 .
It is easy to show that the sum of the elements in a 
rhythm feature matrix is 1. Therefore, a rhythm feature 
matrix can be considered as a probability distribution matrix 
that describes the feature of the document’s sentence rhythm 
by probability of occurrences of syllable length sequence in 
the document. 
Please note that the definition of rhythm feature matrix 
in (1) does not depend on the words used in the text. The 
values in (1) remain the same when some selected words are 
replaced by other words of the same length. In the Chinese 
language, most words have a length of two characters. As a 
result, the values in (1) are robust to simple word 
replacement.  
4. METRICS OF RHYTHM SIMILARITY 
To measure the similarity in rhythm for two documents, we 
first build the rhythm feature matrix for each document, and 
then calculate the similarity between the matrices. We use 
the similarity between rhythm feature matrices as an 
estimation of the similarity between the two documents. 
Furthermore, to determine whether an article is written by a 
particular author, we can build a rhythm feature matrix from 
the author’s known articles, and compare with the rhythm 
feature matrix of the article being tested.  
However, it is very rare that the rhythm feature 
matrices of two papers become exactly the same, even if the 
two articles are from the same author and talking about the 
same topic. In our empirical studies, we observe that the 
rhythm feature matrices for different articles from the same 
author can be very similar. Further automatic authorship 
attribution requires a mathematical definition of similarity. 
We evaluate two different definitions of similarity in our 
application: Euclidean distance [9] and Kullback-Leibler 
Divergence [10].
4.1 Euclidean distance algorithm (EU algorithm) 
Euclidean distance, though mostly used to depict the 
distance between two points in the n-dimensional space, 
may also be adapted to calculate differences between two 
matrices. The Euclidean distance is calculated as follows: 
   BbAa iiii mm baBAdiseu , 2...... )(),(_ 11 (2)
Where A and B are two rhythm feature matrices, 
mii
a ...1  is 
the element at coordinate ( miii ,..., 21 ) of A; miib ...1 is the 
element at coordinate ( miii ,..., 21 ) of B. A larger value of 
),(_ BAdiseu means that the two documents are less 
similar to each other. 
4.2 Kullback-Leibler Divergence algorithm (KL 
algorithm) 
In probability theory and information theory, the 
Kullback–Leibler divergence is a measure of the difference 
between two probability distributions P and Q: 
)(
)(log)()||(
xQ
xPxPQPD
Ex    (3) 
Kullback–Leibler divergence is not symmetric, 
i.e., )||()||( PQDQPD  , so it cannot meet our 
requirements by itself. We can use the Jensen–Shannon 
Divergence [11] to make it symmetric as follows: 
)||(
2
1)||(
2
1)||( MQDMPDQPJSD  (4)
)(
2
1 QPM   (5) 
As discussed in Section 3, a rhythm feature matrix is a 
probability distribution matrix of syllable length. 
Therefore, the distance defined in (4) can be used to 
evaluate the difference between two rhythm feature 
matrices. Substituting (3) and (5) into (4), we get: 
)(
2
1
log
2
1
)(
2
1
log
2
1),(
......
...
...
,
......
...
...
11
1
1
11
1
1
mm
m
m
mm
m
m
iiii
ii
ii
BbAa
iiii
ii
ii
ba
b
b
ba
a
aBARD



 
(6)
However, the definition in (3)-(6) cannot be used 
directly to evaluate the difference between two articles. In 
practice, the rhythm feature matrix A for a document D may 
contain considerable amount of zeros. For example, it is 
common that in an article there is no sentence of length 2. 
Sometimes, it may occur that the denominator in (6) to 
become 0, i.e., 0...... 11  mm iiii ba . To avoid an undefined 
value of distance in this case, we replace all the zeros in 
matrix A with a constant positive number 	 for calculation. 
In order to ensure that the sum of all elements in A is 1 such 
that the rhythm feature matrix still represents a probability 
distribution, we scale all the non-zero elements of the matrix 
by 
 accordingly, with (0 < 
 <1).
As a result, we adapt the definition of rhythm feature 
matrix as follows: 
mii
aA ...1




 
  
	


Ac ii
ii
ii m
m
m
c
c
a ...
...
... 1
1
1
0
0
...
...
1
1


m
m
ii
ii
c
c
  0, ...11 miicAc 	
    (7) 
Using the two metrics of similarity, we design our 
authorship attribution algorithm as follows. For every writer, 
we build a rhythm feature matrix from the author’s known 
text and stored in a database. Then for a piece of disputed 
text, a rhythm feature matrix is built and compared with the 
rhythm feature matrices of all writers in the database. The 
writer with the rhythm feature matrix most similar to the 
disputed text is identified as the author of the text.  
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
We conduct experiments using a test set consisting of texts 
from 10 modern writers, including Xun Lu, She Lao, Jin Ba, 
Dun Mao, Yong Jin, Long Gu, Yusheng Liang, Ailing 
Zhang, Shuo Wang and Qiuyu Yu. Instead of using all the 
articles of all writers, we randomly select texts of 500,000 
characters from each writer as a training set. We build an n-
dimensional rhythm feature matrix ( ]10.1[n ) for each 
writer using this training set.  
This paper randomly selects 20 texts for each writer 
outside the training set, resulting in a total of 200 texts. 
Each text contains 5000 characters. We then build an n-
dimensional rhythm feature matrix for each text ( ]10.1[n ).
Finally, we calculate the difference between the matrices by 
the methods in this paper for authorship attribution. The 
results are summarized as follows: 
Table 1 The results for each method
Number of matrix 
dimensions
1 2 3 4 5 
Number of successful 
hits (EU)
113 122 104 119 117 
Rate of successful 
hits (EU)
0.57 0.61 0.52 0.60 0.59
Number of successful 
hits (KL)
148 152 164 164 132 
Rate of successful 
hits (KL)
0.74 0.76 0.82 0.82 0.66
Number of matrix 
dimensions
6 7 8 9 10 
Number of 
successful hits (EU)
109 114 102 103 104 
Rate of successful 
hits (EU)
0.55 0.57 0.51 0.52 0.52
Number of 
successful hits (KL)
108 112 104 96 102 
Rate of successful 
hits (KL)
0.54 0.56 0.52 0.48 0.51
We display it by a line chart as follows:  
Figure 1 The results for each method
The result shows that the success rate changes when 
the dimension of the rhythm feature matrix changes from 1 
to 10. For the EU algorithm, the success rate is relatively 
stable and not very sensitive to the dimension. The KL 
algorithm achieves the maximum success rate when the 
dimension is 3 or 4. Overall, the KL algorithm are about 
80% with the correct dimension value, the EU algorithm has 
a much lower success rate from 50% to 60%. 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTHRE WORK 
This paper presents a new authorship attribution algorithm. 
Traditional solutions focus more on the content of the 
articles (what they write) while our algorithm focus on the 
inherent rhythm of the article (how they write). A rhythm 
feature matrix is proposed to describe the rhythm of the text. 
In the experiments, we evaluate two different ways to 
evaluate the similarity of articles through the rhythm feature 
matrix. The experiment shows that with a well-chosen 
dimension of matrices matrix comparison algorithm, our 
solution features a good success rate of 80%.
For the future work, we plan to further investigate the 
possibility to combine our rhythm-based algorithm with 
other traditional algorithms and we expect that in that way 
we could make higher success rate.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The  research  was  supported  by  the  National  High-tech  
R&D Program  of  China  (No.2006AA01A120);  and  by  
Chinese Academy  of  Sciences  (CAS)  of  Special  Items  
of  Information (No.INFO-115 D01); and  by  Youth-
Research Foundation of CNIC, CAS 
(No.CNIC_QN_09005). 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] M. W. Smith. Recent Experience and New Developments of 
Methods for Determination of Authorship. In ALLC Bulletin, 
Volume 11, Pages 73-82, 1983 
[2] J. M. Farringdon, A. Q. Morton, M.D. Baker. Analyzing for 
Authorship: A Guide to the Cusum Technique. University of 
Wales Press, Cardiff, 1996 
[3] L. M. Soboroff, C. K. Nicholas, J. M. Kukla, et al. New 
Paradigms in Information Visualization and Manipulation. ACM 
Press, New York, 1997 
[4] O. De Vel, A. Anderson, M. Corney, G. Mohay. Mining Email 
Content for Author Identification Forensics. ACM SIGMOD: 
Special Section on Data Mining for Intrusion Detection and Threat 
Analysis, December 2001 
[5] Xiaoming Sun, Shaoping Ma. Identification based on writing 
style. In Proc. of the 20th Anniversary of Chinese Information 
Processing Conference. Beijing: Tsinghua University Press, Pages 
198-204, 2001 
[6] Yijiang Jin, Xiaoming Sun, Shaoping Ma. Writing Style 
Identification on Internet. Journal of Guangxi Normal University, 
Volume 21, No. 1, Pages 62-66,2003 
[7] Xiaochun Wu, Xuanqing Huang, Lide Wu. Authorship 
Attribution Based on Semantic Analysis. In Journal of Chinese 
Information Processing, Volume 20, No. 6, Pages 61-68, 2006 
[8] M. B. Malyutov. Authorship Attribution of Texts: A Review. 
In Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics, Volume 21, Pages 
353-357, 2005 
[9] E. Deza, M. M. Deza. Encyclopedia of Distances, Springer, 
Page 94, 2009 
[10] S. Kullback, R. A. Leibler. On Information and Sufficiency. 
In  Annals of Mathematical Statistics, Volume 22, No. 1, Pages 
79–86, 1951 
[11] D. M. Endres, J. E. Schindelin. A New Metric for Probability 
Distributions. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Volume 
49, No. 7, Pages 1858–1860, 2003 
