INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND RESEARCH  (IJSPR)                                              ISSN: 2349-4689 
Volume-14, Number - 01, 2015  
 
www.ijspr.com                                                                                                                                                                                    IJSPR | 39 
 
A Survey on Plagiarism Detection Techniques and 
Understanding Textual Features 
Heena Sherwani#1, Mitesh Bargadiya*2 
#1 Research Scholar (M.Tech (SS) IV Sem), Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
*2 Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
#1, *2 Vindhya Institute of Technology and Science, Indore (M.P) INDIA) 
 
Abstract - Web is a powerful tool for human where different types 
of data and applications are readily available to explore. The 
unknown or secondary authors copy the information and text 
from the original document which is readily available on web, 
leads to copyright violation in web document known as 
Plagiarism. This paper presents various plagiarism detection 
techniques. Textual features are needed in plagiarism detection 
frameworks. The proposed work is intended to survey various 
plagiarism types, different textual features and plagiarism 
detection methods to analyse which method detects which 
plagiarism type. We have also surveyed the plagiarism over 
watermarked text and plain text document. 
Keywords: Plagiarism, textual features, watermarking. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the digital era, various resources are available on the web. 
Web contains very sensitive and important documents which 
are readily available to explore. The information distribution 
through web also involves the risk. A watermark can be a 
valuable addition to our document. Whether you want to 
enhance the appearance of the document by adding a seal or 
image or whether you want to add a text watermark that 
identifies the document contents as a draft or private 
information, the watermark feature is a definite asset for 
intermediate to advanced users. Watermarking discourages 
counterfeiting. The watermarking is a method to achieve the 
copyright protection of web contents. Because the 
multimedia represents several different media such as text, 
image, video, audio, and graphic objects, and they shows 
very different characteristics in hiding information inside 
them so different watermarking algorithms appropriate to 
each of them should be developed [6].  
An effective watermark carries different properties which 
may change as per application. The properties are [6]: 
1. Lustiness: The watermark should be reliable or valid so 
that it must not degrade easily and should persist under 
severe conditions. 
2. Security: Watermark should maintain the privacy of 
document from unwanted or unauthenticated sources. It 
should be able to maintain the secrecy of document.  
3. Rapid retrieval: The watermark algorithms must be at full 
tilt. Easy and fast embedding of documents must be done. 
4. Multiple watermarks: The document should be embedded 
with several watermarks such that each time the image or 
text downloaded should contain unique watermark. 
5. Unambiguity: A watermark should not have redundancy 
problem regarding document of a rightful author. 
II. BACKGROUND  
There are no two humans write exactly the same text no 
matter how similar thoughts and language they are using. 
Similarly, text written by different authors should be 
different, except for cited portions. If proper referencing is 
left or abandoned then problems of plagiarism arise. 
Alzahrani et al. [5] discussed the classification of 
plagiarism, based on the plagiarist’s behaviour into two 
types: 
A. Literal Plagiarism 
Literal Plagiarism is the most common practice where 
plagiarists simply copy and paste the text from web. Except 
few alterations in the original text document, plagiarists 
copies entirely word-for-word from source document 
without direct quotation. The diagram below shows various 
types of plagiarism [5]. 
B. Intelligent Plagiarism 
 
Intelligent Plagiarism is another type of plagiarism wherein 
plagiarists try to cheat readers by changing the contributions 
of others which appears as their own. In intelligent 
plagiarism, plagiarists try to hide and change the original 
work in various intelligent ways which are as follows [5]: 
 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND RESEARCH  (IJSPR)                                              ISSN: 2349-4689 
Volume-14, Number - 01, 2015  
 
www.ijspr.com                                                                                                                                                                                    IJSPR | 40 
 
1. Text Manipulation- This plagiarism can confuse the 
readers by changing most of its appearance and 
manipulating the text. Paraphrasing and summarizing the 
text in a shorter form using restructuring, sentence reduction 
and concept specification are other types of plagiarisms. 
 
2. Translation- Plagiarism can be done by translating the 
text document which is in one language into another without 
referencing to original source. Automatic translation and 
manual translation comes under translated plagiarism. 
 
 
Fig. 2.1 Plagiarism Types 
 
3. Idea Adoption- It is the most critical plagiarism that 
refers to copy other's idea and use it as their own. It is a 
major ethical offence adopting to adopt ideas of other. Idea 
Adoption is a serious academic problem. Idea adoption 
plagiarism can be committed in following forms: 
 
a)  Semantic-based meaning- In this type of idea 
plagiarism, same idea is expressed in different words using 
translation, paraphrasing and summarization of text. 
 
b) Section-based importance- Here the most important 
sections such as findings, conclusions etc are plagiarized. 
Thus under this type, it plagiarizes the important substantial 
sections of any document.  
 
c) Context–based meaning- In this type of plagiarism, 
structure or sequence of ideas is plagiarized from the source 
document. 
PLAGIARISM DETECTION- Plagiarism detection is the 
process of figuring the document, analysing its data, 
unveiling the portions that are likely to be plagiarized and 
bringing similar source documents if available [5]. 
According to Osman et al. Plagiarism detection process has 
four stages which are collection, analysis, confirmation and 
investigation [1]. Conference management systems, 
academic institutions and publishers have started using 
plagiarism detectors such as CrossCheck, Turnitin, 
WCopyFind etc. Among these detectors Turnitin is very 
popular [4]. 
 
PLAGIARISM DETECTION TASKS- plagiarism detection is 
divided into two main tasks [1], [5] which are: 
 
1. Extrinsic Plagiarism Detection- It detects plagiarism on 
a reference to one or more source documents. It uses 
computer’s capability to search the plagiarized document in 
a similar source documents. Many researches have been 
undertaken for extrinsic plagiarism detection. In this task the 
various source documents and a query document is taken 
which passes through retrieval model later a feature based 
analysis is done and comparison is done between different 
units. Now processing unit combines theses units into 
passages to present the results to human which may decide 
that plagiarism is committed or not. 
 
2. Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection- Intrinsic plagiarism 
detection is carried out by looking into query document in 
isolation. It uses human’s capability to detect plagiarism via 
writing style variations [3]. Stamatatos et al. has presented 
new method to quantify style variations using character n-
gram profiles and a style change function [3]. Thus intrinsic 
plagiarism detection deals where no reference is given and 
style inconsistencies are presented in a document.  
 
 
TEXTUAL FEATURES- Textual features are used to 
characterize documents before plagiarism detection methods 
are applied. Textual features quantify documents and are 
needed in various plagiarism detection frameworks which 
are as follows: 
 
A. Textual Features for Extrinsic Plagiarism Detection- To 
quantify documents in extrinsic plagiarism detection, 
various textual features are discussed below with detailed 
description [5]: 
 
1)  Lexical Features: In any document, character and word 
are the simplest form to represent. Lexical features are 
operated at character or word level. Character n-gram 
representation is used in a document d to represent a 
sequence of characters. Similarly, word n-gram 
representation is a collection of words in any document. 
CNG and WNG are known as shingles or fingerprints. The 
process of creating fingerprints is called fingerprinting or 
shingling. Various tools and resources such as Tokenizer, 
Stemmer, Lemmatizer are used to break document into its 
basic form [8]. 
 
2)  Syntactic Features: They are characterized by sentence 
based representation. Here text is splitted using end 
delimiters such as full stop, question mark etc. After 
splitting the text into sentences, part of speech (POS) 
structure can be created using POS tagger. Similarly text 
chunk is used to characterize bigger text and chunker is 
generated by windowing. Tools and resources used are POS 
tagger, text chunker, Sentence splitter, Partial parser etc. 
 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND RESEARCH  (IJSPR)                                              ISSN: 2349-4689 
Volume-14, Number - 01, 2015  
 
www.ijspr.com                                                                                                                                                                                    IJSPR | 41 
 
3)  Semantic Features: Semantic features helps in 
plagiarism detection by providing insights into the meaning 
of text so that we can compare text semantically using 
semantic dependencies and POS tagging. Thesaurus, Word-
Net etc helps to find the synonyms, hyponyms and 
antonyms. 
 
4)  Structural Features: Structural features for plagiarism 
detection deals with tree organizations of documents. 
Document is the collection of paragraphs and similar 
paragraphs constitute a block having similar semantics. 
These blocks later form sections and sub-sections. This semi 
structured document such as journal papers etc quantified by 
structural features. Structural features can be divided into 
two types which are block-specific and content-specific 
structured features [5]. In block specific structured features, 
web pages based documents were considered as blocks. 
Later HTML tags are used to segment web pages. The 
paragraphs are grouped into pages where a new paragraph is 
added to each page until maximum count is reached 
otherwise new page is created. Content-specific structured 
features encode the document features into semantically 
related blocks. Content-specific features with flat features 
can get better gist of concepts thus provides better 
plagiarism detection. 
 
B.  Textual Features for Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection- 
Every author has its own writing skills and style. Intrinsic 
plagiarism detection deals with stylometric features which 
quantify the writing style and its variations. Intrinsic 
plagiarism detection also uses lexical features operate at 
character level, syntactic features operate at sentence level 
and uses POS, semantic features quantify semantic 
dependencies and application based features which includes 
language specific and content-specific keywords [5]. 
 
PLAGIARISM DETECTION METHODS- Various research 
works have undertaken and as a result gives different 
plagiarism detection techniques which are as below [1], [5]: 
 
1)  Character-Based Methods: According to Alzahrani et 
al. [5] character based techniques helps in plagiarism 
detection using character n-gram and word n-gram features. 
The suspicious document is compared against the candidate 
document on string basis. String matching can be exactly 
similar or approximate. Exact string matching means two 
strings say x and y have exactly the same letters. While in 
approximate string matching some degree of letter 
resembles and thus different operations like Insertion, 
Deletion, Substitution and Transposition are applied. This 
string matching is also called as fingerprint. 
 
2)  Vector-Based Methods: Like character-based method, 
vector-based method relies on tokens instead of strings. 
Tokens are compared and similarity is calculated using 
vector similarity coefficient, Dice’s, Euclidean, Cosine, or 
Manhattan coefficients. Due to simplicity and ease, Cosine 
with other metrics was efficient for plagiarism detection. 
 
3)  Syntax-Based Methods: Syntactical features are used to 
find the similarity between texts. This syntactical features 
contains POS that is part of speech tagger which gauge the 
similarity between texts. The similarity using POS tags 
shows that two texts are having similar syntactical features 
and using LCS algorithm [1] it detects plagiarism. 
 
4)  Semantic-Based Methods: A sentence is a group of 
words arranged in different order. Two sentences can be 
semantically same but having different order of words. Thus 
resemblance between two sentences can be derived through 
word similarity and order similarity [5]. Osman et al., [2] 
have introduced effective plagiarism detection technique 
based on Semantic Role Labeling. SRL analyzed each 
sentences in a text and generated a value for each argument. 
Finally, the generated values for each argument show their 
behavior and also show that every argument behavior does 
not affect the plagiarism detection process [2]. 
 
5) Fuzzy-Based Methods: The concept of “fuzzy” in 
plagiarism detection is related with vagueness of similarity 
of words in a sentence of any text. The similarity may vary 
from zero to one which means degree of similarity between 
words in a document match exactly in case of one and match 
nothing in case of zero. While there may be some degree of 
similarity is shown by fuzzy set. A term-to-term correlation 
matrix is constructed which shows the similarity between 
different words and helps to form fuzzy set. Fuzzy-based 
methods found to be very effective up to some extent. 
 
6)  Structural-Based Methods: All the above methods use 
flat features representations such as lexical features, 
syntactical features and semantic features of a text in a 
document. Hierarchical feature or tree feature representation 
uses contextual information and shows contextual similarity 
throughout the document or section or sub-section. Tree 
structured representation is very effective in plagiarism 
detection of web pages and web related documents. 
 
7)  Stylometric-Based Methods: Every author has their 
own writing skills and vocabulary. Author employs patterns 
to construct sentences having different writing style. 
Stylometric-based methods are used in intrinsic plagiarism 
detection frameworks where plagiarism is detected by 
quantified writing style variation. 
 
8) Cross-Lingual Plagiarism Detection Methods: Cross 
lingual methods using cross language features measures the 
similarity between sections of query document and sections 
of the candidate document. It uses various cross-lingual 
syntax-based methods, cross-lingual semantic-based 
methods, cross-lingual dictionary-based methods and 
statistics-based methods [5]. 
 
III. REVIEW 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND RESEARCH  (IJSPR)                                              ISSN: 2349-4689 
Volume-14, Number - 01, 2015  
 
www.ijspr.com                                                                                                                                                                                    IJSPR | 42 
 
In the following Table 1 contains the literature review, along 
with their contributions in the Plagiarism Detection 
techniques and antiplagiarism tools. 
TABLE I : SUMMARY OF VARIOUS AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTION IN PLAGIARISM DETECTION 
S no. Year Published By Paper Title Remark 
1 2012 
A.H. Osman et 
al. 
“Survey of Text Plagiarism 
Detection” 
1.        This paper has significantly reflected a novel text 
plagiarism detection technique called citation-based methods. 
2.        Author has described the four plagiarism detection process 
stages as collection, analysis, confirmation and investigation.  
2 2011 
A. H. Osman et 
al. 
"An Improved Plagiarism 
Detection Scheme Based on 
Semantic Role Labeling" 
1.        In this paper, author has developed an improved plagiarism 
detection technique on semantic role labeling in which SRL 
employed and compared text based on semantic allocation 
for every term inside a sentence. 
3 2008 
Efstathios 
Stamatatos et 
al. 
“Intrinsic Plagiarism 
Detection Using Character n-
gram Profiles” 
1.        In this paper, author has presented a new method to 
quantify style variation within a document using style change 
function and character n-gram profile. 
2.        Author proposed a set of heuristic ruled to detect 
plagiarism. 
4 2006 
Hermann 
Maurer et al. 
“Plagiarism- A Survey” 
1.        This paper shows a detailed survey on various plagiarism 
detection tools and services. 
2.        Various web based tools such as Turnitin, SafeAssignment, 
docoloc, Moss etc are investigated and compared effectively. 
5 2012 Alzahrani et al 
“Understanding Plagiarism 
Linguistic Patterns, Textual 
Features, and Detection 
Methods” 
1.        This paper showed state-of-the-art techniques for 
plagiarism detection, different frameworks and textual 
features with resources and tools. 
2.        Author suggested two methods semantic-based and fuzzy-
based for idea plagiarism detection. 
3.        Author also proposed the use of structural-based methods 
are efficient for section and context-based idea plagiarism 
detection.  
 
2014 
Sunanda Datta 
et al. 
“Data Authentication using 
Digital Watermarking” 
1.        In this paper, author has explained the digital watermarking 
concepts along with different watermarking methods and 
which method is more suitable to be used. 
2.        Various types, processes and contributions of other authors 
in the field of watermarking have been presented clearly. 
7 2012 
Vanessa Wei 
Feng et al. 
“Text-level Discourse Parsing 
with Rich Linguistic 
Features” 
1.        In this paper, author has developed an RST-style text-level 
discourse parser and incorporated their own rich linguistic 
features. 
8 2014 
Zdenek Ceskal 
et al. 
“Multilingual Plagiarism 
Detection” 
1.        This paper describes a novel approach and a new method 
called MLPlag for multilingual plagiarism detection. This 
method has proved to be accurate and has given promising 
results. 
2.        Experiments are performed on both monolingual and 
multilingual corpora and results are shown in this paper. 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
This paper includes the survey of plagiarism detection 
techniques and various textual features for capturing 
different types of plagiarism. Character-based methods, 
vector-based methods and syntax-based methods are suitable 
for detecting literal plagiarism. Semantic-based and fuzzy-
based methods are more reliable as they incorporate 
semantic features. Both these methods received less 
attention because of time complexity of algorithms which 
makes them impractical for  
real  use. Stylometric methods are used in intrinsic 
plagiarism detection framework in which source document 
is unavailable and leaves no evidence of plagiarism which is 
important aspect for human. Structure-based methods are 
used for tree structure representation of document and thus 
combined with vector-based methods detects plagiarism 
more efficiently. However all these methods cater literal 
plagiarism but idea plagiarism needs more research and 
more effective approach.    
 
REFERENCES 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND RESEARCH  (IJSPR)                                              ISSN: 2349-4689 
Volume-14, Number - 01, 2015  
 
www.ijspr.com                                                                                                                                                                                    IJSPR | 43 
 
 
[1] Ahmed Hamza Osman, Naomie Salim, and Albaraa                   
Abuobieda, ”Survey of Text Plagiarism Detection,” Computer 
Engineering and Applications Vol. 1, No. 1, June 2012. 
[2] A. H. Osman, et al., "An Improved Plagiarism Detection 
Scheme Based on Semantic Role Labeling," Applied Soft 
Computing, 2011. 
[3] Efstathios Stamatatos, “Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection Using 
Character n-gram Profiles,” University of the Aegean, 2008. 
[4] Hermann Maurer, Frank Kappe and Bilal Zaka, “Plagiarism- 
A Survey,” Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 12, 
no. 8 (2006). 
[5] Salha M. Alzahrani, Naomie Salim, and Ajith Abraham, 
“Understanding Plagiarism Linguistic Patterns, Textual 
Features, and Detection Methods,”  IEEE Transactions On 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics Part-C, Vol.42, No.2, March 
2012. 
[6] Sunanda Datta, Dr. Asoke Nath, “Data Authentication Using 
Digital Watermarking,” Vol.2,Issue 14,December 2014, ISSN: 
2321-7782. 
[7] Vanessa Wei Feng, Graeme Hirst, “Text-level Discourse 
Parsing with Rich Linguistic Features,” Proceedings of the 
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 60–68, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 
2012. 
[8] Zdenek Ceska1, Michal Toman1 and Karel Jezek, 
“Multilingual Plagiarism Detection,” University of West 
Bohemia, oct. 2014. 
