EMPIRICAL TEXT MINING FOR GENRE DETECTION 
Vasiliki Simaki*, Sofia Stamou*+, Nikos Kirtsis* 
*Computer Engineering and Informatics Department, Patras University, Greece 
+ Department of Archives and Library Science,Ionian University, Greece 
{simaki, stamou, kirtsis}@ceid.upatras.gr 
Keywords: Genre detection, annotation, human study 
Abstract: In this paper, we report on a preliminary study we carried out for identifying patterns that characterize the genre type of 
Greek texts. In the course of our study, we address four distinct genre types, we record their observable stylistic elements 
and we indicate their exploitation for automatic genre-based document classification. The findings of our study demon-
strate that texts contain lexical features with discriminative power as far as genre is concerned, however modeling those 
features so that they can be explored by computer-based applications is still in early stages. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The genre is the totality of characteristics we ob-
serve in a text that gives a unique print. It is an het-
erogeneous categorical principle in that it provides 
clues for classifying texts into specific styles. Genre 
clues are closer to the field of semantics and unlike 
text type that conveys information about the texts' 
structure, they give out information about the style 
of a text. Genre clues are employed for characteriz-
ing a text as subjective/objective, positive/negative 
about the subject it elaborates, opinionated, factual, 
etc. They may also be employed for unravelling 
stylistic features reflected within a text's content, 
with these ranging from literary content to proce-
dural, descriptive and so forth.  
In this paper, we report on an observatory study 
we carried out in which we try to identify structural 
and contextual clues within text in order to be able 
to characterize its underlying genre accurately. Our 
observations verify that there are discrete informa-
tional points within texts that constitute their genre 
clues. Based on this finding, we take a step further 
and try to mine lexical and syntactic patterns from 
text, which may be treated as genre indicators for 
automatically classifying texts according to genre 
classes. 
2 RELATED WORK 
Automatic genre and style detection of texts is an 
active field of research over the past years essen-
tially because there are many challenges and thus 
yet-unresolved issues associated with it. In this re-
spect, several researchers have proposed various 
solutions to the problem of identifying the charac-
teristics that communicate the genre and the stylis-
tic print of texts. In particular, Kessler et al. (1997) 
proposed a theory of genres that compares various 
surface textual features and they attempted the 
automatic genre detection via the exploitation of 
genre clues in a text's body. The clues they deter-
mined are: structural, lexical, character-level and 
derivative; and, despite their surface nature, they 
are as successful as deep structural cues. Finn et al. 
(2002) proposed the application of machine learn-
ing techniques for the automatic classification of 
text genres. They investigated three approaches to 
automatically classify text documents by genre, i.e. 
the bag-of-words method, part-of-speech statistics 
and handcrafted shallow linguistic features. The 
application of their approach to a collection of news 
articles revealed that part-of-speech tagging and 
statistical analysis of a text's content may effec-
tively contribute towards genre-based document 
classification. Later, Finn and Kushmerick (2003) 
elaborated on the details of textual genres and 
showed how genre can be distinguished across dif-
ferent texts. Lee and Myaeng (2004) implemented 
the so-called ‘deviation-based statistical feature 
selection’ method and proved its efficacy in auto-
matically extracting genre-related features from 
texts. Santini et al. (2006) proposed a new defini-
tion for genre based on the traits of hybridism, indi-
vidualization and evolution. This theoretical charac-
terization constitutes the base for an inferential 
model that automatically identifies genres within 
web pages. Later, Santini (2007) presented a model 
based on a scheme performing zero-to-multi genre 
assignments. Sharoff (2007) performed experiments 
to find the best set of features that delimit a typol-
ogy useful for classifying web pages according to 
their domain and genre. With respect to Greek, 
Stamatatos et al. (2000) described an approach that 
relies on classification schemes and natural lan-
guage processing modules for categorizing Greek 
texts according to their genre and author. The appli-
cation of their technique to various Greek corpora 
proved the feasibility of their proposed method. 
 
3 METHODOLOGY 
Our text genre detection approach operates upon 
pre-determined classes of text types in which it 
looks for features that signify the genre of the re-
spective texts. Before delving into the details of our 
method, we should point out that we distinguish 
text genre from text type in that the former repre-
sents the way in which information is communi-
cated via texts, whereas the latter represents the 
type of information texts convey. As an example 
consider the current paper, whose style might be 
characterized as technical or formal and whose type 
might be characterized as scientific publication or 
research paper. 
Based on the discrimination between style and 
type, we propose a method that tries to identify the 
genre (i.e. style) of texts that belong to particular 
types. To obviate the need for pre-classifying texts 
according to their type, we rely on an existing tex-
tual type classification scheme1
 
1 http://www.sil.org/linguistics/glossaryoflinguisticterms/ 
WhatIsAText.htm 
 that defines the 
following categories of text types: (i) narrative: an 
account of events, (ii) expository: text that explains 
something, (iii) procedural: text that gives instruc-
tions on how to do something and (iv) descriptive: 
text that lists the characteristics of something. Each 
of the above category types contains sub-types, 
which share common elements in structure and con-
tent with their parental type and with each other, 
and at the same time they deliver clues that are 
unique and representative of their respective sub-
type category. As sub-type example categories con-
sider the following: (i) narrative texts may be sub-
categorized into novels, poetry or short stories, (ii) 
expository texts may be sub-categorized into news 
articles, travel books and periodicals, (iii) proce-
dural texts may be sub-categorized into various 
kinds of guidebooks, e.g. cooking books, manuals, 
installation guides and (iv) descriptive texts may be 
sub-categorized into encyclopedias, grammars and 
dictionaries. Given the type and/or sub-type of a 
text, our method tries to identify structural and con-
textual elements that signify the text's style or else 
genre. To ensure the accurate identification of 
genre, we relied on a dataset of texts already classi-
fied into one of the above types and after manually 
inspecting them we extracted their genre-indicative 
elements. Manual inspection of texts was performed 
by human expert annotators, i.e. linguistics, to 
whom we distributed a number of texts along with 
their respective type categories and we asked them 
to indicate for every text type the features (both 
contextual and structural if feasible) that yield its 
style. Note that we did not ask our study partici-
pants to directly indicate the genre of every exam-
ined text type, but rather to indicate the elements 
that shape the stylistic identity of every examined 
text. This is because the quest in our study is to 
determine the characteristics that distinguish the 
genre of text types from one another rather than 
annotate texts with stylistic information. Based on 
the above determination, one can employ super-
vised clustering methods for automatically grouping 
texts in terms of their common underlying stylistic 
elements. Turning back to the description of our 
method, we should point out that due to space and 
time constraints, we did not examine all the sub-
categories of every text type but rather we relied on 
texts categorized under a specific (randomly se-
lected) type sub-category. Thus, for the narrative 
category, we relied on texts belonging to the short 
stories sub-category, for the expository category we 
relied on texts belonging to the news articles sub-
category, for the procedural category we relied on 
texts belonging to the cookbooks sub-category and 
for the descriptive category we relied on texts be-
longing to the dictionaries sub-category. 
The dataset used for each of the above catego-
ries, concerned online texts that we harvested from 
suitable websites, i.e. sites containing (i) short sto-
ries, (ii) online newspapers, (iii) sites about recipes 
and cooking and (iv) lexicographic sites. In the next 
section, we report on the statistics of our collected 
dataset. Now, we present the way in which human 
annotators assessed our collected data sources in 
order to identify their structural and contextual ele-
ments that signify their genre. To carry out our 
study, we recruited 5 experienced linguists (3 fe-
male, 2 male), who volunteered to read the texts 
collected for every type category and indicate the 
elements that they judged as indicative of the texts' 
style. The only instruction given to our study par-
ticipants was that their role would not be to indicate 
the texts' genre but rather to identify elements that 
demonstrate the style. To acquaint our users with 
their task, we run a supervised laboratory experi-
ment in which we asked them to experiment with a 
number of texts and via the think-aloud protocol to 
indicate which elements they deemed as style-
descriptive for each of the test texts. Note also that 
our volunteers were aware of the type sub-category 
of every text they examined. Finally, we advised 
our participants to indicate only elements for which 
they felt absolutely confident that they are indica-
tive of the texts' genre and we did not allow them to 
communicate with each other during their participa-
tion in the survey. The time duration of the study 
was five consecutive days, with two 3-hour sessions 
per day. At the end of the study, we collected the 
notes (in the form of free-style comments) our par-
ticipants delivered, we grouped them by text type 
 
and we examined for every text type the genre-
indicative elements that were selected by the major-
ity of our study participants. Obtained results for 
each of the text types considered are presented and 
discussed in the following section. 
4 IDENTIFYING GENRE CLUES 
Table 1 summarizes our experimental dataset. 
Table 1: Statistical distribution of the examined dataset 
across text types. 
 Documents 853 
Short stories (narrative) 157 
News articles (expository) 359 
Recipes (procedural) 334 
Dictionaries (descriptive) 3 
  
Having collected the experimental texts for our 
human survey, we grouped them by type and we 
asked our study participants to read the texts in 
every type and note down the clues they considered 
indicative of the respective texts' genre. To facili-
tate the work of our volunteers, we asked them to 
write down in the form of (self-selected) keywords 
and/or short phrases brief descriptions of the clues 
they identified. All texts across all four types were 
examined by all the participants, thus we received 
feedback for the entire dataset. Based on the user-
selected genre clues for each of the text types con-
sidered, we built an indexing module where we 
stored the user-selected genre clues for further 
processing. Genre clues processing concerned man-
ual assessment of the collected feedback to identify 
recurrent genre identifiers. In our study, we deem a 
genre clue as recurrent in the user feedback if at 
least three of the participants indicated the same 
clue as genre-indicative even if the terms used to 
verbalize the clue were not identical among their 
comments. Table 2 gives the statistics of the user-
defined genre clues for each of the types examined. 
Table 2: User-selected genre clues for text types. 
 Text type: short stories 
 Genre clues selected by more that 3 users 5 
 Genre clues selected by 3 or less users 9 
Text type: news articles 
 Genre clues selected by more that 3 users 4 
 Genre clues selected by 3 or less users 9 
Text type: recipes 
 Genre clues selected by more that 3 users 4 
 Genre clues selected by 3 or less users 6 
Text type: dictionaries 
 Genre clues selected by more that 3 users 3 
 Genre clues selected by 3 or less users 5 
  
According to the reported data, there are high 
levels of user agreement with respect to the ele-
ments that signify the genre of different text types. 
This might be due to the fact that all our study par-
ticipants were experienced linguistics with a solid 
knowledge of what text genre is and how it can be 
encapsulated in the structural and lexical elements 
of texts. 
4.1 Analysis of Genre Clue Indicators 
Having collected and processed user feedback with 
respect to what constitute the indicative characteris-
tics of genre within texts, we proceed with the pres-
entation and analysis of those indicators in an at-
tempt to shed light on the text properties that sig-
nify style. Table 3 reports the stylistic characteris-
tics of texts belonging to the each of the categories 
examined as given by at least 3 of our participants. 
Table 3: Genre clues for the short stories, new articles, recipes and dictionary categories respectively. 
 Text type: short stories Text type: news articles 
Genre clue Fraction Genre clue Fraction 
Limited text size  61.14% Headings 100.00% 
Quick narration 57.89% Images, tables 100.00% 
Presence of dialogue 47.77% Syntactic coherence 22.31% 
Syntactic coherence 44.45% Named entities 13.74% 
Recursion  40.25%   
Text type: recipes Text type: dictionaries 
Genre clue Fraction Genre clue Fraction 
Structure replication  100.00% Structure replication 100.00% 
Sequential short NPs 25.77% Short, elliptical phrases 98.00% 
Precise verbal structures 11.88% Use of abbreviations/symbols 23.00% 
Use of command words 10.51%   
  
As the table shows, there are relatively high 
levels of repetition among the genre clues that char-
acterize text types. To identify how genre clues are 
pronounced into the structural and contextual prop-
erties of their corresponding texts, we relied on the 
combined analysis of the texts employed in our 
study and the comments our participants delivered 
for each of the examined texts and we interpret our 
findings as follows.  
 
For the short stories category, the limited text 
size and the quick narration are the most frequently 
indicated clues of genre. The text size feature ac-
counts to the number of words narrative texts con-
tain, which according to our data ranges between 
1,000 and 3,500 terms. The quick narration feature 
accounts to the use of descriptive language, the suc-
cession of events (usually in a chronological order), 
the use of pronouns and the presence of factual 
statements within text. Modeling the characteristic 
of quick narration is a quite complex task that re-
quires large volumes of human-annotated data (i.e. 
narrative corpora) as well as the availability of so-
phisticated language processing modules. The syn-
tactic coherence feature accounts to the presence of 
full syntactic phrases within texts and the recursion 
feature accounts to embedding phrases of the same 
type within texts. Both of them together with the 
dialogue feature are genre descriptive elements for 
narrative texts and can be captured after applying 
syntactic parsing to the contents of the respective 
texts. 
The genre clues identified for the news articles 
category have strong discrimination power as these 
are present in the striking majority of journalistic 
texts. In particular, we observe that what character-
izes the genre of a text as expository and specifi-
cally as journalistic is the presence of headings, 
images and the utilization of named entities in the 
text contents. Modeling the above features in order 
to come up with automated genre detection methods 
is relatively easy. This is because most of the fea-
tures that characterize expository texts and news 
articles can be identified within the texts’ structural 
properties where the application of shallow parsing 
would be sufficient for their detection. For the re-
maining features that serve as indicators of exposi-
tory texts, we would need to apply deep syntactic 
analysis to the texts’ contents to be able to auto-
matically extract them. 
The genre clues identified for procedural texts 
are pretty different from both narrative and exposi-
tory texts with their main differences accounting for 
the texts' structural properties. In particular, texts 
belonging to the recipes type replicate the same 
structural and syntactic patterns, i.e. they begin with 
a title/heading, which is followed by a list of se-
quential short noun phrases (NPs), which are topi-
cally related to each other. Noun phrases are fol-
lowed by short text nuggets, which contain simple 
and repetitive terminology, command words as well 
as precise verbal structures, i.e. verbs in indicative 
plural. Our data indicates that we can capture and 
therefore model the stylistic features of procedural 
texts by relying mainly on the texts' structure and 
less on their content. This facilitates the genre char-
acteristics modeling task as it does not require the 
application of deep lexical analysis to the examined 
texts. Of course we are aware of the fact that differ-
ent types of procedural texts may vary in their 
structure, but still one could apply our user-selected 
features as a starting base for detecting texts that 
describe a process of doing something. 
Finally, dictionaries are specialized instances of 
text with unique stylistic features. As such, we can 
safely determine their genre by relying on the 
analysis of their structural elements, i.e. by looking 
for the pattern: lemma entry + sequences of short 
elliptical phrases that may contain abbreviations 
and/or symbols. Although instances of the above 
patterns may vary across different categories of 
descriptive texts, still the structure of their contex-
tual elements, i.e., lemma entries followed by short 
descriptions, is what constitutes their genre print. 
5 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
We have presented an exploratory study for 
identifying the features that characterize the genre 
of different text types. Our findings show that there 
exist specific structural and contextual elements 
within texts that can be modeled as genre clues in 
order to be explored by automatic genre classifica-
tion modules. In the future, we plan to investigate 
ways of semi-automatically assigning texts of par-
ticular types to pre-specified genres. 
REFERENCES 
Finn, A. and Kushmerick, N. 2003. Learning to classify docu-
ments according to genre. In Proceedings of the Computa-
tional Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis Workshop. 
Finn, A., Kushmerick, N. and Smyth, B. 2002. Genre classifica-
tion and domain transfer for information filtering. In Pro-
ceedings of the European Colloquium on Information Re-
trieval Research, pp. 353-362, Glasgow. 
Karlgren, J. 1999. Stylistic experiments in information retrieval. 
Natural Language Information Retrieval, Kluwer. 
Lee, Y.B. and Myaeng, S.H. 2004. Automatic identification of 
text genres and their roles in subject-based categorization. In 
the 37th Hawaiian Conference on System Sciences. 
Santini, M., Power, R. and Evans, R. 2006. Implementing a 
characterization of genre for automatic genre identification of 
web pages. ACL Computational Linguistics Conference. 
Santini, M. 2007. Automatic genre identification: towards a 
flexible classification scheme. In the BCS IRSG Symposium: 
Future Directions in Information Access, Glasgow, Scotland. 
Sharoff, S. 2007. Classifying web corpora into domain and genre 
using automatic feature identification. In the Web as Corpus 
Workshop, Louvain-la-Neuve. 
Stamatatos E., Fakotakis N. and Kokkinakis G. 2000. Automatic 
text categorization in terms of genre and author. Computa-
tional Linguistics, vol.26, no.4, pp. 461-485, MIT Press 
