Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 
Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka 
 
VSB - Technical University of Ostrava 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
708 33 Ostrava-Poruba, Czech Republic 
vaclav.snasel@vsb.cz, milos.kudelka@inflex.cz 
Abstract. In our chapter we are working within the field of Web content 
mining. In relation to the user's description of a Web page, we define a new 
term: Named object. Named objects are used for a new classification of 
selected methods dealing with mining information from Web pages. This 
classification has been made on the basis of a survey of published methods. 
Our approach is based on the perception of a Web page through an 
intention. This intention is important both for the users and authors of a 
Web page. Named object is near to Web design patterns, which became a 
basis for our own mining method, Pattrio. The Pattrio method is introduced 
in this work together with a few experiments. 
1   Introduction 
A Web page is like a family house. Each of its parts has its purpose, determined 
by a function which it serves. Every part can be named so that all users envision 
approximately the same thing under that name such as living room, bathroom, 
lobby, bedroom, kitchen and balcony. In order for the inhabitants to orientate well 
in the house, certain rules are kept. From the point of view of these rules, all 
houses are similar. That is why it is usually not a problem for first time visitors to 
orientate in the house. We can describe the house quite precisely thanks to names. 
If we add information about a more detailed location such as sizes, colors, 
furnishings and further details to the description, then the future visitor can get an 
almost perfect notion of what he will see in the house when he comes in for the 
first time. We can also take an approach similar to description a building other 
than a family house (school, supermarket, office etc.) Also in this case the same 
applies for visitors and it is usually not a problem to orientate (of course it does 
not always have to be the case, as there are bad Web pages, there are also bad 
buildings). 
Let us look at the problem from the other perspective. If we visit a building 
with a blindfolded person, then we can submit three basic tasks. The first is to find 
out what the purpose of the building is. The second is to find out what parts (e.g. 
rooms) the building contains. And the third task can be linked to the furnishings of 
individual rooms. When solving these tasks, it is probably possible to start with 
any of them. There is one more important issue. If the visitor completes some of 
the tasks and we will require him to describe the result, he will certainly use 
commonly used names, which describe the type of building, its parts and finally, 
its furnishings.  
Architect Christopher Alexander [1] brought in a similar and to a certain extent 
formalized way of description. In our chapter in this book, we try to work with a 
Web page in a similar way. And we try to show that this way of looking at a Web 
page can moreover, be a good tool for the classification of some approaches in the 
field of Web content mining. We can verify it is reasonable to use individually 
named (labeled) part of a Web page to describe entire page. This holds true both 
for the suggestion of methods for page semantics detection and for the technically 
utilizable user's page description. 
Our chapter is organized in the following way. In the second section, basic 
principles concerning Web usability are described. In the third section, we will 
explain what is meant by Web content mining and what typical tasks are dealt 
with in this area. In the fourth section of the chapter, we will explain in detail what 
is meant by the term intention in relation to Web page content. In this section, we 
will also introduce a new term: Named object, as a basic abstraction related to the 
intention. The fifth section of the chapter is devoted to the survey of approaches 
which in some way relate to our view on a Web page. In the sixth section, we 
present our method Pattrio, which is focused on the detection of Named objects. 
We will describe experiments related to the successfulness of this method's 
usability and to its results for partial tasks. The last sections of the chapter are 
devoted to experiments, a summary and prospects for further research. 
2   Web Usability 
Web usability is closely linked to User Centered Design (UCD). In a wider sense, 
UCD is a philosophy which results in the process of software system 
development. The main difference from other approaches is that UCD tries to 
optimize the user interface, so that it 
 Corresponds to what users are used to 
 Does not make the user change their way of working 
Jacob Nielsen defines usability as follows: “Usability is a quality attribute that 
assesses how easy user interfaces are to use.” In the book [29] many tests with 
users are shown and many important recommendations for Web page creators 
come out of the results of these tests.  
However, one of the problems is that recommendations in the field of Web 
usability are not completely formalized. In [14] a conclusion is formulated that 
recommendations resulting from Web usability can be formalized with the use of 
patterns (for more about patterns see section Web Design Patterns). One of the 
pattern characteristics which describe verified experience is that they have an apt 
name that characterizes the solved task. The methodology of using patterns for 
Web design is very thoroughly elaborated in [8]. There we can find classification 
of patterns and important recommendations for developers. 
38 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
Additional interesting pieces of information related to our view on the Web 
page are stated in [37]. These pieces of information are related to page layout and 
parts of page perception. The theory of grouping and alignment was developed 
early in the 20th century. The Gestalt psychologists described several layout 
properties. Some of them seem to be important for our visual systems (Fig. 1). 
Proximity occurs when elements are placed close together. These elements tend 
to be perceived as a group. If things are close together viewers will associate them 
with one another. This is basis for strong grouping of content and controls on a UI. 
Similarity occurs when elements look similar to one another. These elements 
tend to be perceived as a group. If two things are the same shape, size, color, or 
orientation, then viewers will also associate them with each other. 
Continuity occurs when the eye is forced to move through one element and 
continue to another element. Our eyes want to see continuous lines and curves 
formed by the alignment of smaller elements. 
Closure occurs when elements are not completely enclosed in a space. If 
enough of the information is indicated, these elements tend to be perceived as a 
group, the missing elements are filled in automatically: We also want to see 
simple closed forms, like rectangles and blobs of whitespace that are not explicitly 
drawn for us. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Gestalt principles (proximity, similarity, continuity, closer) 
In paper [10], a set of principles based on Gestalt principles is proposed in a 
pattern language form. At the lowest level, these principles follow Gestalt 
principles and describe the essential syntax, which establishes the rules for 
combining words, shapes, and images. These morphological elements have 
various visible properties such as color, size, thickness, texture, orientation, and 
transparency. 
Also, eye-tracking is an important field in user interface design [13]. It is about 
how a user's goal influences the way they read and traverse a Web page, which 
parts of a page users attend to first, how people react to advertising, where they 
look first for common page elements, how they respond to text, pictures, and so 
much more. In [11], the following question is answered: “In which way does the 
visual organization of the Web pages help to lead the visual exploration for an 
information retrieval?". An explicit goal can be described by respecting two 
characteristics: 
 It must be compatible with the set of the designer's intentions. 
 It must be compatible with the set of the user's potentials. 
As a result, methods of Web page analysis have to be based on the relations 
between human perception, cognitive sciences, and biology. The Web page is 
usually split up into two common structures: 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 39
 The physical structure that expresses the organization into geometrical 
blocks done with homogeneous characteristics. This is the layout of the 
document. 
 The logical structure that expresses the semantic description of the physical 
organization, that deals with the human interpretation of each block, such 
as line, section, title, and paragraph. 
3   Web Content Mining 
Web mining is the usage of data mining technology on the Web [16]. Specifically, 
it is the case of finding and extracting information from sources that relate to the 
user's interaction with Web pages. In 2002 [15], several challenges had been 
formulated for developing an intelligent Web: Web page complexity far exceeds 
the complexity, the Web constitutes highly dynamic information, the Web serves a 
broad spectrum of user communities, and only a small portion of Web pages 
contain truly relevant or useful information source of any traditional text 
document collection. Therefore, following issues should be solved primarily: 
mining Web search-engine data, analyzing Web link structures, classifying Web 
documents automatically, mining Web page semantic structures and page 
contents, mining Web dynamics, building a multilayered, multidimensional Web, 
etc. Most tasks are still relevant today. 
Mainly three areas of Web data mining are concerned [21]: Web content 
mining, Web structure mining and Web usage mining. Web content mining 
describes the discovery of useful information from Web contents, data, and 
documents. The Web content data consist of unstructured data such as free texts, 
semi-structured data such as HTML documents, and a more structured data such 
as data in the tables or database generated HTML pages. The goal of Web content 
mining is to improve finding information or filtering information for the users. 
Our research focuses on Web content mining whose purpose is to analyze Web 
pages to find out which useful information is included in the Web page (from the 
user's point of view). In this area, two sub-areas can be found. The first one is 
based on information retrieval and its purpose is to find information useful for 
finding relevant Web pages in large collections (Web searching). The other one is 
based on information extraction [5] and its purpose is to find structure information 
that can be, for example, saved in the database and process it accordingly (for 
example the name and price of products). We are trying to contribute to this area 
by the fact that according to us, the usable tool for the area of Web data mining are 
Named objects and Web design patterns, and while doing it we are touching both 
these sub-areas (see [24]). 
40 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
4   Intent Abstraction 
Every single Web page (or group of Web pages) can be perceived from three 
different points of view. When considering the individual points of view we were 
inspired by specialists on Web design [8] and on the communication of humans 
with computers [3]. These points of view represent the views of three different 
groups of people who take part in the formation of the Web page (Fig. 2). 
1. The first group is those whose intention is that the user finds what he 
expects on the Web page. The intention which the Web page is supposed to 
fulfil is consequently represented by this group. 
2. The second group is users who work with the Web page. This group 
consequently represents how the Web page should appear outwardly to the 
user. It is important that this performance satisfies a particular need of the 
user. 
3. The third group is developers responsible for the creation of the Web page. 
They are therefore consequently responsible for fulfilling the goals of the 
two preceding groups. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Web page – user, intention, and technology point of view 
4.1   User Point of View 
If we use an example of a real Web page (Fig. 3), then from the user's point of 
view it is a typical Web page with a product, where the basic information on the 
product can be found (including a picture), as well as the possibility of purchase 
and other offers. The visual aspect and anticipated behavior of the Web page in 
the domain of product sale can be described as usual, and from this point of view 
the Web usability is very good. In connection with the point of view of the user 
who will work with the Web page it can be expected that his needs will be 
sufficiently satisfied. 
 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 41
 
Fig. 3. Product Web page 
4.2   Intention 
We can perform a certain generalization in connection with those who define the 
intention of a Web page. Intention can be described as a series of tasks, which are 
to be implemented on the Web page. Among those tasks are counted the display of 
information about the product, the display of a catalogue with constituent items of 
the accessories, a provision for the possibility to continue to order or purchase the 
product, a provision of possibilities to navigation to further related Web pages etc. 
The intention is therefore to provide the user with such a page, where the user gets 
all information needed for a possible product purchase. In the Fig. 4 the areas 
representing the aforementioned tasks are simply depicted. 
 
42 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
 
Fig. 4. Intentions 
 
Fig. 5. Intention hierarchy (a) and (b) 
If we go further in the generalization, we can more or less disregard the detailed 
graphic and content appearance of the Web page. What is left from the intention 
can be (in correspondence with users' expectations) named and the Web page can 
be e.g., roughed out at an abstract level (Fig. 5a). In such a way the outlined 
scheme can become a basis for further pages with offers of different products. 
Nevertheless, in the schematic description of the intention we can be even more 
general and we can implement the description e.g. in the form of a tree (Fig. 5b). 
In this case the scheme is focused more technically and is fully distinguished from 
the graphic appearance of the Web page. Besides that it creates a hierarchy, which 
is an important element for the perception of the whole page. 
 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 43
4.3   Named object 
From the point of view of the user and the developer of the Web page, the linking 
element is an intention which defines the external architecture and content of the 
Web page. Whatever the intention is, it is always proven by the appearance of the 
Web page (overall structure and graphics) and by the type and structure of 
information contained. To ensure the unified view of users and the author of the 
Web page in relation to the intention it is important to find a characteristic of the 
intention which provides a reasonable level of abstraction. This abstraction has to 
be distinguished from the technical details. As it can be seen in the Fig. 5 (a) and 
(b), we used a name for every part of the content. This name describes which 
partial intention is implemented in this part of content. We consider the name to 
be a key feature of an intention. The concern is actually that both the author of the 
Web page and the user can relatively unambiguously describe the page with 
names. The names can serve as a dictionary in this case. In the Fig. 5 (b) is the 
Web page described more from the point of view of the designer. If we look at the 
Web page through a task dealt with by the user, we can use following example. 
 
Example 
The user wants to get to know something about a selected product and possibly 
to buy it on the Web page. This page can be described in a following way: 
“The page contains the Price information, the Purchase possibility and the 
Special offer. There are also Technical features and the Discussion at the bottom.” 
 
Fig. 6. User’s point of view 
If we express this description in a graphic form (Fig. 6), then it is similar to the 
Fig. 5 (b). Apparently the Web page can be described at an abstract level so that 
the user and the author of the Web page concur. For this description it is necessary 
to specify more precisely what it is based on. In our considerations it is an 
abstraction coming out of an intention, which is common to the user and author of 
the Web page – Intent Abstraction. The level of abstraction can be different when 
describing the Web page. We can define altogether, three levels.   
 
 
 
 
44 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
Intent Abstraction Levels 
1. Page level. The first level is based on a type of Web page. This level 
results from the classification of Web pages, which can be done manually 
or automatically and it describes the overall intention of the page existence 
(it therefore does not deal with semantic content). An example of taxonomy 
can be e.g. Web catalogues [40, 38] or different genre classifications [2]. 
2. Domain dependent level. Second level comes from aforementioned 
description. There are usually more parts on the Web page and each of 
them represents a partial target (intention). Individual intentions are 
dependent on the domain in which the Web page appears. From the point 
of view of page description, also the semantics of those page elements 
representing particular targets is very important.  
3. Domain independent level. The third level is a parallel to the previous 
level but the intention is not dependent on a domain, but rather it 
represents, for the user, a different readable characteristic of a page part 
(e.g. Menu, Advertisement, Something to Read, Table Data, Input Form, 
etc.). From the page description point of view, the semantics contained are 
not important for those elements.   
 
As it follows from the aforementioned, all three selected levels of abstraction 
have one common characteristic. This characteristic is the name of a descriptive 
element (or type) of a page. With regard to the fact that the stated descriptive 
elements are related to the Web page content or its part, we decided to use term 
Named object for them. 
 
Definition: Named object (NO) is a part of a Web page  
1. Whose intention is general and it repeats frequently 
2. Which can be named intelligibly and more or less unambiguously so that 
the name is understandable for the Web page user 
4.4   NO Recognition  
It follows from previous description, that in order to be able to speak about NO, 
this element has to be distinguishable by the user. From what attributes should the 
user recognize, if and what NO there is in question? We work with up to three 
levels of view: 
1. The first view is purely semantic in the sense of the textual content of a 
page. It does not always have to be a meaning in a sense of natural 
language such as sentences or paragraphs with a meaningful content. 
Logically coherent data blocks can still lack of grammars [44]. E.g. for 
Price Information it can be only a group of words and symbols (‘price‘, 
‘vat‘, symbol $) of a data-type (price, number). 
2. The second view is visual in a sense of page perception as a whole. Here 
individual segments of perception or groups of segments of the page are in 
question. It is dependent on use of colors, font and auxiliary elements 
(lines, horizontal and vertical gaps between the segments etc.) 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 45
3. The third view is a structural one in a technical sense. It is about the use of 
special structures, such as tables, bookmarks, navigation trees, etc.  
 
If we replace the user's view on a Web page for a computer view, then it is not 
easy to reach the conclusion that we find algorithms for NO detection on a Web 
page and for the detection of their semantic content. However, there are 
approaches, which successfully apply methods implementing these tasks. 
5   Survey 
In our survey of methods dealing with Web content mining we focused on those 
methods which have their target or at least the object of experiment as this, what 
we call the Named object. Individual NOs serve us as a tool for the classification 
of particular methods (see Table. 1). 
Let us come back to the metaphor of a family house and let us use NO as a 
basic descriptive element of a Web page. The computer (algorithm for Web page 
analysis) is in the same situation as a blindfolded man. The better the page is 
technically and semantically designed, the easier the job of the algorithm is. 
Algorithms, which solve for Web pages a parallel of the three tasks from the 
introduction, can be divided into three groups and we can describe the principles 
of their functioning in a very simplified way: 
Table. 1. Named objects 
Genres (Roussinov, Meyer zu Eissen, Boese, etc.) 
Homepage, Articles, News bulletin, Glossary, Course Lists, Instructional 
Materials, Geographical Location, Special Topics, Publications, Product 
Information, Product Lists, Ads, Order Forms, Ratings Help, Article, 
Discussion, Shop, Portrayal, Hub, Download, etc. 
Web Design Patterns (Page Type) – www.welie.com 
Page Level 
Article Page, Blog Page, Case Study, Contact Page, Event Calendar, 
Forum, Guest Book, Help Page, Homepage, Newsletter, Printer-friendly 
Page, Product Page, Tutorial. 
Domain 
Dependent 
Product Details (Price Information, Purchase Possibility), Special Offer,  
Product Catalogue, Product Technical Features, Discussion and 
Comments, Review, Customer Reviews, News, Author and Publications, 
Book Info, Job Advertisement, Personal Advertisement, etc. 
N
am
ed
 O
bj
ec
ts
 
Domain 
Independent 
Table, Something to Read (Text Content), Link List, Menu, Advertisement, 
etc. 
 
1. Algorithms for the detection of page type (NO on page level). Methods can 
focus on semantic features, e.g. keywords (product pages contain words as 
'price', symbol '$' etc.) and data types, or on technical features, e.g. features 
related to the Web site, which the Web page belongs to (Home Page has a 
specific URL address, it can contain a Flash presentation) etc.  
2. Algorithms for the detection of page parts (NO on a domain dependent or 
domain independent level). Methods can focus on specific technical 
features of the Web page (e.g. items of product catalogues are represented 
by similar DOM trees, such as the text part containing one or more 
46 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
paragraphs of text with occasional links to pictures) or on the visual layout 
of a page, to work with semantics search in the found segments and blocs.  
3. Algorithms for the extraction of information content of NO (e.g. structured 
data). Methods require specific procedures aimed at analysis of information 
content, extraction of data types (attributes) and labels linked to these 
attributes. 
5.1   Genre Detection 
(Intent Abstraction Level: Page) 
The aim of this group of methods is to assign the Web page to some type. This 
type is either known in advance or it arises as a result of method application. In 
connection with NO we will deal mainly with the first category. 
Genre is a taxonomy that incorporates the style, form and content of a 
document which is orthogonal to topic, with fuzzy classification to multiple genres 
[2]. In the same paper there are described existing classifications. Regarding these 
classifications there are many approaches on genre identification methods. In 
paper [32], there are analyzed classification problems in terms of two broad 
textual phenomena: genre hybridism and individualization. The aim of this paper 
is to show that web pages need a zero to multi genre classification scheme in 
addition to the traditional single genre classification. The goal of paper [18] is to 
analyze home page genres (personal home page, corporate home page or 
organization home page). In paper [4] authors have proposed a flexible approach 
for Web page genre categorization. Flexibility means that the approach assigns a 
document to all predefined genres with different weights. In [17] paper is 
proposed a low-level representation of style of Web pages based on n-grams. 
Experiments based on two benchmark genre corpora are presented. In [7] paper, 
there is described a set of experiments to examine the effect of various attributes 
of web genre on the automatic identification of the genre of web pages. Four 
different genres are used in the data set (FAQ, News, E-Shopping and Personal 
Home Pages). 
5.2   Table Extraction 
(Intent Abstraction Level: Domain Independent) 
Tables are an important element for structuring related data. The extraction of 
tables from Web pages appears to be one of the key tasks for further retrieval of 
structured data. Differentiation of tables emerges as a common problem of all 
approaches, which represent page layout and those which contain structured data. 
Tables belong to the field of Domain Independent NO, however, their extraction 
can serve well for detection of other Domain Dependent NO. A survey of different 
approaches is in [41]. Generally, tables often have associated text, including titles, 
captions, data sources, and footnotes or additional text that elaborate on cells. A 
paper [26] describes an approach to automatic Web table segmentation and 
extraction of records. This approach is based on the common structure of many 
Web sites, which present information as lists or tables. In [9] there is proposed an 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 47
approach which requires aspects of table understanding, but it especially relies on 
extraction ontology. An approach describing transformation of arbitrary tables into 
explicit semantics is presented in [30]. The Tartar system (Transforming 
ARbitrary TAbles into fRames) is based on a grounded cognitive table model. In 
paper [12] there is presented a different approach. Authors use a tree 
representation of a variation of the two dimensional visual box model used by web 
browsers for domain-independent information extraction from web tables.  
5.3   Opinion, News, and Discussion Extraction 
(Intent Abstraction Level: Domain Dependent) 
It is a wide area of methods which aim to summarize opinions of customers on a 
product or on its specific features. In the individual methods, also language 
analysis (NLP) is used. Opinions of customers on product Web pages are the main 
source for analysis, but it can also be discussions on thematic forums or individual 
reviews in the form of articles (NOs Customer Review, Review, Discussions, 
Blogs). A survey of recent methods of opinion mining is in [25]. In this paper, 
three tasks specific to opinion mining are analyzed: development of linguistic 
resources, sentiment classification, and opinion summarization. Another survey is 
introduced in [6]. The survey is focused on legal blogs (a.k.a. blawg is any 
Weblog that focuses on substantive discussions of the law, the legal profession, 
including law schools, and the process by which judicial decisions are made.  
There is presented a top-level taxonomy shows a variety of topics for blogging 
sub-community (General legal blogs, Blogs categorized by legal specialty, Blogs 
categorized by law or legal event, Blogs categorized by jurisdictional scope, Blogs 
categorized by author/publisher, Blogs categorized by number of contributors, 
Miscellaneous blogs categorized by topic, Collections of legal blogs. News 
extraction methods deal with the extraction of articles from news Web pages. 
From the method point of view it is a special case of methods from the field of 
Text content extraction. One of the aims of these methods can be to find 
duplicities published on different Web sites. An approach presented in [31] is 
based on the concept of tree-edit distance and allows not only the extraction of 
relevant text from the pages of a given Web site, but also the fetching of the entire 
Web site content and the identification of the pages of interest. In paper [42] there 
is a template-independent news extraction approach that simulates human beings. 
The approach is based on a stable visual consistency among news pages across 
websites. Discussion as a Named object can be a good source for Opinion 
extraction. Paper [35] describes techniques to collect, store, enrich and analyze 
comments on articles. An extraction method is based on similarity of comments 
and their recurring features (name, date and time, e-mail, etc.). The similar 
approach is in [27]. The presented system is based on generated wrappers. 
48 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
5.4   Product Details and Technical Features Extraction 
(Intent Abstraction Level: Domain Dependent) 
Product details is a specific NO on product Web pages. It is a basic characteristic, 
which usually contains a picture, product name, price information, etc. The aim of 
the methods is to extract as much information as possible. This information can be 
saved into a database and then implement operations in this database. An 
extraction of Product details info is a typical task in supervised or semi-supervised 
approaches. The goal of a paper [28] is explore a paradigm to enable web search at 
the object level, extracting and integrating web information for objects relevant to 
a specific application domain. A similar approach on extracting author metadata is 
proposed in [43]. Authors attempt to extract author meta-data from their 
homepages. A paper [34] presents a symbolic approach to extract domain specific 
technical features of products from large German corpora. The proposed methods 
depend on manually added lists of technical measures. A similar approach is 
described in [39] (experiments on camera and MP3 player features). The approach 
is a two phase framework for mining and summarizing hot items in multiple 
auction Web sites. 
6   Pattrio method 
The starting point of our research on Pattrio method is Web design patterns. 
Generally, the design patterns describe proven experience of repeated problem 
solving in the area of software solution design. From this point of view, the design 
patterns belong to key artifacts securing efficient reuse. While the design patterns 
have been proven in real projects, their usage increases the solution quality and 
reduces the time of their implementation. Good examples are also the so called 
Web design patterns, which are patterns for design related to the Web. Even in this 
area, the patterns are getting quite common (they are collected and published in 
the form of printed or Internet catalogues, e.g. see van Duyne, welie web). The 
design patterns are meant for designers and they are free texts containing the 
problem description, its solution in specific connections and examples of usage. 
We are trying to look at these patterns from the opposite side (from the point of 
view of the Web page user) and that enables us to use selected Web design 
patterns also in a different way. 
6.1   Web Design Patterns 
Design patterns and pattern languages came from architecture from the work of 
Christopher Alexander and his colleagues. From the mid sixties to mid seventies, 
Alexander and his colleagues defined a new approach to architectural design. The 
new approach, centered on the concept of pattern languages, is described in a 
series of books [1]. 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 49
Alexander’s definition of pattern is as follow: “Each pattern describes a 
problem which occurs over and over again in our environment, and then describes 
the core of the solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this 
solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same way twice.” 
 
 
Fig. 7. Sample of forum pattern (www.welie.com) 
According to [37] patterns are structural and behavioral features that improve 
the applicability of software architecture, a user interface, a web site or something 
another in some domain. They make things more usable and easier to understand. 
Patterns are descriptions of best practices within a given design domain. They 
capture common and widely accepted solutions, their validity is empirically 
proved. Patterns are not novel, patterns are captured experiences and each their 
implementation is a little different. 
Good examples are also the so called Web design patterns, which are patterns 
for design related to the web. A typical example of a Web design pattern can be 
the Forum pattern (see Fig. 7). This pattern is meant for designers who need to 
implement this element on an independent web page or as a part of another web 
page. The pattern describes key solution features without implementation details. 
6.2   Named Object as Web Design Pattern Projection 
Patterns are simple descriptions of repeated problems and their solutions. They are 
intended for developers and they do not contain technical details. That is why their 
instances in real solutions are not stereotypes and in many cases they are difficult 
to distinguish. Besides that they deal with different levels of detail (e.g. 
www.welie.com). It can be a level of a whole page, but also e.g. user login, which 
is just a small part of a page. Some parts of Web pages are on the contrary so easy, 
that it is not necessary to describe them in a form of patterns. But they can be 
interesting from a page description point of view.  
In our approach, we were inspired by pattern use for the analysis of Web page 
content. If we look for patterns' instances on Web pages, we will need detailed 
technical information. That is why we have created own catalogue, in which we 
describe those repeated Named objects, which we manage to detect on Web pages 
50 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
by our method. For description we use a description similar to a pattern 
description, but its intention is different and it aims at understanding what 
characteristics are important for detection algorithm design. However, our view 
has a lot in common with patterns. It is mainly because also for us, in the same 
way as for a pattern, the most important characteristic is the name of the thing 
described. Our approach is different on the level of the general view and target. 
Simply said, we understand Named object used by us as a projection of a Web 
design pattern. This projection does not always have to be unambiguous, e.g. one 
pattern can be projected to more NOs. 
6.3   Pattrio Catalog 
Patterns are designed for users (Web designers in this case) who work with them 
and use them in production. A pattern description is composed from parts and 
each part describes a specific pattern feature. Authors usually use the pattern 
structure introduced in [1]. In the description there is a pattern name, problem 
description, context, solution and examples of use. Usually, these are also 
consequences of the use of the pattern and related patterns which relate somehow 
with the pattern being used. For our description of NO we use the similar section-
oriented structure. 
 
Example - Discussion (Forum) 
Problem: How can a discussion about a certain topic be held? How can a 
summary of comments and opinions be displayed? 
Context: Social field, community sites, blogs, etc. Discussions about products 
and service sales. Review discussions. News story discussion. 
Forces: A page fragment with a headline and repeating segments containing 
individual comments. Keywords to labeling discussion on the page (discussion, 
forum, re, author,…). Keywords to labeling persons (first names, nicknames). 
Date and time. There may be a form to enter a new comment. Segments with the 
discussion contributions are similar to the mentioned elements view, in form. 
Solution: Usually, an implementation using a table layout with an indentation 
for replies (or similar technology leading to the same-looking result) is used. The 
Discussion is often together with the Login. If Discussion is on a selling product 
Website there are usually Purchase possibility, Price information. The Discussion 
can be alone on the page. In other case there is also the Something to read. In 
different domains the Discussion can be displayed with Review, News, etc. See 
Fig. 8. 
 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 51
 
Fig. 8. Discussion 
6.4   Detection Algorithm 
We have defined sets of elements mentioned above for each NO that are 
characteristic for this NO (words, data types, technical elements). These elements 
have been obtained on the basis of deeper analysis of a high volume of web pages. 
This analysis also included the calculation of weight of individual NO elements 
that defines the level of relevance for the NO. Besides, we have implemented a set 
of partial algorithms whose results are the extracted data types and also the score 
for the quality of fulfillment of individual rules of NOs. 
In the context of our approach, there are elements with semantic contents 
(words or simple phrases and data types) and elements with importance for the 
structure of the web page where the NO can be found (technical elements). The 
rules are the way that individual elements take part in the NO display. While 
defining these rules, we have been inspired by the Gestalt principles. We are using 
four rules based on these principles. The first one (proximity) defines the 
acceptable measurable distances of individual elements from each other. The 
second one (closure) defines the way of creating of independent closed segments 
containing the elements. One or more segments then create the NO instance on the 
web page. The third one (similarity) defines that the NO includes more related 
similar segments. The forth one (continuity) defines that the NO contains more 
various segments that together create the NO instance. 
The basic algorithm for detection of domain dependent NOs [22] then 
implements the pre-processing of the code of the HTML page (only selected 
elements are preserved – e.g. block elements as table, div, lines, etc.), 
segmentation and evaluation of rules and associations (Fig. 9). The result for the 
page is the score of NOs that are present on the page. The score of the NO then 
52 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
says what is the relevance of expecting the NO on the page for the user (our 
experiments show that the relevance of score calculation is approx. 80 % - see 
[19]). 
 
 
Fig. 9. Detection algorithm 
7   Experiments 
If we are going to work with NO on the user's side, then we can use them as in 
Fig. 6 as dictionary for page description. If such a description is used, each user 
can imagine what kind of page it is (without knowing what kind of product it 
relates to). In the frame of testing of our approach, we have implemented a user 
interface for a search engine, where we are working with exactly such a page 
description (see [23]). When a set of results is displayed, each page also contains a 
tie-on label containing the list of automatically detected NOs. Besides, each page 
also displays an extended snippet of detected NO instances that is displayed in 
italics. (see Fig. 10). If our search engine is used, the user can see what type of 
page it is. The main thing is that pages with the same or similar descriptions are 
not the same (in the sense of the same design). Furthermore, it is not important if 
the instances of detected NOs are in the same location. It is really only a 
description of an external description of page architecture that can say a lot to the 
user. In our testing interface for search engines, we have implemented the 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 53
possibility to re-order the result set according to user requirements. Each page has 
a tie-on label describing external page architecture by NO. The content of the tie-
on label can be understood as a page profile. If the user finds a page whose profile 
is good for him/her, then the user can click on the tie-on label and reorganize the 
found set to get the pages with similar profiles into the beginning of this set (our 
interface is working with the set of the first one hundred pages during 
reorganization). 
 
 
Fig. 10. Tie-on label and snippet 
For the purpose of page re-ordering during the interaction of the user with the 
result set, we need to define how to measure the similarity of web pages. As we 
have mentioned, the external page architecture is, from the user point of view, 
understood as a page profile. The user then sees as similar the pages with similar 
profiles. As we are working with a predefined group of NOs, we can represent the 
page as a vector of a defined dimension. Currently, we are working with a vector 
of 24 dimensions; each part of the vector represents the score of one NO. In the 
case of such a representation we can well use the qualities of the vector-space 
model (see [33]). The key advantage of this approach is the fact that the 
dimensions of vectors are not too high. The reason is that the sources of the page 
description using Web design patterms, genres, and NOs exist as catalogues 
whose range is limited (to tens of items). This is the reason why the usage of this 
model is very efficient. The similarity of two pages (and of their profiles) can then 
be interpreted as the similarity of vectors representing these pages. To compare 
both vectors, we have used in our experiments the cosine measure representing the 
cosine of the angle between them. 
We have done several experiments whose purpose was to find out if there are 
any typical web page profiles. For these experiments, we have selected the domain 
of product sale that is very well covered by existing Web design patterns. We have 
used various clustering methods [36, 23]. The result of data analysis were three 
groups of profiles – Selling, Review and discussion, and Personal advertising. We 
are presenting an example of usage of the SOM [20] – Kohonen map (see Fig. 11) 
. 
The clusters found in the data are marked by numbers: 
54 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
1. Selling: 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 18, 20, 21, 24, 25 (6,570 pages) - NO: Price 
information, Purchase possibility, Special Offer, Repayment sale, 
Technical details. 
2. Review and discussion: 3, 16, 17, 22, 23 (3,570 pages) – NO: Discussion, 
Comments, Review, Technical Details. 
3. Personal advertising: 5, 11, 12, 19 (1,050 pages) – NO: Price information, 
Second Hand, Special offer. 
4. Other clusters: 13, 14, 15 (2,310 pages) – pages from other domain (or 
imperfection of our method). 
 
 
Fig. 11. SOM – product domain clusters 
8   Conclusion 
In our chapter we introduced a new term: Named object, which is related to 
Web page description from the point of view of intention. The intention is 
common to the authors and the users of a page. NO describes a part of a Web page 
whose intention can be concisely named. From this point of view we tried to show 
that two apparently little linked areas have a lot in common. Those are the areas of 
Web Usability and Web content mining.  NO serves as Intent abstraction, with 
which the page can be described. We performed a survey of methods from the area 
of Web content mining and we selected those which are related to the use of NO. 
Selected methods have been classified according to which NO is the subject of 
use. We also presented our own method Pattrio in the chapter. This method is 
based on using our own NO catalogue for Web page content analysis, for user 
Web page description, for searching and for page similarity evaluation. Our 
experiments have also shown that one of the qualities of NO is their small 
language and cultural dependence. Our current research leads to the usage of NO 
for multi-language searching. The replacement of semantically dependent 
elements in NOs and of algorithms for their extraction can cause our method of 
NO detection to provide sufficiently relevant results in various language 
environments. 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 55
References 
1. Alexander, Ch.: A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford 
University Press, New York (1977) 
2. Boese, E. S., Howe, A. E.: Effects of web document evolution on genre 
classification. 14th ACM Information and Knowledge Management (Bremen, 
Germany, October 31 - November 05, 2005). CIKM '05. ACM, New York, NY, 
pp. 632–639 (2005)   
3. Borchers, J.O.: Interaction design patterns: twelve theses, Position paper, 
Workshop on Pattern Languages for Interaction Design, CHI 2000 Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–6 (2000) 
4. Chaker, J., Ounelli, H.: Genre Categorization of Web Pages. ICDM Workshops 
(2007)
5. Chang, Ch.H., Kayed, M., Girgis, M.R., Shaalan, K.F.: A Survey of Web 
Information Extraction Systems, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, 18, 1411–1428 (2006) 
6. Conrad, J.G., Schilder, F.: Opinion mining in legal blogs. Artificial intelligence 
and Law (Stanford, June 04 - 08, 2007). ICAIL '07. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 
231–236. (2007) 
7. Dong, L., Watters, C.R., Duffy J., Shepherd, M.A.: An Examination of Genre 
Attributes for Web Page Classification. HICSS (2008) 
8. Van Duyne, D.K., Landay, J.A., Hong. J.I. The Design of Sites: Patterns, 
Principles, and Processes for Crafting a Customer-Centered Web Experience. 
Pearson Education (2002) 
9. Embley, D.E., Tao, C., Liddle, S. W. : Automating the extraction of data from 
HTML tables with unknown structure. Data  Knowl. Eng. 5, 3–28 
10. Flieder, K., Modritscher, F. Foundations of a pattern language based on Gestalt  
 principles. In CHI '06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems,  
 pp. 773–778  (2006) 
11. Gagneux, A., Eglin, V., Emptoz, H.: Quality Approach of Web Documents by an  
 Evaluation of Structure Relevance, Proceedings of WDA (2001) 
12. Gatterbauer, W., Bohunsky, P., Herzog, M., Krupl, B., Pollak, B.: Towards 
domain-independent information extraction from web tables. World Wide Web 
'07 (2007) 
13. Goldberg, J. H., Stimson, M. J., Lewenstein, M., Scott, N., Wichansky, A. M.: 
Eye tracking in web search tasks: design implications. Symposium on Eye 
Tracking Research & Applications, ETRA '02. ACM, pp.. 51–58 (2002) 
14. Graham, L.: A pattern language for web usability. Addison-Wesley  (2003) 
15. Han, J. Chang, K.: Data Mining for Web Intelligence. Computer 35, 11, 64–70 
(2002)
16. Han J., Kamber, M.: Data mining: concepts and techniques, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA. (2000) 
17. Kanaris, I., Stamatatos, E.:  Webpage Genre Identification Using Variable-Length 
Character n-Grams Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 2007. ICTAI 2007. pp. 3–
10 (2007) 
18. Kennedy, A., Shepherd, M.: Automatic identification of home pages on the web. 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (2005) 
56 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
19. Kocibova, J., Klos, K., Lehecka, O., Kudelka, M., Snasel, V.: Web Page 
Analysis: Experiments Based on Discussion and Purchase Web Patterns. 
IEEE/ACM/WIC Web Intelligence Workshops (2007). 
20. Kohonen, T.: Self-Organizing Maps, Springer (2006) 
21. Kosala, K. Blockeel, H.: Web Mining Research: A Survey, SIGKDD 
Explorations, 2, 1–15 (2000) 
22. Kudelka, M., Snasel, V., Lehecka, O., El-Qawasmeh, E.: Semantic Analysis of 
Web Pages Using Web Patterns. IEEE/ACM/WIC Web Intelligence (2006) 
23. Kudelka, M., Snasel, V.,  Lehecka, O., El-Qawasmeh, E., Pokorny, J.: Web Pages 
Reordering and Clustering Based on Web Patterns. SOFSEM 2008, Novy 
Smokovec, Slovakia, in Springer LNCS (2008)  
24. Kudelka, M., Snasel V., Lehecka, O., El-Qawasmeh, E.: Web Content Mining 
Using Web Design Patterns, IEEE International Conference on Information 
Reuse and Integration (2008) 
25. Lee, D., Jeong, O., and Lee, S.: Opinion mining of customer feedback data on the 
web. Conference on Ubiquitous information Management and Communication 
ICUIMC '08. pp. 230–235 (2008). 
26. Lerman, K., Getoor, L., Minton, S., Knoblock, C.: Using the structure of Web 
sites for automatic segmentation of tables. ACM SIGMOD Management of Data, 
SIGMOD '04. pp. 119–130 (2004) 
27. Limanto, H. Y., Giang, N. N., Trung, V. T., Zhang, J., He, Q., Huy, N. Q.: An 
information extraction engine for web discussion forums. World Wide Web 
WWW '05. pp. 978–979 (2005) 
28. Nie, Z., Wen, J-R., Ma W-Y.: Object-level Vertical Search. CIDR 2007, pp. 235–
246. (2007) 
29. Nielsen, J., Loranger, H.: Prioritizing Web Usability. New Riders Press, 
Berkeley. (2006) 
30. Pivk, A., Cimiano, P., Sure, Y., Gams, M., Rajkovic, V., Studer, R.: 
Transforming arbitrary tables into logical form with TARTAR. Data Knowl. Eng. 
60, 567–595 (2007) 
31. Reis, D.C., Golgher, P.B., Silva, A.S.  Laender, A.F.: Automatic web news 
extraction using tree edit distance. In WWW '04: Proceedings of the 13th 
international conference on World Wide Web (2004) 
32. Santini, M.: Characterizing Genres of Web Pages: Genre Hybridism and 
Individualization. HICSS 2007, p. 71 (2007) 
33. Salton G., Wong, A.  Yang, C. S.: A vector space model for automatic indexing, 
Communications of the ACM 18, 613–620 (1975) 
34. Schmidt, S., Mandl, S., Ludwig, B., Stoyan, H.: Product-advisory on the web: An 
information extraction approach, Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pp. 
678–683 (2007) 
35. Schuth, A., Marx, M., de Rijke, M.: Extracting the discussion structure in 
comments on news-articles. ACM international Workshop on Web information 
and Data Management pp. 97–104 (2007) 
36. Snasel, V., Rezankova, H., Husek, D., Kudelka, M,. Lehecka, O.: Semantic 
Analysis of Web Pages Using Cluster Analysis and Nonnegative Matrix 
Factorization. IEEE/WIC AWIC 2007, Springer ASC (2007) 
37. Tidwell, J.: Designing Interfaces: Patterns for Effective Interaction Design, 
O'Reilly Media, Inc. (2006) 
Web Content Mining Focused on Named Objects 57
38. Van Welie, M.: Pattern in Interaction Design,http://www.welie.com, (last access 
2008-08-31).
39. Wong, T-L. W. Lam, W.: Hot Item Mining and Summarization from Multiple 
Auction Web Sites. ICDM 2005, pp. 797–800 (2005) 
40. Yahoo!, http://www.yahoo.com, (last access 2008-08-31). 
41. Zanibbi, R., Blostein, D., Cordy, J.R: A survey of table recognition: Models, 
observations, transformations, and inferences, International Journal on Document 
Analysis and Recognition, 7, 1–16 (2004) 
42. Zheng, S., Song,  R., Wen, J.-R.: Template-independent news extraction based on 
visual consistency. In Proceedings of AAAI-2007, pp. 1507–1511 (2005). 
43. Zheng, S., Zhou, D., Li, J., Giles, C.L.: Extracting Author Meta-Data from Web 
Using Visual Features,Data Mining Workshops, ICDM Workshops, 2007, pp. 
33–40 (2007) 
44. Zhu, J., Zhang, B., Nie, Z., Wen, J.R., Hon, H.W. Webpage understanding: an 
integrated approach, Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data, San Jose, 
California, USA, pp. 903–912 (2007) 
58 Václav Snášel and Milos Kudelka
