
26
The forensic linguist
The expert linguist meets the adversarial system
Lawrence M. Solan
Science in the adversarial system
The academic world and the world of litigation produce an awkward mix. Lawyers are
in the business of winning their cases. Academics are in the business of engaging in dis-
interested research in an effort to uncover truths. Academics, including those who work
in the “hard sciences,” are accustomed to such tasks as evaluating competing theories,
each of which has its own strengths and weaknesses. Criteria of evaluation generally
include both descriptive and explanatory adequacy and sometimes such things as
Occam’s Razor and other measures of parsimony and elegance. In linguistic theory, for
example, competing syntactic accounts are frequently judged on the breadth of the
phenomena they are able to explain without resort to ad hoc solutions. The more elegant
solution that covers more ground wins. In this realm, uncertainty is the norm. Those
engaged in scientific inquiry do not close up shop once they have achieved some
progress. Rather, they continue their explorations, often revising (and sometimes even
discarding) earlier hypotheses as new data and new explanations come to light.
The legal system is also designed to uncover truths. But, in places that employ an
adversarial system, it does not do so by conducting disinterested research, but rather
through the vigorous presentation of evidence slanted toward different positions. The
assumption—more a matter of faith—is that the better sets of facts, arguments and the-
ories presented in the court room will rise to the top, and that thereby the quest for truth
will be served (see Landsman 1984). For this reason, during the litigation process, lawyers
are likely to exploit the uncertainty of opposing experts. This can lead to serious dis-
comfort when an expert accustomed to living with a level of uncertainty as a professional
matter finds himself the subject of ridicule in the courtroom (see, e.g. Shuy 2006;
Coulthard and Johnson 2007 for discussion).
Philosopher/legal scholar Susan Haack, drawing on the work of Peirce, comments on
the difference between scientific and legal inquiry:
Distinguishing genuine inquiry, the real thing, from pseudo-inquiry or “sham
reasoning,” C.S. Peirce – a working scientist as well as the greatest of American
395
philosophers – wrote that “the spirit … is the most essential thing – the motive”;
that genuine inquiry consists in “actually drawing the bow upon truth with
intentness in the eye, with energy in the arm.” For the same reason, I am tempted
to write of advocacy “research” (in scare quotes); for it is something of a stretch to
call advocacy research “research” at all. Advocacy “research” is like inquiry insofar
as it involves seeking out evidence. But it is part of an advocacy project insofar as it
involves seeking out evidence favoring a predetermined conclusion; and it is
undertaken in the spirit, from the motive, of an advocate. In short, it is a kind of
pseudo-inquiry.
(Haack 2008: 1071)
Making matters worse, lawyers are not required to be sincere in their attacks (Post 1987;
Solan 2008). They are not permitted to lie outright. Nonetheless, the lawyer who
believes the opposing expert’s position to be valid remains obliged to find holes in the
analysis and to exploit them vigorously. If a coroner makes a computational error in
computing the time of death, the lawyer will—in fact, must—take maximum advantage
of the mistake even if the lawyer believes the time of death in the report to be correct.
At least that is so in the United States.
It is somewhat ironic that scientific investigation accepts more uncertainty than does
the legal process, since it is the legal system’s assumption that scientific knowledge is crisp
and factual that makes it attractive to the legal system in the first place (see Berger and
Solan 2008 for discussion). Nonetheless, that is often the case. The imperfect match
between scientific inquiry and the structure of the adversarial system presents a challenge
for the expert witness. One lawyer wants the witness to act as a good team player, while
the other attempts to rip him or her to shreds. In this article, I bring to the attention of
the forensic linguistic community a number of issues that have been raised more gen-
erally about expert evidence in the adversarial system that might be important to the field
as it develops.
A large body of literature demonstrates that in interpreting facts, people (including
experts) tend to be biased toward confirming the result that they have already reached.
People are aware of such tendencies in others, but deny it in themselves. This means that
even experts with high moral integrity will tend to cast their conclusions in a way that is
helpful to the position they have espoused. Moreover, people tend to view positive
results without regard to underlying base rates. This has led to the acceptance of forensic
identification techniques that are not adequately grounded in science. The proliferation
of DNA analysis in legal settings makes the absence of such analysis in other forensic
sciences particularly salient, but the problem has been there all along.
The legal system has reacted to these problems in different ways. In the United States,
there has been a growing emphasis on the importance of valid and replicable
methodology in court, as evidenced by the United States Supreme Court’s 1993 Daubert
decision and it progeny. The UK, while also considering a move in that direction (see
Law Commission 2009), has required experts to certify that they understand their first
obligation is to be straightforward and disinterested. Both are positive developments.
I begin by discussing some of the cognitive biases that have been discussed in the
recent psychological and legal literature. Awareness of them can both help the expert
linguist to understand some of the pitfalls of entering the all-or-nothing fray of litigation,
and further help to understand the intensity of the current push toward developing
reliable methodologies on which experts can base their testimony. I then turn to
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
396
developments in the legal system directed at addressing some of these problems. Finally,
this chapter turns to forensic linguistics in particular, and discusses various standards that
the field may adopt on its own behalf.
The challenge facing forensic identification sciences
The need to make forensic science more scientific
Forensic identification techniques have been under serious scrutiny and attack in the
United States during the past decade. To take a dramatic example, until recently bullet
lead analysis had been a staple of law enforcement agencies in criminal cases. For more
than thirty years, analysts, in particular from the FBI, would testify that the lead from a
questioned bullet and that from a reference box of ammunition associated with the
defendant, “were analytically indistinguishable,” “came from the same batch,” “were
consistent with their having come from the same box of ammunition,” and so on.
(Giannelli 2007: 200). Disturbingly, difficulty in determining how to couch conclusions
about the firmness of an identification shows itself in forensic linguistic identification as
well. But more disturbingly, bullet lead analysis has now been shown to be without
scientific basis. In 2004, the National Research Council (NRC), which is the research
arm of the National Academies (formerly the National Academy of Science) issued a
devastating report (NRC 2004). Among its conclusions was that the output from a single
“melt” of lead “can range from the equivalent of as few as 12,000 to as many as 35
million 40-grain, .22 caliber longrifle bullets” (NRC 2004: 6). Courts began jumping
ship and, in 2005, the FBI abandoned the procedure.1 Prior to that, the analysis was used
in many criminal trials involving firearms, including death penalty cases. The recognition
that this forensic procedure is not provably reliable has had its consequences. Based on
the discredited technology, in 2008, a Florida court overturned the conviction of a man
who had spent ten years in prison for killing his wife based on the discredited technol-
ogy. The legitimacy of many other convictions has been brought into question.2
Lead bullet analysis is not alone. Even fingerprint identification, long considered an
airtight method, has been questioned in recent years. Significantly, the history of fin-
gerprint identification reveals that it developed in the absence of studies demonstrating
their uniqueness. That has always been taken as a matter of faith (Mnookin 2001a). This
is not to say that fingerprinting has been unsuccessful as a tool for law enforcement. The
Innocence Project announces on its web page that there have been 240 post-conviction
DNA exonerations in the US courts of people who had been convicted of crimes, but of
those, only two involved incorrect testimony about fingerprints. In one case, an analyst
testified that the comparison was inconclusive when in fact, it had excluded the defen-
dant; in the other, the crime lab compared two sets of the defendants’ known prints to
each other, rather than comparing the prints at the crime scene to the defendant’s known
prints.3 Moreover, while few disagree that fingerprint comparison can be very accurate in
most cases (but see Cole 2004), fingerprints in forensic settings are often both partial and
degraded and we do not know the rate at which accuracy and consensus diminish as the
amount of information is decreased. A case in point is the FBI’s incorrect fingerprint
identification of an American Muslim as the Madrid bomber (see Dror et al. 2005).
The same holds true for handwriting analysis, which has received particularly brutal
treatment in the literature on the admissibility of expert testimony (see Risinger and Saks
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
397
1996; Mnookin 2001b, but see Moenssens’ 1997 defense of the field). Here, again, the
issue is not whether document examiners ever get it right. Of course they do. Rather,
the issue is that handwriting analysis was not put to the test to determine its limits. Even
when a document examiner has been well-trained and is a person of integrity, without
the implementation of techniques that have been validated, we do not know where an
expert’s expertise begins and ends, other than as a matter of trust.
More broadly, in 2009, the National Research Council of the National Academies
came out with a report on the status of forensic identification. Entitled Strengthening
Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward (NRC 2009), among its findings were
the following:
Two very important questions should underlie the law’s admission of and reliance
upon forensic evidence in criminal trials: (1) the extent to which a particular
forensic discipline is founded on a reliable scientific methodology that gives it the
capacity to accurately analyze evidence and report findings and (2) the extent to
which practitioners in a particular forensic discipline rely on human interpretation
that could be tainted by error, the threat of bias, or the absence of sound opera-
tional procedures and robust performance standards. … Unfortunately, these
important questions do not always produce satisfactory answers in judicial decisions
pertaining to the admissibility of forensic science evidence proffered in criminal
trials.
(NRC 2009: S-7)
The report, thus, criticizes both the various forensic disciplines for not policing them-
selves adequately, and the courts for falling asleep at the job and not performing
their gatekeeping function with adequate standards. What should be done? The report
suggests:
A body of research is required to establish the limits and measures of performance
and to address the impact of sources of variability and potential bias. Such research
is sorely needed, but it seems to be lacking in most of the forensic disciplines that
rely on subjective assessments of matching characteristics. These disciplines need to
develop rigorous protocols to guide these subjective interpretations and pursue
equally rigorous research and evaluation programs.
(NRC 2009: S-6)
Cognitive biases in forensic science
What are the biases to which forensic scientists are so susceptible? They are the same
biases to which scientists of all sorts may succumb. First among them are observer effects, in
particular confirmation bias. Observer effects refer to the long-recognized fact that “context
and expectations influence an individual’s perceptions and interpretations of what he
observes.” (Risinger et al. 2002: 12). Recognition of this potential drives a great deal of
methodology in science, especially in areas of medical research where double-blind
studies are the norm. Even when patients are randomly selected for participation, it is
only when both the doctor administering the treatment and the patient receiving it are
unaware of whether the patient is receiving the experimental treatment or is a member
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
398
of the control group receiving a placebo that the results of clinical trials are deemed
reliable. The concern is that otherwise subtle, even unconscious cues may lead to
distortions in the results.
In the case of forensic experts, one of the most important cues is prior knowledge of
the result that the party engaging the expert would like them to reach. This leads to
confirmation bias, the “unwitting selectivity in the acquisition and use of evidence” in
which people are likely to engage (Nickerson 1998: 175). In fact, even when we
have no stake in the outcome, we tend to look at data selectively to confirm tentative
conclusions we have reached. In a famous study using a card game, Wason and Johnson-
Laird (1972) found that people quickly see the significance of information that may
prove them right or wrong. In contrast, most people ignore evidence that can disconfirm
a working hypothesis but cannot otherwise serve to strengthen the hypothesis.
Once we have taken a position on a matter, information that supports that position
becomes more salient, and information that tends to disconfirm it becomes less so
(Nickerson 1998; Simon 2004). To take a classic example from the psychological
literature, Darley and Gross (1983) showed two groups of subjects a videotape of a child
taking an academic test. One group of subjects was told that the child came from a high
socioeconomic background, the other group told that the child came from a low
socioeconomic background. They were then asked to evaluate the child’s academic
ability based on what they observed of the child’s behavior while she took the test.
The results were dramatic. Those who were told that the child came from a wealthy
background rated her ability as greater than did those who were told she was eco-
nomically disadvantaged. Both groups supported their ratings by referring extensively to
evidence from the videotape.
Real-life experiences abound. It happens, for example, when the police, certain that
they have apprehended the guilty party and acting in good faith, ignore evidence of
another’s guilt and of their suspect’s innocence as they build their case. Malcolm
Coulthard discusses a number of such cases in his writings (see, e.g. Coulthard 2004).
In one, convinced that they had apprehended four men who killed a 13-year old
newspaper delivery boy, the police extracted a confession from one of them—Patrick
Molloy. However, the police denied that the language contained in the confession was
language that they had suggested to him and that he had accepted under duress, as he
alleged. The four were convicted, and Coulthard was consulted on appeal, at which time
he found the transcript of a police interview to be unrealistically identical to that of a
statement attributed to him. The Crown conceded error during the appeal process, based
on other evidence of the defendants’ innocence. Such things happen when the police are
so convinced that they have the right person that they feel justified in cutting corners.
The doctoring of an interview record is misconduct, but the motivation to do so comes
largely from confirmation bias.
Confirmation bias also occurs when an expert witness focuses in a report on the
information that bolsters the position taken, and understates or ignores information that
would tend to lead to a contrary position. Dror et al. (2005) presented five experienced
fingerprint analysts with separate pairs of fingerprints for comparison. In each case, the
pair was one that the analyst had himself identified as a match sometime earlier in the
ordinary course of business. The experimenters also showed each of these five pairs of
prints to independent examiners, who agreed that each pair of prints constituted a
matched set. However, a confederate told each of these experts that the questioned prints
were the ones erroneously identified by the FBI as a match in the Madrid bombing case.
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
399
The experts were then told to ignore this contextual information in conducting their
analysis. The result was that three of the five experts found no match, one said he could
not decide, and only one came to the same conclusion he had reached earlier: that there
was a match.
Making things worse, not only are we subject to this bias, but we each have a “bias
blind spot” (Pronin et al. 2002). That is, we have a propensity to think that our own
beliefs are objective, while the beliefs of others are colored by various biases that influ-
ence them. Even when such biases are brought to our attention, we tend to recognize
them as applying to others—not to ourselves. In other words, we see bias in others,
analytical crispness in ourselves. Pronin and Kugler attribute this asymmetry to the fact
that “people over-value thoughts, feelings, and other mental contents, relative to beha-
vior, when assessing their own actions, motives, and preferences, but not when assessing
others’” (Pronin and Kugler: 2007: 566). They call this the “Introspection Illusion.”
Their studies first confirmed the bias blind spot. When, for example, Harvard students
were told that some people tend to be biased toward self-serving views of their academic
or job performance, they attributed this bias more to other, similarly situated students
than to themselves. They further said that they judged themselves more by evaluating
their own thoughts and motives, and judged others based more on their actual behavior.
Whether judging themselves or others, the more they relied on thoughts and motives,
the less bias they found. The more they relied on behavior, the more bias they found.
Significantly, when participants were told in advance that relying on introspection
instead of evaluating their own behavior can lead them to a biased assessment, they took
heed and were no longer subject to the bias blind spot (Pronin and Kugler 2007: 575).
This finding may have significant ramifications in the forensic arena.
Judicial reactions to expert evidence in the US and the UK
We have now identified two problems facing the expert linguist: the brutality of the
adversarial system, including snide and personal attacks on individuals working within
standard scientific paradigms, and a broad concern that the forensic identification sciences
lack adequate scientific foundation. This section deals with how the courts have grappled
with the second of these issues. The next section will deal with the tension between the
two problems, and how forensic linguistics might develop to jointly address them.
Linguistic expert testimony is widely accepted in both English and American courts.
However, the courts in the US and the UK have engaged different strategies to deal
with the need for ensuring reliable expert testimony. While American courts have
focused more on the need for valid and reliable methodology, British courts have con-
centrated on requiring experts to certify that they have conducted their analysis in a
neutral, disinterested manner. Both approaches have something to offer in response to
the issues raised above.
The Daubert standard in American courts: the judge as gatekeeper
For most of the twentieth century, American courts admitted scientific evidence if it had
“gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.” The standard was
derived from a 1923 court of appeals case, Frye v. United States, a case that involved a lie
detector test that measured systolic blood pressure. The problem with the Frye test,
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
400
however, is that it is subject to manipulation by changing the definition of “the particular
field in which it belongs.” Among lie detector analysts, the device in question in Frye
might be perfectly acceptable. Among social scientists and medical experts, waiting for
the results of validation testing, it might be unacceptable. Moreover, as noted at the
beginning of this article, science is often not about certainty, but rather about con-
troversy. The “right” theory may have been articulated, but is not yet generally accepted,
whether because of the sociology of the scientific community, or because the theory is in
development and has not yet been shown to be able to handle crucial cases and to
explain apparent counterexamples.
These problems with the Frye standard were recognized in 1975, when the Federal
Rules of Evidence were first adopted. The standard under Rule 702 as originally enacted
was that expert evidence should be admitted, “if it will assist the trier of fact to under-
stand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue.” It was not clear from the rule’s language,
however, whether this standard was intended to replace Frye, or merely to explain the
goal of the Frye standard.
The Supreme Court of the United States answered that question in three cases decided
in the 1990s, which have come to be called the Daubert trilogy. The first case, Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., was decided in 1993. The issue there was whether
Bendectin, an anti-nausea drug taken during pregnancy, caused birth defects in the
plaintiff’s children. Most of the scientific literature said that it did not, but the plaintiff
wished to have an expert testify to challenge the scientific literature and to discuss animal
studies which suggested that Bendectin might indeed cause birth defects in children.
Ultimately, the case was sent back to the lower appellate court, which ruled that the
expert testimony was not admissible because it lacked the indicia of scientific validity. In
determining whether proffered testimony is scientifically valid, the standard would no
longer be whether it was generally accepted by the scientific community. Rather, the
testimony must have a “grounding in the methods and procedures of science” (p. 590).
This grounding may be evidenced by four nonexclusive criteria: whether the theory
offered has been tested; whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication;
the known rate of error; and whether the theory is generally accepted in the scientific
community (p. 593). Note that the fourth criterion is the Frye standard, which has now
become one of a number of nonexclusive factors that a court will consider.
The second case in the Daubert trilogy, General Electric Company v. Joiner, concerned
the standard of review for appellate courts of Daubert decisions made at trial. The Court
held that rulings about the admissibility of expert testimony should be overturned only if
the trial court abused its discretion. This is a very lax standard, and it means in essence
that the decisions of trial judges to admit or reject expert evidence will rarely be
reviewed seriously, and even more rarely reversed.
Finally, in Kumho Tire Company v. Carmichael, the Supreme Court held that the Daubert
approach applies not only to scientific testimony, but also to experts who testify based on
their experience. The expert in that case was called to testify on the cause of tire damage
based on his experience in the tire industry. The Court held that his opinion based upon
experience that cannot be tested did not meet evidentiary standards. The determining fact
is whether the expert “employs in the courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that
characterizes the practice of an expert in the relevant field” (p. 152).
As a result of these three cases, the Federal Rules of Evidence were amended to permit
expert testimony if it will “assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to
determine a fact in issue,” and if:
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
401
(1) The testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data,
(2) The testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and
(3) The witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.
(Rule 702, Fed R. Evid.)
It should be noted that all three cases in the Daubert trilogy were civil cases in which an
individual was suing a corporation, and in all three, the courts held that the expert’s
proffered testimony did not pass muster. It was the legal academic community, and to
some extent criminal defense lawyers, who subsequently argued that the Daubert
approach should apply to the forensic identification sciences, which were inadequately
validated notwithstanding their claims (see, e.g. Risinger and Saks 1996). It is still not at
all clear that American courts apply these principles evenhandedly in civil and criminal
cases alike (Risinger 2000), or for that matter, that the actual rulings of courts differ
significantly depending upon whether a jurisdiction applies the Frye standard or the
Daubert standard (Cheng and Yoon 2005). Nonetheless, Daubert has colored the debate
about forensic testimony, which often is offered as scientific even though validations
studies have not been conducted in a scientific manner.
Expert certification of neutrality in the UK
The UK has taken a somewhat different approach (see Law Commission 2009),
although, at the time of writing, Daubert-like standards are under consideration there as
well. Rather than focusing on the methodology, the UK has traditionally focused on the
credentials and integrity of the expert. Aware of the temptation for experts to present
biased evidence, Civil Procedure Rules have been enacted requiring experts to affirm
that they are acting in a neutral manner. The rules state explicitly that
1. It is the duty of an expert to help the Court on matters within his expertise.
2. This duty overrides any obligation to the person from whom he has received
instructions or by whom he is paid.
(Civil Procedure Rule 35.3)
Expert reports must contain a statement that the expert understands his duty to the court
and that he has complied with that duty (Civil Procedure Rules 35.10).
Similarly, Appendix 11 to the Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide (2002)
imposes neutrality on experts. Because the material may not be familiar to those who do
not work within the British courts, it is worth quoting in full:
1. It is the duty of an expert to help the court on the matters within his expertise:
rule 35.3(1). This duty is paramount and overrides any obligation to the
person from whom the expert has received instructions or by whom he is paid: rule
35.3(2).
2. Expert evidence presented to the court should be, and should be seen to be, the
independent product of the expert uninfluenced by the pressures of litigation.
3. An expert witness should provide independent assistance to the court by way of
objective unbiased opinion in relation to matters within his expertise. An expert
witness should never assume the role of an advocate.
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
402
4. An expert witness should not omit to consider material facts which could detract
from his concluded opinion.
5. An expert witness should make it clear when a particular question or issue falls
outside his expertise.
6. If an expert’s opinion is not properly researched because he considers that insuffi-
cient data is available, this must be stated in his report with an indication that the
opinion is no more than a provisional one.
7. In a case where an expert witness who has prepared a report is unable to confirm
that the report contains the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth
without some qualification, that qualification must be stated in the report.
8. If, after exchange of reports, an expert witness changes his view on a material
matter having read another expert’s report or for any other reason, such change of
view should be communicated in writing (through the party’s legal representatives)
to the other side without delay, and when appropriate to the court.
(Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide, 2002: 151)
Admirably, the goal is to reduce the adversarial nature of scientific debate in the litigation
context. No doubt these standards accomplish that goal to some extent. However, given
both the pressure placed on experts and the bias blind spot discussed earlier, it is not
likely to accomplish that goal up to the level of purely disinterested scientific standards.
Experts will continue to be tempted to write short, uninformative reports in order to
keep the opposing party from preparing a rebuttal adequately; present few if any coun-
terexamples to their analysis in their main reports; or to be as helpful to opposing parties
during cross-examination as they would be if they believed themselves to be entirely
neutral; or to raise issues on their own that might compromise their party’s position, even
if they would have done so in an academic climate. As Sanders notes:
[W]hen [experts] do fail to present adequate justification for a belief, often it is not
because they fail to present the best case for a position but that they fail to tell the
“whole truth” about their belief and present with equal force the evidence for and
against it.
(Sanders 2007: 1558)
Thus, it should not be surprising that the UK is considering a move toward focusing on
valid methods.
The direction of forensic linguistics
I have identified two problems facing the linguist who ventures into the world of liti-
gation: One is a problem that experts have with the legal system—its intolerance of
uncertainty in scientific inquiry, notwithstanding that scientists accept that the current
best account may not ultimately survive further the test of time. This, combined with the
aggressive advocacy of the adversarial system, can lead lawyers to ridicule even experts
who are prominent researchers in their fields. The result of this hostility is a reluctance
on the part of many top scholars to participate in the system at all (see Coulthard and
Johnson 2007 for discussion and also Gray, this volume). The second problem that the
legal system has with experts is that the experts themselves provide inadequate protection
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
403
against bias by failing to develop methods that have been independently validated. This is
the main thrust of the National Research Council (2009) report on forensic science in
the United States.
I would like to argue here that in fact these are the same problem, at least in large part.
Fixing the second will reduce the severity of the first in that the best way for an expert to
avoid bias and to reduce the stress associated with defending one’s professional opinion in
court is to employ reliable methods that have been proven valid. A second, somewhat
less effective, approach is for experts to submit to proficiency testing. This is not as good
as the first method, because even proficient experts can succumb to bias in a forensic
setting. Nonetheless, I explore the benefits of proficiency testing below.
Developing valid methodology
The basic concern in developing methods that will be acceptable in court and meet the
standards of normal science is to develop and test those methods outside the litigation
context. Not only is litigation-driven research more prone to bias, but it is less highly
valued by the courts for that reason. In fact, as Haack (2008) points out, once Mrs.
Daubert’s case was sent back to the lower court for additional proceedings, the judge
there commented on the reduced reliability of scientific evidence gathered for the pur-
pose of the litigation itself. Judge Kozinski commented there: “[I]n determining whether
proposed expert testimony amounts to good science, we may not ignore the fact that a
scientist’s normal workplace is the lab or the field, not the courtroom or the lawyer’s
office.” (Daubert 2, 1316–17 n.3) He further contrasted the increased likelihood of bias
when the result is tied to remuneration, with independent research conducted as normal
science, which carries its own indicia of reliability.
The development of valid methodology has produced positive results in other forensic
fields. For example, as mentioned above, handwriting analysis has been in ill repute in
the United States because of its inability to describe a valid method with provable rates of
accuracy. In part because of that criticism, the government has funded research in that
area, resulting in improved technology that has been accepted under Daubert analysis. In
a 2002 case, United States v. Prime, the trial court summarizes some of that progress—
including a greater understanding of the rate of error—in admitting the testimony of a
handwriting expert who had been involved in these improvements to that field.
Academic critics have also begun to recognize this progress (see, e.g. Giannelli 2003: 8–9).
How such research is to be conducted in the linguistic arena differs from one subfield
to another. The forensic phonetic literature, for example, is replete with studies of what
circumstances make it easier or harder to recognize a speaker by his or her voice (see
Yarmey forthcoming for a good summary). Moreover, some researchers are developing
automated systems that are being tested for rates of error in terms of both misses (failure
to identify) and false alarms (false identification; see Solan and Tiersma 2005 for
discussion of some of these developments.). At the same time, there has been some
movement toward the proficiency testing of those phoneticians who use both aural and
acoustical information to form judgments, a trend to which I return below.
When it comes to authorship identification, some researchers have attempted to
identify criteria which, taken in combination, can diagnose both authorship and non-
authorship. Chaski (2005), for example, uses aspects of punctuation, marked syntactic
structures and word length in combination. Her results are impressive, and she has been
permitted to testify in cases after Daubert scrutiny, although the process has still not been
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
404
tested for validity and reliability through independent means. My point here is a basic
one: the research upon which expert testimony is based is best conducted in the lab,
outside the context of a particular dispute, as Judge Kozinski prescribes. Other researchers
have employed similar research methods, using criteria for identification that differ from
Chaski’s, sometimes using sophisticated mathematical modeling (see, e.g. Stamatatos 2006).
Recent research into the conventions of text messaging shows promise for research
along these lines. Grant (this volume) discusses cases in which two possible authors of a
questioned text message use in general quite different styles of abbreviation and ellipsis in
their texting. Once pointed out, one’s intuition is that such differences will predict
authorship, although research confirming this has not yet been published. Grant himself
suggests some ways in which such research could be structured. Olsson (2003) observes
that while some texters are entirely consistent in their use of stylistic conventions, some
are not, and the amount of inconsistency varies from person to person. This diversity
should be taken into account in determining—based on research from corpora that
are already available or which are gathered for research purposes—how predictive of
co-authorship and non-authorship these conventions are.
In other subfields of forensic linguistics, the methodology may require only that the
types of materials examined and the arguments made be standardized to the extent that
a consensus develops about what might be useful to the legal community. Linguists
frequently testify in trademark disputes, for example. Those who conduct frequent
analyses, for the purpose of determining the confusability or the strength of a mark,
might publish their approaches in order to set best practices for the field. This, at least to
some extent, is occurring (see Shuy 2002; Butters 2008a and this volume).
Proficiency as a substitute for methodology
Those who have practiced in the area of forensic linguistics, especially in the area of
authorship identification, might respond to the call for methodology as follows: “I have
been doing this for a long time, and I am very good at it. I cannot tell in advance exactly
which features in a particular case will be diagnostic of authorship, so requiring that
I develop a methodology that is tightly defined will require me to ignore data that might
be important in an individual case.” In discussing some prominent cases involving
authorship identification, Peter Tiersma and I (Solan and Tiersma 2005) note that
the absence of established methods might lead some insightful analysis to remain unac-
ceptable in the courtroom. We therefore suggest that research projects be initiated to
discover and validate reliable methods that will stand up to evidentiary scrutiny.
Perhaps, however, proficiency testing, if done properly could serve as an intermediate
level of validation while a field conducts research into replicable methods. In a recent
lecture, Professor Jennifer Mnookin has referred to this as the “black box” approach to
forensic identification, and argues that it might be useful in some instances. The concern
is that in some instances, Daubert may be causing us to throw the baby out with the
bathwater, rejecting skilled diagnosis based on experience (see Sanders 2001 for discus-
sion). Medical diagnosis is in part an art in which the most skilled diagnosticians are
unable to articulate what separates them from the rest of the pack (see Groopman 2007).
It would not be surprising if practitioners of forensic linguistic identification also
developed skills that more than meet the standard of being helpful to the trier of fact.
Valid proficiency testing is difficult to accomplish. The biggest problem is developing
materials that are relevant to real-life forensic problems. For example, when a document
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
405
has only two possible authors, rejecting one of them is sufficient to establish the other as
the author (assuming only one person wrote the document). In other cases, however, the
question is whether a particular suspect wrote a document, and there is no information
about who else might have written it otherwise. How many other potential authors
should the expert be able to reject before reaching an opinion that the suspect is the
likely author? These are difficult questions that must be resolved before proficiency
testing can be designed in a meaningful way.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, information about a practitioner’s proficiency might
be useful to the legal system, especially during the development of validated methodol-
ogies. In fact, the success rate of proficient practitioners might be compared with that of
other methods, particularly automated ones. Cambier-Langeveld (2007a) conducted a
study in which she pitted phoneticians using the auditory-acoustic method against semi-
automatic and automatic speaker recognition systems. The result was that the machines
produced fewer false alarms than the phoneticians, but at the same time failed to make
some correct identifications that the phoneticians were able to make. Some phoneticians
were extremely good and outperformed the machines, but disturbingly, the phoneticians
varied in their level of skill, highlighting the importance of proficiency testing at
the minimum. Without that testing, the individual who goes before the jury with
confidence and charisma may be the one who prevails, regardless of actual skill.
Even experts who are proven to be good at what they do through proficiency testing
will be subject to bias when they conduct their analysis in a litigation context. Thus, I do
not advocate this approach as a long-term goal in the development of forensic linguistics.
Nonetheless, it might play a role in preserving insight while the field moves ahead.
Conclusion
I have explored here two related, but seemingly distinct problems that arise when the
expert linguist enters the world of litigation: the legal system is unrealistic about what
science can do, and the forensic community has not adequately developed valid and
reliable methods. I have attempted here to show how these problems can be solved
together, through a single approach to methodology, and have suggested that proficiency
testing might bridge the gap in the short term.
It will be up to both the academic and the forensic linguistics communities to move
the field ahead in these directions. To do so is particularly difficult given the dual role
that many play as both academics and consultants. Yet some thirty years ago, it was the
academic linguists and phoneticians who demanded that forensic use of spectrograms
(voice prints) be used judiciously since they had not been proven accurate in forensic
settings. The field of forensic linguistics remains capable of moving itself forward in the
early part of the twenty-first century.
Notes
The author wishes to express his gratitude to Susan Haack and Michael Risinger for valuable comments
on an earlier draft of this article.
1 Eric Lichtblau, ‘F.B.I. Abandons Disputed Test for Bullets from Crime Scene’, New York Times,
Sept. 2, 2005, p. A2.
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
406
2 Judge Overturns Jimmy Ates’ Conviction: Use of Junk Science Leads to Release, press release of the
Florida Innocence Project, available online at: www.oranous.com/innocence/JimmyAtes/Ates%
20Press%20Release%2012%2017%202008%20FINAL.pdf (accessed 16 July 2009).
3 www.innocenceproject.org/docs/DNA_Exonerations_Forensic_Science.pdf, visited June 21, 2009.
Further reading
Darley, John M. and Paget H. Gross (1983) ‘A hypothesis-confirming bias in labeling effects,’ Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 44: 20–33.
Giannelli, Paul C. (2007) ‘Wrongful convictions and forensic science: the need to regulate crime labs,’
North Carolina Law Review, 86: 163–235.
National Research Council of the National Academies (2009) Strengthening Forensic Science in the United
States: A Path Forward, Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
Pronin, Emily and Matthew Kugler (2007) ‘Valuing thoughts, ignoring behavior: The introspection
illusion as a source of the bias blind spot,’ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43: 565–78.
Sanders, Joseph (2007) ‘Expert witness ethics,’ Fordham Law Review, 76: 1539–84.
Shuy, Roger (2006) Linguistics in the Courtroom: A Practical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laws and cases cited
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 43 F.3d 1311, (9th Cir. 1993)(“Daubert 2”).
Frye v. United States, 293 F. 213 (D.C. Cir. 1923).
General Electric Company v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136 (1997).
Kumho Tire Company v.Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999).
United States v. Prime, 220 F. Supp. 2d 1203 (W.D. Wash. 2002).
Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide, Appendix 11 (UK) (2002) available online at: www.hmcourts-
service.gov.uk/docs/guide.pdf.
Civil Procedure Rule 35.3 (UK).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 702 (US).
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
407
References
15 U.S.C. §§ 1331 et seq., [1970] Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, (1970).
34 Fed. Reg. § 7919 [1969], An Amendment of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, 15
U.S.C. §§1331 et seq. (1965).
Abbott, H.P. (2008) The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Adams, K. and Winter, A. (1997) ‘Gang graffiti as a discourse genre’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 1(3): 337–60.
Adams, M. (2005) ‘Lexical property rights: trademarks and American dictionaries’, Verbatim: The Lan-
guage Quarterly, 30: 1–8.
Adams, M. and Westerhaus, J. (2005) ‘Surnames and American trademark law’, Names: A Journal of
Onomastics, 53: 259–73. Available online at: www.adobe.com/products/flashplayer/ (accessed 8 June
2009).
Agrimonti, L. (1995) ‘Note: the limitations of Daubert and its misapplication to quasi-scientific experts:
a two year case review of Daubert v. Merrell-Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2786 (1993)’,
Washburn Law Journal, 35: 134–56.
Ahmad, M.I. (2007) ‘Interpreting communities: lawyering across language difference’, UCLA Law
Review, 54(5): 999–1086.
Ainsworth, J. (1993): ‘In a different register: the pragmatics of powerlessness in. police interrogation’,
The Yale Law Journal, 103(2): 259–322.
——(2006) ‘Linguistics as a knowledge domain in the law’, Drake Law Review, 54: 651–69.
——(2008) ‘“You have the right to remain silent … ” but only if you ask for it just so: the role of
linguistic ideology in American police interrogation law’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
The Law, 15: 1–21.
Airy, J.T. (2009) ‘Valuable lessons learned at an international counterterrorism forum’, The FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin, August (1–9).
Aitken, C. (1995) Statistics and the Evaluation of Evidence for Forensic Scientists, Chichester: John Wiley.
Aitken, J.K. and Butter, P. (2004) Piesse – The Elements of Drafting, 10th edn, Sydney: Lawbook Co.
Aldridge, M. and Luchjenbroers, J. (2007) ‘Linguistic manipulations in legal discourse: framing questions
and “smuggling” information’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 85–107.
——(2008) ‘Vulnerable witnesses and problems of portrayal: a consideration of videotaped interviews in
child rape case’, Journal of English Linguistics, 36(3): 266–84.
Aldridge, M. and Williams, C. (2006) ‘A survey of police officers’ attitudes of interviewing with special
measures’, unpublished ms.
Aldridge, M. and Wood, J. (1997) ‘Talking about feelings: young children’s ability to express emotions’,
Child Abuse and Neglect, 21: 1221–33.
Aldridge, M., Timmins, K. and Wood, J. (1997) ‘Children’s understanding of legal terminology: judges
get money at pet shows, don’t they?’, Child Abuse Review, 6: 141–46.
615
Allen, L.E. (1957) ‘Symbolic logic: a razor-edged tool for drafting and interpreting legal documents’,
Yale Law Journal, 66(6): 833–879.
Allimant, A. and Anne, S. (2008) ‘No room … homelessness and the experiences of women of non-
English speaking backgrounds’, paper presented at 5th National Homelessness Conference, Adelaide,
Australia.
Altman, R. (2008) A Theory of Narrative, New York: Columbia University Press.
American National Standards Institute (1978) American national standard guide for classifying and labeling
epoxy products according to their hazardous potentialities, New York: ANSI.
Amsterdam, A.G. and Bruner, J. (2002) Minding the Law, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, P. (2007) Technical Communication: A Reader-Centered Approach, 6th edn, Boston, MA:
Thomson/Wadsworth.
Andrews, M., Squire, C. and Tamboukou, M. (eds) (2008) Doing Narrative Research, Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Angélil-Carter, S (2002) Stolen Language? Plagiarism in Writing, London: Longman.
Angermeyer, P.S. (2005) ‘Who is “you”? Polite forms of address and ambiguous participant roles in
court interpreting’, Target, 17: 203–26.
Apitz, G. and Lin, J. (2007) ‘Interfaces to support the scholarly exploration of text collections’, in Pro-
ceedings of the CHI 2007 Workshop for Exploratory Search and HCI, San Jose, CA. Available online at:
www.umiacs.umd.edu/~digidock/publications.html.
Archer, D. (2002) ‘“Can innocent people be guilty?” A sociopragmatic analysis of examination tran-
scripts from the Salem witchcraft trials’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 3(1): 1–30.
——(2005) Questions and Answers in the English Courtroom (1640–1760), Amsterdam and Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
——(2006a) ‘(Re)initiating strategies: judges and defendants in Early Modern English courtrooms’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 181–211.
——(2006b) ‘Tracing the development of advocacy in two nineteenth-century English trials’, in M.
Dossena and I. Taavitsainen (eds) Diachronic Perspectives on Domain-Specific English, Bern: Peter Lang,
43–67.
——(forthcoming) ‘Tracing the crime narratives within the Palmer trial (1856): from the lawyer’s
opening speeches to the judge’s summing up’, in C. Heffer, F. Rock and J. Conley (eds) Textual
Travels in Legal-Lay Interaction, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aronsson, K. (1991) ‘Social interaction and the recycling of legal evidence’, in N. Coupland, H. Giles
and J. Wiemann (eds) Miscommunication and Problematic Talk, Newbury Park and London: Sage.
Atkinson, J. and Drew, P. (1979) Order in Court: The Organisation of Verbal Interaction in Judicial Settings,
London: Macmillan.
Auburn, T., Drake, S. and Willig, C. (1995) ‘“You punched him, didn’t you?”: versions of violence in
accusatory interviews’, Discourse & Society, 6(3): 353–86.
Auburn, T., Lea, S. and Drake, S. (1999) ‘“It’s your opportunity to be truthful”: disbelief, mundane
reasoning and the investigation of crime’, in C. Willig (ed.) Applied Discourse Analysis: Social and
Psychological Interventions, Buckingham: Open University Press, 44–65.
Auer, P. and Wei, L. (2007) ‘Introduction: multilingualism as a problem? Monolingualism as a pro-
blem?’, in P. Auer and L. Wei (eds) Handbook of Multilingualism and Multilingual Communication,
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1–14.
Austin, A.D. (1984) Complex Litigation Confronts the Jury System: A Case Study, Frederick, MD:
University Publications of America.
Austin, J.L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Australian Evidence Act 1995. Available online at: www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCo
mpilation1.nsf/0/0A3CF7EBACDD51B0CA25719A00060BE6/$file/EvidenceAct1995_WD02.pdf
(accessed 10 January 2008).
Axelrod, A. (2007) Getting Your Way Every Day, New York: American Management Association
(AMACON).
Baayen, R.H. (2001) Word Frequency Distributions, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
REFERENCES
616
Bachman, L. (2000) ‘Modern language testing at the turn of the century: assuring that what we count
counts’, Language Testing, 17: 1–42.
Bachman, L. and Palmer, A. (1996) Language Testing in Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. (1992) ‘Working memory’, Science, 255(5044): 556–59.
Bailey, R. (1984) ‘Dictionaries and proprietary names: the air-shuttle case’, Dictionaries, 53–65.
Baken, R.J. and Orlikoff, R.F. (2000) Clinical Measurement of Speech and Voice, San Diego, CA: Singular.
Baker, J.H. (1990) An Introduction to English Legal History, 3rd edn, London: Butterworths.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) ‘Discourse in the novel’, in M. Holquist (ed.) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays
by M. M. Bakhtin, Austin: University of Texas Press, 259–422.
Baldwin, J. (1993) ‘Police interview techniques: establishing truth or proof?’, British Journal of Criminol-
ogy, 33: 325–52.
Baldwin, J. and French, P. (1990) Forensic Phonetics, London: Pinter.
Baltisberger, E. and Favaro, S. (2007) ‘When informants don’t want to inform: how to get relevant data
in the particular context of linguistic analyses for the determination of origin (LADO)’, in M.T.
Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the 2nd European IAFL Conference on Forensic
Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 85–90.
Bamberg, M. (2004) ‘Considering counter narratives’, in M. Bamberg and M. Andrews (eds) Considering
Counter Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 351–71.
Barnes, R. (2007) ‘Chief Justice counsels humility: Roberts says lawyers must put themselves in Judges’
shoes’, The Washington Post, February 6, A15.
Barnhart, C.L. (ed.) (1947) American College Dictionary, New York: Random House.
Baron, D. (1989) ‘Word law’, Verbatim, 16: 1–4.
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. (2000) ‘Literacy practices’, in D. Barton, M. Hamilton and R. Ivanič (eds)
Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context, London: Routledge, 7–15.
Barton, D., Hamilton, M. and Ivanič, R. (2000) ‘Introduction: exploring situated literacies’, in D.
Barton, M. Hamilton and R. Ivanič (eds) Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context, London:
Routledge, 1–6.
Bauman, R. (2004) A World Of Others’ Words: Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Intertextuality, Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. (1990) ‘Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on language and
social life’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 19: 59–88.
BBC News (2003) ‘McDonald’s Anger over McJob Entry’, 9 November, BBC News Online, accessed
23 March 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/3255883.stm.
——(2007) ‘McDonald’s Seeks “McJob” Rewrite’, BBC News Online, 20 March 2007, accessed 23
March 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/6469707.stm.
Beach, W.A. (1985) ‘Temporal density in courtroom interaction: constraints on the recovery of past
events in legal discourse’, Communication Monographs, 52: 1–18.
Beattie, J.M. (1986) Crime and the Courts in England 1660–1800, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——(1991) ‘Scales of justice: defence counsel and the English criminal trial in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries’, Law and History Review, 9(2): 221–67.
Beaupré, M. (1986) Interpreting Bilingual Legislation, Toronto: Carswell.
Bedell, G. (2000) 3 Steps to Yes, New York: Crown Business.
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language in Society, 13: 145–204.
Bell, B. and Loftus, A. (1985) ‘Vivid persuasion in the courtroom’, Journal of Personality Assessment, 49:
659–64.
Bennell, C. and Canter, D. (2002) ‘Linking commercial burglaries by modus operandi: tests using
regression and ROC analysis’, Science and Justice, 42: 153–64.
Bennett, W.L. and Feldman, M.S. (1981) Reconstructing Reality in the Courtroom, London: Tavistock
Publications.
Benneworth, K. (2006) ‘Repertoires of paedophilia: conflicting descriptions of adult–child sexual rela-
tionships in the investigative interview’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2):
190–211.
REFERENCES
617
——(2007) ‘“Just good friends”: managing the clash of discourses in police interviews with paedophiles’,
in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 42–62.
——(2009) ‘Police interviews with suspected paedophiles: a discourse analysis’, Discourse and Society, 20
(5): 555–569.
Beres, L. and Griffith, T. (2004) ‘Gangs, schools and stereotypes’, Loyola Los Angeles Law Review, 37:
935–78.
Beretta, A., Campbell, C., Carr, T.H., Huang, J., Schmitt, L.M., Christianson, K. and Cao, Y. (2003)
‘An Er-Fmri investigation of morphological inflection in German reveals that the brain makes a dis-
tinction between regular and irregular forms’, Brain and Language, 85: 67–92.
Berger, M.A. and Solan, L.M. (2008) ‘The uneasy relationship between science and law: an essay and
introduction’, Brooklyn Law Review, 73: 847–54.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction of Reality, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Berk-Seligson, S. (1990/2002) The Bilingual Courtroom: Court Interpreters in the Judicial Process, Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
——(1999) ‘The impact of court interpreting on the coerciveness of leading questions’, Forensic Lin-
guistics, 6(1): 30–56.
——(2000) ‘Interpreting for the police: issues in pre-trial phases of the judicial process’, Forensic Lin-
guistics, 7(2): 212–37.
——(2002) ‘The Miranda warnings and linguistic coercion: the role of footing in the interrogation of a
limited-English speaking murder suspect’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 127–46.
——(2008) ‘Judicial systems in contact. Access to justice and the right to interpreting/translating ser-
vices among the Quichua of Ecuador’, Interpreting, 10: 9–33.
Bhatia, V.K. (1982) An Investigation into Formal and Functional Characteristics of Qualifications in Legislative
Writing and its Application to English for Academic Legal Purposes, PhD thesis, University of Aston in
Birmingham.
——(1983) ‘Simplification v. easification: the case of legal texts’, Applied Linguistics, 4(1): 42–54.
——(1987a) ‘Language of the law’, Language Teaching, 20(3): 227–34.
——(1987b) ‘Textual-mapping in British legislative writing’, World Englishes, 6(1): 1–10.
——(1993) Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings, London: Longman.
——(1994) ‘Cognitive structuring in legislative provisions’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law,
London: Longman, 136–55.
——(1997) ‘Translating legal genres’, in A. Trosborg (ed.) Text Typology and Translation, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 203–16.
——(2004) Worlds of Written Discourse: A genre-based view, London and New York: Continuum.
——(2005) ‘Specificity and generality in legislative expression: two sides of the coin’, in Bhatia, V.K.,
Engberg, J., Gotti, M. and Heller, D. (eds) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang, 337–356.
Bhatia, V.K. and Candlin, C.N. (2004) ‘Analysing arbitration laws across legal systems’,Hermes, 32: 13–43.
Bhatia, V.K., Candlin, C.N. and Engberg, J. (eds) (2008) Legal Discourse across Cultures and Systems,
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Bhatia, V.K., Engberg, J., Gotti, M. and Heller, D. (2005) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang.
Biber, D. (1988) Variation across Speech and Writing, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. and Finegan, E. (1988) ‘Adverbial stance types in English’, Discourse Processes, 11: 1–34.
——(1989) ‘Styles of stance in English: lexical and grammatical marking of evidentiality and affect’,
Text, 9: 93–124.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) ‘Stance adverbials’, in Longman
Grammar of Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Longman, 853–75.
Bittner, E. (1967) ‘The police on skid row: a study of peace keeping’, American Sociological Review, 32:
699–715.
Blatchford, H. and Foulkes, P. (2006) ‘Identification of voices in shouting’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 13: 241–54.
Bloch, B. (1948) ‘A set of postulates for phonemic analysis’, Language, 24(1): 3–46.
REFERENCES
618
Blommaert, J. (2001) ‘Investigating narrative inequality: African asylum seekers’ stories in Belgium’,
Discourse & Society, 12(4): 413–49.
——(2005) Discourse, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bogen, D. and Lynch, M. (1989) ‘Taking account of the hostile native: plausible deniability and the
production of conventional history in the IranContra Hearings’, Social Problems, 36: 197–224.
Bogoch, B. (1999) ‘Courtroom discourse and the gendered construction of professional identity’, Law
and Society Inquiry, 24(2): 329–75.
Braun, A. (1996) ‘Age estimation by different listener groups’, Forensic Linguistics, 3: 65–73.
Braun, A. and Wagner, A. (2002) ‘Is voice quality language-dependent?’, in A. Braun and H.R.
Masthoff (eds) Phonetics and its Applications: Festschrift for Jens-Peter Köster on the Occasion of his 60th
Birthday, Stuttgart: Steiner.
Brazil, D. (1993) ‘Telling tales’, in M. Coulthard (ed.) Advances in Spoken Discourse Analysis, London:
Routledge, 154–69.
Brennan, F. (2003) Tampering with Asylum, Brisbane: University of Queensland Press.
Brennan, M. (1994) ‘Cross-examining children in criminal courts: child welfare under attack’, in J.
Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 199–216.
Brennan, M. and Brennan, R.E. (1988) Strange Language – Child Victims under Cross-Examination, Wagga
Wagga, NSW: Charles Sturt University.
Brereton, D. (1997) ‘How different are rape trials? A comparison of the cross-examination of complai-
nants in rape and assault trials’, British Journal of Criminology, 37(2): 242–261.
Brière, E. (1978) ‘Limited English speakers and the Miranda rights’, TESOL Quarterly, 12(3): 235–45.
Briggs, C. (ed.) (1996) Disorderly Discourse: Narrative, Conflict and Inequality, New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
——(1997) ‘Notes on a “confession”: on the construction of gender, sexuality and violence in an
infanticide case’, Pragmatics, 7(4): 519–46.
Broeders, A.P.A. (1999) ‘Some observations on the use of probability scales in forensic identification’,
Forensic Linguistics: International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 6, ii: 228–41.
——(2001) ‘Forensic speech and audio analysis, forensic linguistics 1998 to 2001: a review’, 13th
INTERPOL Forensic Science Symposium, 16–19 October 2001, Lyon, France. Available online at:
www.interpol.int/Public/Forensic/IFSS/meeting13/Reviews/ForensicLinguistics.pdf.
Bromby, M.C. (2002) The Role and Responsibilities of the Expert Witness within the UK Judicial System,
dissertation presented for the Diploma in Forensic Medical Science. Available online at: www.caledoni
an.ac.uk/lss/global/contactmaps/staff/bromby/DipFMSDissertation.pdf. (accessed 9 January 2008).
Brooks, P. (1996) ‘The law as narrative and rhetoric’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories:
Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 14–22.
——(2000) Troubling Confessions: Speaking Guilt in Law and Literature, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Brooks, P. and Gewirtz, P. (eds) (1996) Law’s Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Brouwer, J. (2007) ‘Kennedy cousin will stay in jail’, Sunday Mirror, 28 October 2007, p. 28.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bruner, J. (1978) ‘The role of dialogue in language’, in A. Sinclair, R. Jarvella and W.J.M. Levelt (eds)
The Child’s Conception of Language, New York: Springer-Verlag, 241–56.
——(1986) Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1990) Acts of Meaning, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1996) The Culture of Education, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(2004) ‘Life as narrative’, Social Research, 71(3) 691–710. (Originally published in Social Research 54
(1), Spring 1987).
Bucholtz, M. (2006) ‘Word up: social meanings of slang in California youth culture’, in J. Goodman
and L. Monaghan (eds) Interpersonal Communication: An Ethnographic Approach, London: Blackwell,
243–67.
REFERENCES
619
Bucke, T., Street, R. and Brown, D. (2000) ‘The right of silence: the impact of the Criminal Justice
and Public Order Act 1994’, Home Office Research Study 199, London: Home Office.
Bülow-Møller, A.M. (1991) ‘Trial evidence: overt and covert communication in court’, International
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(1): 38–60.
Burchfield, R. (1992) Unlocking the English Language, New York: Hill and Wang.
Burns, B. (2001) A Theory of the Trial, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Burns, S. (2001) ‘“Think your blackest thoughts and darken them”: judicial mediation of large money
damage disputes’, Human Studies, 24(3): 227–49.
Burrell, S. (1990) ‘Gang evidence: issues for criminal defence’, Santa Clara Law Review, 30: 739–84.
Bursik, R. and Grasmick, H. (2006) ‘Defining and researching gangs’, in Egley, A., Maxson, C.L.,
Miller, J. and Klein, M.W. (eds) The Modern Gang Reader, 3rd edn, Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury Publ.
Co., 2–13.
Burton, M., Evans, R. and Saunders, A. (2007) ‘Vulnerable and intimidated witnesses and the adver-
sarial process in England and Wales’, International Journal of Evidence and Proof, 11(1): 1–23.
Butters, R. (2007a) ‘Changing linguistic issues in US trademark litigation’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova
and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language
and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 29–42.
——(2007b) ‘Sociolinguistic variation and the law’, in R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds) Sociolinguistic Var-
iation: Theories, Methods and Applications, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 318–37.
——(2008a) ‘A linguistic look at trademark dilution’, Santa Clara Computer and High Technology Law
Journal, 24: 507–19.
——(2008b) ‘Review of Shuy (2006)’, Language in Society, 37(2): 300–4.
——(2008c) ‘Trademarks and other proprietary terms’, in J. Gibbons and M. Turell (eds) Dimensions of
Forensic Linguistics, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 231–47.
Butters, R. and Westerhaus, J. (2004) ‘Linguistic change in words one owns: how trademarks become
“generic”’, in A. Curzan and K. Emmons (eds) Studies in the History of the English Language II, Berlin/
New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 111–23.
Buttny, R. and Cohen, J.R. (2007) ‘Drawing on the words of others at public hearings: Zoning, Wal-
Mart, and the threat to the aquifer’, Language in Society, 36: 735–56.
Bygate, M., Skehan, P. and Swain, M. (2001) Research Pedagogic Tasks: Second Language Learning,
Teaching and Testing, London: Longman.
Byrd, D. (1994) ‘Relation of sex and dialect to reduction’, Speech Communication, 15: 39–54.
Cahill, D., Grebler, G., Baker, A. and Tully, B. (1988) Vulnerable Testimony: Police Interviewing of Men-
tally Handicapped and Mentally Disordered People in Connection with Serious Crime, unpublished mono-
graph, London: Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults.
Cairns, D.J.A. (1998) Advocacy and the Making of the Adversarial Criminal Trial 1800–1865, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Caldas-Coulthard, C.R. and Coulthard, M. (1996) Texts and Practices. Readings in Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge.
Caldwell, H. and Fisher-Ogden, D. (2004) ‘Stalking the jets and the sharks: exploring the con-
stitutionality of the gang death penalty enhancer’, George Mason Law Review, 12: 601–50.
Caldwell, R. (1982) ‘Specialist informant interviews’, reported in Bhatia, 1982.
Cambier-Langeveld, T. (2007a) ‘Current methods in forensic speaker identification: results of a colla-
borative exercise’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14: 223–43.
——(2007b) ‘Hot issues in the field of “language analysis”’, paper presented at the IAFPA 16th annual
conference of the International Association of Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, 2007. Available
online at: www.iafpa.net/confprog07.htm (accessed 26 November 2008).
Cameron, D. (2001) Working with Spoken Discourse, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980) ‘Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language
teaching and testing’, Applied Linguistics, 1: 1–47.
Cao, D. (2007a) Translating Law, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2007b) ‘Inter-lingual uncertainty in bilingual and multilingual law’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39: 69–83.
REFERENCES
620
Carr-Hill, R., Passingham, S., Wolf, A. and Kent, N. (1996) Lost Opportunities: The Language Skills of
Linguistic Minorities in England and Wales, London: The Basic Skills Agency.
Cashion, J.L. (1985) ‘Politeness in courtroom language’, conference paper available as Eric Document
Reproduction Service, No. ED 254 882.
Cassell, J. and McNeill, D. (1991) ‘Gesture and the poetics of prose’, Poetics Today, 12(3): 375–404.
Cassell, P.G. (1996a) ‘Miranda’s social cost: an empirical reassessment’, Northwestern University Law
Review, 90: 387–499.
——(1996b) ‘All benefits, no costs: the grand illusion of Miranda’s defenders’, Northwestern Law Review,
90: 1084–1124.
——(2001) ‘Miranda’s social cost: An empirical reassessment’,Northwestern University Law Review, 90: 387–499.
Cassell, P.G. and Hayman, B.S. (1996) ‘Police interrogation in the 1990’s: an empirical study of the
effects of Miranda’, UCLA Law Review, 43: 839–931.
Cederborg, A. (2002) ‘The discourse of police interviews: the case of sexually abused children’, in H.
Giles (ed.) Law Enforcement, Communication and Community, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
de Certeau, M. (1986) Heterologies: Discourse on the Other, trans. B. Massumi, Minneapolis, MN: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press.
Chafe, W.L. (1985) ‘Linguistic differences produced by differences between speaking and writing’, in
D.R. Olson, N. Torrance and A. Hildyard (eds) Literacy, Language and Learning: The Nature and
Consequences of Reading and Writing, London: Cambridge University Press, 105–23.
Chambers, J.K. (2008) ‘Curriculum Vitae’. Available online at: www.chass.utoronto.ca/~chambers/
(accessed December 2008).
Chambers, J.K., Trudgill, P. and Schilling-Estes, N. (eds) (2002) The Handbook of Language Variation and
Change, Oxford: Blackwell.
Chang, Y. (2004) ‘Courtroom questioning as a culturally situated persuasive genre of talk’, Discourse and
Society, 15(6): 705–22.
Channell, J. (1994) Vague Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Charrow, R. and Charrow, V. (1979) ‘Making legal language understandable: a psycholinguistic study
of jury instructions’, Columbia Law Review, 79: 1306–74.
Chaski, C. (2001) ‘Empirical evaluations of language-based author identification techniques’, Interna-
tional Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(1): 1–65.
——(2005) ‘Who’s at the keyboard? Authorship attribution in digital evidence investigations’, Interna-
tional Journal of Digital Evidence, 4: 1–13.
Chatman, S. (1978) Story and Discourse, London: Cornell University Press.
Cheng, E.K. and Yoon, A.H. (2005) ‘Does Frye or Daubert matter? A study of scientific admissibility
standards’, Virginia Law Review, 91: 471–512.
Cheshire, J. (2002) ‘Sex and gender in variationist research’, in J.K. Chambers, P. Trudgill and N.
Schilling-Estes (eds) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change, Oxford: Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. (1985) The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Christensen, T.P. (2008) ‘Judges’ deviations from norm-based direct speech in court’, Interpreting, 10:
99–127.
Cicourel, A.V. (1968) The Social Organization of Juvenile Justice, New York: Wiley.
Clankie, S. (2002) ‘Theory of genericization on brand name change’, Studies in Onomastics, 6, Lewiston,
New York: Edwin Mellen.
Clarke, C. and Milne, R. (2001) National Evaluation of the PEACE Investigative Interviewing Course,
London: Home Office.
Clayman, S. and Heritage, J. (2002) The News Interview: Journalists and Public Figures on the Air, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cliff, N. (1959) ‘Adverbs as multipliers’, Psychological Review, 66(1): 27–44.
Clift, R. and Holt, E. (2007) ‘Introduction’, in E. Holt and R. Clift (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported Speech
in Interaction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–15.
Clopper, C.G. and Pisoni, D.B. (2004) ‘Some acoustic cues for the perceptual categorization of
American English regional dialects’, Journal of Phonetics, 32: 111–40.
REFERENCES
621
——(2006) ‘Effects of region of origin and geographic mobility on perceptual dialect categorization’,
Language Variation and Change, 18: 193–221.
Cloud, M., Shepherd, G.B., Barkoff, A.N., Shur, J.V., Chi, U. and Rev, L. (2002) ‘Words without
meaning: the constitution, confessions, and mentally retarded suspects’, University of Chicago Law
Review, 69: 495–624.
Coates, L. and Wade, A. (2004) ‘Telling it like it isn’t: obscuring perpetrator responsibility for violent
crime’, Discourse and Society, 5: 189–206.
Coates, L., Bavelas, J. and Gibson, J. (1994) ‘Anomalous language in sexual assault trial judgements’,
Discourse and Society, 5: 189–206.
Cody, M.J. and McLaughlin, M.L. (1988) ‘Accounts on trial: oral arguments in traffic court’, in C.
Antaki (ed.) Analysing Everyday Explanation: A Casebook of Methods, London: Sage, 113–26.
Cohen, L. (1977) The Probable and the Provable, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Coldrey, J. (1987) ‘Aboriginals and the criminal courts’, in K.M. Hazlehurst (ed.) Ivory Scales: Black
Australia and the Law, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Cole, S.A. (2004) ‘Grandfathering evidence: fingerprint admissibility rulings from Jennings to Llera
Plaza and back again’, American Criminal Law Review, 41: 1189–1276.
Coleman, R.O. (1976) ‘A comparison of the contributions of two voice quality characteristics to the
perception of maleness and femaleness in the voice’, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 19: 168–80.
Collins, D. (2001) Reanimated Voices: Speech Reporting in a Historical Pragmatic Perspective, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
——(2007) ‘Speech reporting and the suppression of orality in seventeenth-century Russian trial dos-
siers’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 1: 175–99.
Comack, E. (1999) ‘Theoretical excursions’, in E. Comack (ed.) Locating Law: Race/Class/Gender Con-
nections, Halifax, Nova Scotia: Fernwood Publishing, 19–68.
Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Civil, of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, Cali-
fornia (1956) California Jury Instructions: Civil, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co.
——(2004) California Jury Instructions: Civil, St. Paul, MN: West Group.
Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Criminal, of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County,
California (2003) California Jury Instructions: Criminal, St. Paul, MN: West Group.
Conger, J. (1998) Winning ‘Em Over, New York: Simon & Shuster.
Conley, J.M. (2006) ‘Comment – power is as power does’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 467–75.
Conley, J.M. and O’Barr, W.M. (1990) Rules versus Relationships: The Ethnography of Legal Discourse,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(1998/2005) Just Words: Law, Language and Power, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Conquergood, D. (1994) ‘Homeboys and hoods: gang communication and cultural space’, in L. Frey (ed.)
Group Communication in Context: Studies of Natural Groups, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 23–55.
Coode, G. (1845) On Legislative Expression, or, the Language of the Written Law, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Cooke, M. (2009) ‘Interpreter ethics versus customary law: quality and compromise in aboriginal lan-
guages interpreting’, in S. Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Critical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting: A Shared
Responsibility, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 85–98.
Corcoran, C. (2004) ‘A critical examination of the use of language analysis interviews in asylum pro-
ceedings: a case study of a West African seeking asylum in the Netherlands’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 200–21.
Corley, M. and Steward, O.W. (2008) ‘Hesitation dysfluencies in spontaneous speech: the meaning of
um’, Language and Linguistics Compass, 2: 589–602.
Correia, R.D.C. (2003) ‘Translation of EU legal texts’, in A. Tosi (ed.)Crossing Barriers and Bridging Cultures:
The Challenges of Multilingual Translation for the European Union, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 21–37.
Cotter, C. and Walking Turtle, E. (2001) USA Phrasebook: Understanding Americans and Their Culture,
2nd edn, Victoria, Australia: Lonely Planet.
Cotterill, J. (2000) ‘Reading the rights: a cautionary tale of comprehension and comprehensibility’,
Forensic Linguistics, 7: 4–25.
REFERENCES
622
——(2001) ‘Domestic discord, rocky relationships: semantic prosodies in representation of marital vio-
lence in the O.J. Simpson trial’, Discourse & Society, 12(3): 291–312.
——(2002) ‘Intertextuality in the trials of O.J. Simpson’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process,
Hampshire/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the OJ Simpson Trial, Basingstoke and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2004) ‘Collocation, connotation, and courtroom semantics: lawyers’ control of witness testimony
through lexical negation’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 513–37.
Coulthard, M. (1994a) ‘On the use of corpora in the analysis of forensic texts’, Forensic Linguistics, 1(1): 27–43.
——(1994b) ‘Evaluating texts’, in R.M. Coulthard (ed), Advances in Written Text Analysis, London:
Routledge, 1–11.
——(1996) ‘The official version: audience manipulation in police records of interviews with suspects’,
in C.R. Caldas-Coulthard and M. Coulthard (eds) Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge, 166–78.
——(2002) ‘Whose voice is it? Invented and concealed dialogue in written records of verbal evidence
produced by the police’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, New York and Basingstoke:
Palgrave, 19–34:
——(2004) ‘Author identification, idiolect and linguistic uniqueness’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 431–47.
——(2005) ‘The linguist as expert witness’, Linguistics and the Human Sciences, 1(1) 39–58.
——(2007) ‘In my opinion’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European
IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 43–56.
Coulthard, M. and Johnson, A. (2007) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence,
London/New York: Routledge.
Coulthard, M. and Montgomery, M. (1981) Studies in Discourse Analysis, London: Routledge.
Coupland, N., Giles, H. and Wiemann, J.M. (1991) ‘Miscommunication’ and Problematic Talk, Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Cover, R.M. (1986) ‘Violence and the word’, Yale Law Journal, 95: 1601–29.
Cowan, A.L. (2007) ‘Skakel loses in effort to gain a new trial’, The New York Times, 26 October 2007, p. B4.
Creech, R. (2005) Law and Language in the European Community: The Paradox of a Babel ‘United in
Diversity’, Groningen: Europa Law Publishing.
——(2007) ‘Missing the mark: assessing trademarks for distinctiveness and descriptiveness in Europe’s
multilingual environment’, in K. Kredens and S. Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the Law:
International Outlooks, Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 371–78.
Crystal, D. (1995) ‘Review of Forensic Stylistics’, Language, 71(2): 381–84.
——(2008) Txtng: The Gr8 Db8, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crystal, D. and Davy, D. (1969) Investigating English Style, London: Longman.
Culpeper, J. and Kytö, M. (2000) ‘Gender voices in the spoken interaction of the past: a pilot study
based on Early Modern English trial proceedings’, in D. Kastovsky and A. Mettinger (eds) The History
of English in a Social Context, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 53–89.
Curiel, J. (25 March 2008) ‘S.F. gives ex-gang members way to get off list’, San Francisco Chronicle.
Curl, T. and Drew, P. (2008) ‘Contingency and action: a comparison of two forms of requesting’,
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 41: 1–25.
Cutler, A. (1982) ‘Guest editorial: the reliability of speech error data’, in A. Cutler (ed.) Slips of the
Tongue and Language Production, The Hague: Mouton, 7–28.
Cutler, C. (1999) ‘Yorkville crossing: white teens, hiphop, and African American English’, Journal of
Sociolinguistics, 3: 428–42.
Daley, K. and Daley-Caravella, L. (2004) Talk Your Way to the Top, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dancey, C.P. and Reidy, J. (1999) Statistics without Maths for Psychologists, London: Prentice Hall.
Dando, C., Wilcock, R. and Milne, R. (2008) ‘The cognitive interview: inexperienced police officers’
perceptions of their witness/victim interviewing practices’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 13: 59–70.
Danet, B. (1980a) ‘“Baby” or “fetus”: language and the construction of reality in a manslaughter trial’,
Semiotica, 32: 187–219.
REFERENCES
623
——(1980b) ‘Language in the legal process’, Law and Society Review, 14(3): 445–564.
Danet, B. and Bogoch, B. (1980) ‘Fixed fight or free for all? An empirical study of combativeness in the
adversary system of justice’, British Journal of Law and Society, 7: 36–60.
——(1994) ‘Orality, literacy, and performativity in Anglo-Saxon wills’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and
the Law, London: Longman, 100–35.
Danet, B. and Kermish, N.C. (1978) ‘Courtroom questioning: a sociolinguistic perspective’, in L.N.
Massery (ed.) Psychology and Persuasion in Advocacy, Washington, DC: Association of Trial Lawyers of
America, National College of Advocacy, 413–41.
Danet, B., Hoffman, K.B., Kermish, N.C., Rafn, H.J. and Stayman, D (1980) ‘An ethnography of
questioning in the courtroom’, in R.W. Shuy and A. Shnukal (eds) Language Use and the Uses of
Language, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press: 222–34.
Darby, J.K. (ed.) (1981) Speech Evaluation in Psychiatry, New York: Grune and Statton.
Darley, J.M. and Gross, P.H. (1983) ‘A hypothesis-confirming bias in labeling effects’, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 44: 20–33.
Davies, G. and Westcott, H. (1999) ‘Interviewing child witnesses under the memorandum of good
practice: a research review’, Police Research Series Paper, 115.
Davies, G., Wilson, C., Mitchell, R. and Milsom, J. (1995) Videotaping Children’s Evidence: An Evalua-
tion, London: Home Office.
Dawid, A.P. (2002) ‘Bayes’s theorem and weighing evidence by juries’, in R. Swinburne (ed) Bayes’s
Theorem, Proc. Brit. Acad. 113, 71–90.
Deak, M. (2009) ‘Despite contention over lack of translation, court upholds Plainfield man’s conviction’.
Available online at: www.mycentraljersey.com/article/20090701/NEWS/907010365 (accessed 9 July
2009).
Delbridge, A. (ed.) (1981) The Macquarie Dictionary, Sydney: Macquarie Library Pty, Ltd.
Dershowitz, A.M. (1996) ‘Life is not a dramatic narrative’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s
Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 99–105.
Dick, R.C. (1985) Legal Drafting, Toronto: Carswell.
Diehl, R.L., Lindblom, B., Hoemeke, K.A. and Fahey, R.P. (1996) ‘On explaining certain male–female
differences in the phonetic realization of vowel categories’, Journal of Phonetics, 24: 187–208.
Diez, I.G. (2005) ‘The transformation of asylum seekers’ narratives through the asylum procedure’,
paper presented at the International Association of Forensic Linguists 7th Biennial Conference on Forensic
Linguistics/Language and Law, Cardiff University, UK, July 2005.
van Dijk, T. (ed.) (1985) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 4, London: Academic Press.
——(1991) Racism and the Press, London: Routledge.
——(1997) Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction, London: Sage Publications, Inc.
——(2008) Discourse and Context: A Sociocognitive Approach, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dinwoodie, G.B. (2008) ‘What linguistics can do for trademark law’, in L. Bently, J. Davis and J.
Ginsburg (eds) Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary Critique, Cambridge Intellectual Property
and Information Law, 10, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 140–58.
Dobash, R.E. and Dobash, R.P. (1992) Women, Violence and Social Change, London: Routledge.
Docuyanan, F. (2000) ‘Governing graffiti in contested urban spaces’, Political and Legal Anthropology
Review, 23: 103–21.
Donahoe, J.J. (1998) ‘Did Miranda diminish police effectiveness?’, Stanford Law Review, 50: 1147–80.
Doty, K.L. (2007) ‘Telling tales: the role of scribes in constructing the discourse of the Salem witchcraft
trials’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 8(1): 25–41.
Doty, K.L. and Hiltunen, R. (2002) ‘“I will tell, I will tell”: confessional patterns in the Salem witch-
craft trials, 1692’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 3(2): 299–335.
——(2009) ‘Formulaic discourse and speech acts in the witchcraft trial records of Salem, 1692’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 4(1): 458–69.
Doughty, C.J. and Long, M.H. (eds) (2003) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: Blackwell.
Drew, P. (1985) ‘Analysing the use of language in courtroom interaction’, in T.A. van Dijk (ed.)
Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 3, London: Academic Press, 133–47.
REFERENCES
624
——(1990) ‘Strategies in the contest between lawyer and witness in cross-examination’, in J.N. Levi
and A.G. Walker (eds) Language in the Judicial Process, New York: Plenum Press, 39–64.
——(1992) ‘Contested evidence in courtroom cross-examination: the case of a trial for rape’, in P.
Drew and J.C. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 470–520.
——(1997) ‘“Open” class repair initiators in response to sequential sources of trouble in conversation’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 28: 69–101.
——(1998) ‘Metropolitan police service emergency and non-emergency telephone call handling: a
study of the handling of enquiries and incident reports made over the telephone by members of the
public to MPS operator centres, control rooms and the new Scotland Yard information room’, Report
to the Metropolitan Police Service, London.
——(2003) ‘Comparative analysis of talk-in-interaction in different institutional settings: a sketch’, in P.
J. Glenn, C.D. leBaron, J. Mandelbaum and R. Hopper (eds.) Studies on Language in Social Interaction,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 293–308.
——(2004) ‘Conversation analysis’, in K. Fitch and R. Sanders (eds) Handbook of Language and Social
Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 71–102.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992a) ‘Analyzing talk at work: an introduction’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage
(eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 3–65.
——(eds) (1992b) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press.
Drew, P. and Sorjonen, M.J. (1997) ‘Institutional discourse’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse Analysis: A
Multidisciplinary Introduction, London: Sage, 92–118.
Drizin, S.A. and Colgan, B.A. (2004) ‘Tales from the juvenile confession front: a guide to how standard
police interrogation tactics can produce coerced and false confessions from juvenile suspects’, in G.D.
Lassiter (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Drizin, S.A. and Leo, R.A. (2004) ‘The problem of false confession in the post-DNA world’, North
Carolina Law Review, 82: 891–1007. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1134094.
Dror, I.E., Charlton, D. and Péron, E. (2005) ‘Contextual information renders experts vulnerable to
making erroneous identifications’, Forensic Science International, 156: 74–78.
Dumas, B.K. (1990) ‘An analysis of the adequacy of federally mandated cigarette package warnings’ in J.
N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds) Language in the Judicial Process, NY: Plenum Press Corp., 309–52.
——(1992) ‘An analysis of the adequacy of cigarette package warnings: an analysis of the adequacy of
federally mandated cigarette package warnings’, Tennessee Law Review, 59: 261–304.
——(2000a) ‘US pattern jury instructions: problems and proposals’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 49–71.
——(2000b) ‘Warning labels and industry safety information standards: the case of Loctite RC/609’, in
J. Peyton and P. Griffin (eds) Language in Action: New Studies of Language in Society, Cresskill, New
Jersey: Hampton Press, 302–17.
——(2002) ‘Reasonable doubt about reasonable doubt: assessing jury instruction adequacy in a capital
case’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 246–59.
Dunstan, R. (1980) ‘Contexts for coercion: analyzing properties of courtroom “questions”’, British
Journal of Law and Society, 7: 61–77.
Durant, A. (2008) ‘“How can I tell the trade mark on a piece of gingerbread from all the other marks
on it?”, naming and meaning in verbal trade mark signs’, in L. Bently, J. Davis and J. Ginsburg (eds)
Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary Critique, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 107–39.
van Dyke, J. (2007) ‘Interference effects from grammatically unavailable constituents during sentence
processing’, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33(2): 407–30.
van Dyke, J. and McElree, B. (2006) ‘Retrieval interference in sentence comprehension’, Journal of
Memory and Language, 55(2): 157–66.
Eades, D. (1992) Aboriginal English and the Law: Communicating with Aboriginal English Speaking Clients: A
Handbook for Legal Practitioners, Brisbane: Queensland Law Society.
——(1994a) ‘A case of communicative clash: aboriginal English and the legal system’, in J. Gibbons
(ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 234–64.
——(1994b) ‘Forensic linguistics in Australia: an overview’, Forensic Linguistics, 1(2): 113–32.
REFERENCES
625
——(1995) ‘Aboriginal English on trial: the case for Stuart and Condren’, in D. Eades (ed.) Language in
Evidence: Linguistic and Legal Perspectives in Multicultural Australia, Sydney: University of New South
Wales Press, 147–74.
——(1996) ‘Verbatim courtroom transcripts and discourse analysis’, in H. Kniffka, S. Blackwell and M.
Coulthard (eds) Recent Developments in Forensic Linguistics, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang GmbH,
241–54.
——(2000) ‘“I don’t think it’s an answer to the question”: Silencing aboriginal witnesses in court’,
Language in Society, 29: 161–95.
——(2002) ‘“Evidence given in unequivocal terms”: gaining consent of aboriginal kids in court’, in J.
Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 162–79.
——(2003a) ‘Participation of second language and second dialect speakers in the legal system’, Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics, 23: 113–33.
——(2003b) ‘The politics of misunderstanding in the legal process: aboriginal English in Queensland’,
in J. House, G. Kasper and S. Ross (eds) Misunderstanding in Spoken Discourse, London: Longman,
199–226.
——(2004) ‘Understanding Aboriginal English in the legal system: a critical sociolinguistics approach’,
Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 491–512.
——(2005) ‘Applied linguistics and language analysis in asylum seeker cases’, Applied Linguistics, 26(4):
503–26.
——(2006) ‘Lexical struggle in court: aboriginal Australians versus the State’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 10
(2): 153–80.
——(2008a) ‘From expertise to advocacy: forensic linguistics and advocacy in asylum seeker cases’, in F.
Olsen, A. Lorz and D. Stein (eds) Law and Language: Theory and Society, Düsseldorf: Düsseldorf Uni-
versity Press, 87–118.
——(2008b) Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control, Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
——(2009) ‘Testing the claims of asylum seekers: the role of language analysis’, Language Assessment
Quarterly, 6(1): 30–40.
Eades, D. and Arends, J. (2004) ‘Using language analysis in the determination of national origin of
asylum seekers: an introduction’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 179–99.
Eades, D., Fraser, H., Siegel, J., McNamara, T. and Baker, B. (2003) ‘Linguistic identification in the
determination of nationality: a preliminary report’, Language Policy, 2(2): 179–99.
Eakin, J.P. (2008) Living Autobiographically: How we Create Identity in Narrative, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Eberhardt, J.L., Goff, P.A., Purdie, V.J. and Davies, P. (2004) ‘Seeing black: race, crime, and visual
processing’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87: 876–93.
Eckert, P. (1997) ‘Why ethnography?’, in U.B. Kotsinas, A.-B. Stenström and A.-M. Karlsson (eds)
Ungdomsspråk i Norden, Stockholm: MINS 43, 52–62.
Eclavea, R. (1982) ‘Annotation: admissibility of testimony concerning extrajudicial statements made to,
or in presence of, witness through an interpreter’, American Law Reports 4th series, 12: 1016.
Edelman, G. (2009) ‘Improving provision for children with speech, language and communication dif-
ficulties: the role of the voluntary sector’, Current Paediatrics, 14(3): 223–28.
Edwards, D. (1997) Discourse and Cognition, London: Sage.
——(2006) ‘Facts, norms and dispositions: practical uses of the modal would in police interrogations’,
Discourse Studies, 8(4): 475–501.
——(2008) ‘Intentionality and mens rea in police interrogations: the production of actions as crimes’,
Intercultural Pragmatics, 5(2): 177–99.
Edwards, L.H. (2006) Legal Writing: Process, Analysis, and Organization, 4th edn, New York: Aspen.
Edwards, V. (2004) Multilingualism in the English-speaking World, Oxford: Blackwell.
Egelko, R. (2008) ‘Court limits defendant’s right to seek mercy’, The San Francisco Chronicle, 25 July
2008. Available online at: www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article/comments/view?f=/c/a/2008/07/25/
BA5511V00L.DTL (accessed 6 August 2009).
Eggins, S. (1994) An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics, London: Pinter Publishers Ltd.
REFERENCES
626
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual Consent, London and New York: Routledge.
——(2002) ‘(Re)contextualizing complainant’s accounts of sexual assault’, The International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 9(2): 193–212.
——(2003) ‘Coercing gender: language in sexual assault adjudication processes’, in J. Holmes and M.
Meyerhoff (eds) The Handbook of Language and Gender, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 645–70.
——(2006) ‘Constraining the boundaries of gendered identities: trial discourse and judicial decision-
making’, in J. Baxter (ed.) Speaking Out: The Female Voice in Public Contexts, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 139–58.
——(2007) ‘Legal discourse and the cultural intelligibility of gendered meanings’, Journal of Socio-
linguistics, 11(4): 452–77.
Eichhorn, L. (1989) ‘Social science findings and the jury’s ability to disregard evidence under the federal
rules of evidence’, Law & Contemporary Problems, 42: 341–53.
Ellis, R. (2003) Task-based Language Learning and Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. and Barkhuizen, G. (2005) Analysing Learner Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, S. (1994) ‘The Yorkshire ripper enquiry: part I’, Forensic Linguistics, 1: 197–206.
Ellison, L. (2001) The Adversarial Process and the Vulnerable Witness, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elwork, A., Sales, B. and Alfini, J. (1977) ‘Juridic decisions: in ignorance of law or in the light of it?’,
Law and Human Behavior, 1: 123–41.
——(1982) Making Jury Instructions Understandable, Charlottesville, VA: Michie.
Engberg, J. and Heller, D. (2008) ‘Vagueness and indeterminacy in law’, in V.K. Bhatia, C.N. Candlin
and J. Engberg (eds) Legal Discourse across Cultures and Systems, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University
Press.
Engel, S. (2000) Context is Everything: The Nature of Memory, New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Ervin Tripp, S. (1970) ‘Discourse agreement: how children answer questions’, in J. Hayes (ed.) Cognition
and the Development of Language, New York: Wiley, 79–109.
Esbensen, F.L., Winfree, T., He, N. and Taylor, T.J. (2001) ‘Youth gangs and definitional issues: when
is a gang a gang and why does it matter?’, Crime & Delinquency, 47: 105–30.
Espiritu, N. (2005) ‘(E)racing youth: the racialized construction of California’s Proposition 21 and the
development of alternative contestations’, Cleveland State Law Review, 52: 189–208.
Estrich, S. (1987) Real Rape, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
European Commission (2003) ‘Joint practical guide of the European Parliament, the Council and the
Commission for persons involved in the drafting of legislation within the community institutions’.
Evans, M., McIntosh, W., Lin, J. and Cates, C. (2007) ‘Recounting the courts: applying automated
content analysis to enhance empirical legal research’, Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 4(4):1007–39.
Faerk, C. and Kasper, G. (1987) ‘Perspectives on language transfer’, Applied Linguistics, 8(2): 111–36.
Faigman, D., Kaye, D., Saks, M. and Cheng, E. (2007) Modern Scientific Evidence: The Law and Science of
Expert Testimony, Minneapolis: West Pub. Co.
Fairclough, N. (1989) Language and Power, London: Longman.
——(1995) Media Discourse, London: Arnold.
——(2001) ‘Critical discourse analysis as a method in social scientific research’, in R. Wodak and M.
Meyer (eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage, 212–28.
FCA (Federal Court of Australia) (2003) Applicant WAFV of 2002 v. Refugee Review Tribunal [2003]
(17 January 2003). Available online at: www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/FCA/2003/16.html (accessed
26 November 2008).
Feldman, A.D. (2004) ‘High court study: a divided court in more ways than one: the supreme court of
Delaware and its distinctive model for judicial efficacy, 1997–2003’, Albany Law Review, 67: 849–92.
Felton Rosulek, L. (2008) ‘Manipulative silence and social representation in the closing arguments of a
child sexual abuse case’, Text & Talk, 28(4): 529–50.
——(2009a) ‘First person plural pronouns as persuasive devices in the closing arguments of criminal
trials’, poster at the American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL) Conference.
——(2009b) The Sociolinguistic Construction of Reality in the Closing Arguments of Criminal Trials, unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL.
REFERENCES
627
——(forthcoming a) ‘The sociolinguistic creation of opposing representations of defendants and vic-
tims’, International Journal of Speech, Language, and Law.
——(forthcoming b) ‘Legitimation and the heteroglossic nature of closing arguments’, GURT 2008: Proceed-
ings of the Georgetown University Roundtable in Linguistics, Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Filipovic, L. (2007) ‘Language as a witness: insights from cognitive linguistics’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 14: 245–67.
Findley, K.A. and Scott, M.S. (2006) ‘The multiple dimensions of tunnel vision in criminal cases’,
Wisconsin Law Review, 2: 291–397.
Fischoff, S. (2005) ‘Gangsta’ rap and a murder in Bakersfield’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29:
795–805.
Fisher, R.P. and Geiselman, R.E. (1992) Memory-Enhancing Techniques for Investigative Interviewing: The
Cognitive Interview, Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Fisher, R.P., Geiselman, R.E. and Amador, M. (1989) ‘Field test of the cognitive interview: enhancing
the recollection of actual victims and witnesses of crime’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 74: 722–27.
Fisiak, J. (ed.) (1996) Collins English–Polish Dictionary, Warsaw: Polska Oficyna Wydawnicza.
Fitch, W.T. and Giedd, J. (1999) ‘Morphology and development of the human vocal tract: a study
using magnetic resonance imaging’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106: 1511–22.
Fletcher, P. and Ingram, R. (1995) ‘Grammatical impairment’, in P. Fletcher and B. MacWhinney (eds)
The Handbook of Child Language, Oxford: Blackwell, 603–22.
Flückiger, A. (2008) ‘The ambiguous principle of clarity of the law’, in A. Wagner and S. Cacciaguidi-
Fahy (eds) Obscurity and Clarity in the Law: Prospects and Challenges, Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 9–24.
Fodor, J. and Garrett, M. (1967) ‘Some syntactic determinants of sentential complexity’, Perceptions and
Psychophysics, 2(7): 289–96.
Foley, T. (2006) ‘Lawyers and legal interpreters: different clients, different culture’, Interpreting, 8(1): 97–104.
Foulkes, P. and Docherty, G. (2006) ‘The social life of phonetics and phonology’, Journal of Phonetics,
34: 409–38.
Fourakis, M. and Port, R. (1986) ‘Stop epenthesis in English’, Journal of Phonetics, 14: 197–221.
Fowler, R. (1985) ‘Power’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol 4, London: Aca-
demic Press, 61–82.
Foyle, R. (2002) ‘Legislative language in the EU: the crucible’, International Journal for the Semiotics of
Law, 15: 361–74.
Framer, I. (2001) ‘Interpreters and their impact on the criminal justice system: the Alejandro Ramírez
Case’, Proteus, IX(1–2, 1–6). Available online at: http://languageaccess.us/uploads/Interpreters%
20and%20Their%20Impact%20PDF.pdf (accessed 5 August 2009).
Francis, G. (1994) ‘Labelling discourse: an aspect of nominal-group lexical cohesion’, in Coulthard, R.
M. (ed.) Advances in Written Text Analysis, London: Routledge, 83–101.
Francis, W.N. and Kučera, H. (1982) Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and Grammar, Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Fraser, B. (1975) ‘Warning and threatening’, Centrum, 3: 169–80.
——(1980) ‘Conversational mitigation’, Journal of Pragmatics, 4: 341–50.
——(1998) ‘Threatening revisited’, Forensic Linguistics: International Journal of Speech, Language and Law, 5(2):
159–73.
Fraser, B. and Freedgood, L. (1999) ‘Interpreter alterations to pragmatic features in trial testimony’,
paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Association for Applied Linguistics (21,
Stanford, CT, 6–9 March, 1999).
Fraser, H. (2003) ‘Issues in transcription: factors affecting the reliability of transcripts as evidence in legal
cases’, Forensic Linguistics, 10(2): 203–26.
——(2009) ‘The role of “educated native speakers” in providing language analysis for the determination
of the origin of asylum seekers’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 16(1): 113–38.
French, P. and Harrison, P. (2006) ‘Investigative and evidential applications of forensic speech science’,
in A. Heaton-Armstrong, E. Shepherd, G. Gudjonsson and D. Wolchover (eds) Witness Testimony,
Psychological, Investigative and Evidential Perspectives, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
REFERENCES
628
——(2007) ‘Position statement concerning use of impressionistic likelihood terms in forensic speaker
comparison cases’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 137–44.
French, P., Harrison, P. and Windsor Lewis, J. (2006) ‘R v. John Samuel Humble: the Yorkshire ripper
hoaxer trial’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13: 255–73.
Friedman, L.M. (1993) ‘How I write’, 4 SCRIBES Journal of Legal Writing, 3: 5.
Fries, C.C. (1952) The Structure of English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company Inc.
Frontline, (2006) ‘The Enemy Within’, item on Public Broadcasting Station PBS, July 24, 2006
Fuhrman, M. (1998) Murder in Greenwich: Who Killed Martha Moxley? New York: HarperCollins Pub-
lishers.
Fuller, J. (1993) ‘Hearing between the lines: style switching in a courtroom setting’, Pragmatics, 3: 29–43.
de Fruyt, F., Bockstaele, M., Taris, R. and van Hiel, A. (2006) ‘Police interview competencies: assess-
ment and associated traits’, European Journal of Personality, 20(7): 567–84.
Galasiński, D. (2000) The Language of Deception: A Discourse Analytical Study, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Galatolo, R. (2007) ‘Active voicing in court’, in E. Holt and R. Clift (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported
Speech in Interaction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 195–220.
Galatolo, R. and Mizzau, M. (2005) ‘Quoting dialogues and the construction of the narrative point of
view in legal testimony: the role of prosody and gesture’, Studies in Communication Science, Special
Issue ‘Argumentation in Dialogic Interaction’, June 2005: 217–31.
Galindo, L. (1993) ‘The language of gangs, drugs and prison life among Chicanas’, Latino Studies Journal,
4: 23–43.
Garcia, A. (1998) ‘IsMiranda dead, was it overruled, or is it irrelevant?’, St. Thomas Law Review, 10: 461–98.
Gardner, H. (2004) Changing Minds, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Garfinkel, H. and Sacks, H. (1970) ‘On formal structures of practical actions’, in J.C. McKinney and E.
A. Tiryakian (eds) Theoretical Sociology, New York: Appleton Century Crofts, 338–66.
Garner, B. (1995) A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage, 2nd edn, Oxford and New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
——(1999a) The Winning Brief, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(ed.) (1999b) Black’s Law Dictionary, 7th edn, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co.
——(2003) Garner’s Modern American Usage, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
——(ed.) (2004a) Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th edn, Eagan, MN: West Publishers.
——(2004b) The Winning Brief, 2nd edn., Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Gates, H.L. (1995) ‘Thirteen ways of looking at a black man’, New Yorker, 23 October 1995.
Gawande, A. (2009) ‘The cost conundrum’, The New Yorker, Annals of Medicine section, 1 June 2009,
36–44.
Geiselman, R.E., Fisher, R.P., MacKinnon, D.P. and Holland, H.L. (1986) ‘Enhancement of eye-
witness memory with the cognitive interview’, American Journal of Psychology, 99: 385–401.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006) ‘Thinking big with small stories in narrative and identity analysis’, Narrative
Inquiry, 16(1): 122–30.
Gergen, K. (1999) An Invitation to Social Construction, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gernsbacher, M. and Givón, T. (eds) (1995) Coherence in Spontaneous Text, Philadelphia, PA and
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gewirtz, P. (1996a) ‘Victims and voyeurs: two narrative problems at the criminal trial’, in P. Brooks and
P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 135–61.
——(1996b) ‘Narrative and rhetoric in the law’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories: Nar-
rative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2–13.
Gfroerer, S. (2006) ‘Sprechererkennung und Tonträgerauswertung’, in G. Widmaier (ed.) Münchener
Anwaltshandbuch Strafverteidigung, München: Beck, 2505–26.
Ghai, Y. (1997) Hong Kong’s New Constitutional Order: The Resumption of Chinese Sovereignty and the Basic
Law, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
REFERENCES
629
Giambruno, C. (2008) ‘The role of the interpreter in the governance of sixteenth- and seventeenth-
century Spanish colonies in the “New World”’, in C. Valero Garcés and A. Martin (eds) Crossing
Borders in Community Interpreting: Definitions and Dilemmas, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Giannelli, P.C. (2003) ‘Admissibility of scientific evidence’,Oklahoma City University Law Review, 28: 1–15.
——(2007) ‘Wrongful convictions and forensic science: the need to regulate crime labs’, North Carolina
Law Review, 86: 163–235.
Gibbons, J. (ed.) (1994) Language and the Law, London: Longman.
——(1995) ‘What got lost? The place of electronic recording and interpreters in police interviews’, in
D. Eades (ed.) Language in Evidence: Linguistic and Legal Perspectives in Multicultural Australia, Sydney:
University of New South Wales Press, 175–86.
——(2001a) ‘Revising the language of New South Wales police procedures: applied linguistics in
action’, Applied Linguistics, 22(4): 439–69.
——(2001b) ‘Legal transformations in Spanish: an “audiencia” in Chile’, Forensic Linguistics, 8(1): 24–43.
——(2003) Forensic Linguistics: An Introduction to Language in the Justice System, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gibson, W. (1961) ‘Literary minds and judicial style’, New York University Law Review, 36: 915–30.
Giles, H. and Powesland, P.F. (1975a) ‘A social psychological model of speech diversity’, in H. Giles
and P. Powesland (eds) Speech Style and Social Evaluation, New York: Harcourt, Brace, 154–70.
——(1975b) Speech Style and Social Evaluation, London: Academic Press.
Gilmore, G. (1974) The Death of Contract, Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press.
Gilvelber, D. (1997) ‘Meaningless acquittals, meaningful convictions: do we reliably acquit the inno-
cent?’, Rutgers Law Review, 49: 1317–96.
Gitomer, J. (2007) Little Green Book of Getting Your Way, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times Press.
Godfrey, D and Harris, D. (1971) Basic Elements of Intelligence, Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office.
Goffman, E. (1959) Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York: Doubleday.
——(1981a) Forms of Talk, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
——(1981b) ‘Footing’, in Forms of Talk, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 124–57.
——(1986) Frame Analysis, Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003) Hearing Gesture, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gomez, P. (2004) ‘It is not so simply because an expert says it is so: the reliability of gang expert tes-
timony regarding membership in criminal street gangs: pushing the limits of Texas Rule of Evidence
702’, St. Mary’s Law Review, 34: 581–622.
Goodman, G. (1984) ‘The child witness: an introduction’, Journal of Social Issues, 40(2): 1–7.
Goodman, G. and Melinder, A. (2007) ‘Child witness research and forensic interviews with young
children: a review’, Legal and Criminal Psychology, 12: 1–19.
Goodrich, P. (1987) Legal Discourse: Studies in Linguistics, Rhetoric and Legal Analysis, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
——(1990) Languages of Law: From Logics of Memory to Nomadic Masks, London: Weidenfeld and
Nicholson.
Goodwin, C. (1981) Conversational Organization, New York: Academic Press.
——(1994) ‘Professional vision’, American Anthropologist, 96(3): 606–33. Available online at: www.
sscnet.ucla.edu/clic/cgoodwin/94prof_vis.pdf (accessed 6 August 2009).
——(2000) ‘Practices of seeing: visual analysis: an ethnomethodological approach’, in T. van Leeuwen
and C. Jewitt (eds) Handbook of Visual Analysis, London: Sage Publications. Available online at: www.
sscnet.ucla.edu/clic/cgoodwin/publish.htm (accessed 6 August 2009).
——(2003) ‘Pointing as situated practice’, in S. Kita (ed.) Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cogni-
tion Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 217–41.
——(2007) ‘Participation, stance, and affect in the organization of activities’,Discourse and Society, 18(1): 53–73.
Goodwin, C. and Goodwin, M. (2004) ‘Participation’, in A. Duranti (ed.) A Companion to Linguistic
Anthropology, Oxford: Blackwell, 222–44.
Gordon-Smith, D. (1989) ‘The drafting process in the European Community’, Statute Law Review, 10:
56–68.
REFERENCES
630
Gorman, T.P., White, J., Brooks, G. and English, F. (1990) Language for Learning, London: Department
for Education and Science.
Gotti, M. (2005) ‘Vagueness in the model law on international commercial arbitration’, in V.K. Bhatia,
J. Engberg, M. Gotti and D. Heller (eds) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang, 227–53.
Government of Hong Kong, (1984) Sino-British Joint Declaration 1984.
——(1990) The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China.
Government of Hong Kong, Court of Final Appeal, (1999) ‘Chan Kam Nga’, Hong Kong Law Report
Digest 1 at 310, HKSAR.
Graham, T. (2007) ‘Neulander appeals come to an end’, Philadelphia Inquirer, 18 April 2007, p. B01.
Grant, T. (2005) Authorship Attribution in a Forensic Context, unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham.
——(2007) ‘Quantifying evidence for forensic authorship analysis’, International Journal of Speech, Lan-
guage and the Law, 14(1): 1–25.
Grant, T. and Baker, K. (2001) ‘Identifying reliable, valid markers of authorship: a response to Chaski’,
Forensic Linguistics, 8(1): 66–79.
Grant, T., Smith, D. J., Kredens, K. and Spencer, S. (2009) ‘Identifying an author’s native language’,
unpublished research report produced for Qinetiq (Intelligence and Digital Security Division).
Greatbatch, D. (1986) ‘Aspects of topical organization in news interviews: the use of agenda-shifting
procedures by interviewees’, Media, Culture and Society, 8: 441–55.
——(1988) ‘A turn-taking system for British news interviews’, Language in Society, 17: 401–30.
Grebler, G. (2005a) ‘“And then what did she say?” Making confession statements believable and com-
pelling (even when they are false)’, paper presented at the International Association of Forensic Linguists
7th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and Law, Cardiff University, UK, July 2005.
——(2005b) ‘Language issues in (false) confession evidence’, paper presented at International Linguistic
Association 50th Anniversary Conference on Language and Law, New York City, April 2005.
Greene, J. and Pranis, K. (2007) GangWars: The Failure of Enforcement Tactics and the Need for Effective
Public Safety Strategies, Washington, DC: Justice Policy Institute.
Greene, S. (2009) ‘A sign of apathy for deaf’, The Denver Post, 7 July 2009. Available online at: www.
denverpost.com/news/ci_12818667 (accessed 13 July 2009).
Greenfield, S. (2008) ID: The Quest for Identity in the 21st Century, London: Sceptre.
Greisbach, R. (1999) ‘Estimation of speaker height from formant frequencies’, Forensic Linguistics, 6: 265–77.
Grice, H.P. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics 3:
Speech Acts, New York: Academic Press, 41–58.
Griffiths, A. and Milne, R. (2005) ‘Will it all end in tiers: police interviews with suspects in Britain’, in
T. Williamson (ed.) Investigative Interviewing: Rights, Research, Regulation, Willan: Devon, 167–89.
Grimes, B. (1992) Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 12th edn, Dallas, TX: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Grisso, T. (1980) ‘Juveniles’ capacity to waive Miranda rights: an empirical analysis’, California Law
Review, 68: 1134–66.
Groopman, J. (2007) How Doctors Think, New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Groscup, J. and Penrod, S. (2003) ‘Battle of the standards for experts in criminal cases: police vs. psy-
chologists’, Seton Hall Law Review, 33: 1141–65.
Gross, S.R., Jacoby, K., Matheson, D.J., Montgomery, N. and Patil, S. (2005) ‘Exonerations in the
United States, 1989 through 2003’, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 95(2). Available online at:
www.ssrn.com/abstract=753084 (accessed 6 August 2009).
Gruber, K. (2007) A Linguistic and Ethnographic Analysis of Apology Narratives Performed in the Context of
Federal Sentencing Hearings, unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Chicago.
Gubrium, J. and Holstein, J. (2009)Analyzing Narrative Reality, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Gudjonsson, G. (1992) The Psychology of Interrogations, Confessions and Testimony, Chichester: John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.
Gumperz, J. (1982) Discourse Strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J., Aulakh, G. and Kaltman, H. (1982) ‘Thematic structure and progression in discourse’, in J.
Gumperz (ed.) Language and Social Identity, New York: Cambridge University Press, 22–56.
REFERENCES
631
Gunnarsson, B.-L (1984) ‘Functional comprehensibility of legislative texts: Experiments with a Swedish
Act of Parliament’, Text 4(1–3): 71–105.
Gusfield, J. (1980) Illusions of Authority, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Gustafsson, M. (1975) Some Syntactic Properties of English Law Language, Publication No. 4, Department of
English, Turku: University of Turku.
——(1984), ‘The syntactic features of binomial expressions in legal English’, Text, 4(1/3): 123–41.
Haack, S. (2008) ‘What’s wrong with litigation-driven science? An essay in legal epistemology’, Seton
Hall Law Review, 38: 1053–83.
Hager, J. (1959) ‘Let’s simplify legal language’, Rocky Mountain Law Review, 32: 74–86.
Hale, S. (1996) ‘Pragmatic considerations in court interpreting’, Australian Review of Applied Linguistics,
19: 61–72.
——(1999) ‘Interpreters’ treatment of discourse markers in courtroom questions’, Forensic Linguistics, 6
(1): 57–82.
——(2001) ‘How are courtroom questions interpreted? An analysis of Spanish interpreters’ practices’, in
I. Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges. Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St. Jerome.
——(2003). ‘“Excuse me, the interpreter wants to speak” – Interpreter interruptions in the courtroom:
why do interpreters interrupt and what are the consequences?’, Proceedings of the Third Critical Link
Conference, Montreal, May 2001. Available online at: www.criticallink.org/proceedings/5.pdf (acces-
sed 6 August 2009).
——(2004) The Discourse of Court Interpreting: Discourse Practices of the Law, the Witness and the Interpreter,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
——(2007) Community Interpreting, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hale, S. and Campbell, S. (2002) ‘The interaction between text difficulty and translation accuracy’,
Babel, 48: 14–33.
Hale, S. and Gibbons, J. (1999) ‘Varying realities: patterned changes in the interpreter’s representation
of courtroom and external realities’, Applied Linguistics, 20(2): 203–20.
Halliday, M.A K. (1973) Language in a Social Perspective: Explorations in the Functions of Language, London:
Edward Arnold.
——(1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning, London: Edward
Arnold.
——(1989) Spoken and Written Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 2nd edn, London: Edward Arnold.
Hamlyn, B., Phelps, A., Turtel, J. and Sattar, G. (2004) ‘Are special measures working? Evidence from
surveys of vulnerable and intimidated witnesses’, Home Office Research Study, No. 283, London:
HMSO.
Hammersley, M. (2006) ‘Ethnography: problems and prospects’, Ethnography and Education, 1(1): 3–14.
Hanks, P. (1971) Hamlyn Encyclopedic World Dictionary, Feltham: Hamlyn.
Hansen, M. (2002) ‘Dr. Cop on the stand: judges accept police officers as experts too quickly, critics
say’, American Bar Association Journal, 31–4.
Hardcastle, R.A. (1997) ‘Cusum; a credible method for the determination of authorship?’, Science and
Justice, 37(2), 129–38.
Harris, D. (1976) Basic Elements of Intelligence, Washington, DC: US Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration.
Harris, S. (1984) ‘Questions as a mode of control in magistrates’ courts’, International Journal of the
Sociology of Language, 49: 5–28.
——(2001) ‘Fragmented narratives and multiple tellers: witness and defendant accounts in trials’, Dis-
course Studies, 3(1): 53–74.
——(2003) ‘Politeness and power: making and responding to “requests” in institutional settings’, Text,
23(1): 27–52.
——(2005) ‘Telling stories and giving evidence: the hybridisation of narrative and non-narrative modes
of discourse in a sexual assault trial’, in J. Thornborrow and J. Coates (eds) The Sociolinguistics of
Narrative, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 215–37.
REFERENCES
632
Harvey, M. (2000) ‘A beginner’s course in legal translation: the case of culture-bound terms’, ASTTI/
ETII: 357–69.
——(2002) ‘What’s so special about legal translation?’, Meta, 47(2): 177–85.
Hastie, R. (1993) ‘Algebraic models of juror decision processes’, in R. Hastie (ed.) Inside the Juror,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 84–115.
Hastie, R. and Pennington, N. (1996) ‘The O.J. Simpson stories: behavioral scientists’ reflections on
“The People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson”’, University of Colorado Law
Review, 67: 957–76.
Hastie, R., Penrod, S. and Pennington, N. (1983) Inside the Jury, Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
ten Have, P. (2007) Doing Conversation Analysis (2nd edn), London: Sage.
Haworth, K. (2006) ‘The dynamics of power and resistance in police interview discourse’, Discourse &
Society, 17(6): 739–59.
——(2009) ‘Police interview discourse and its role(s) in the judicial process’, unpublished thesis, Uni-
versity of Nottingham.
Heaps, C. and Henley, T. (1999) ‘Language matters: wording considerations in hazard perception and
warning comprehension’, Journal of Psychology, 133: 341–42.
Heath, C. (1986) Body Movement and Speech in Medical Interaction, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Heffer, C. (2002) ‘“If you were standing in Marks and Spencers”: narrativisation and comprehension in
the English summing-up’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 228–45.
——(2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided Analysis of Legal–Lay Discourse, Basingstoke/New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2006) ‘Beyond “reasonable doubt”: The criminal standard of proof instruction as communicative
act’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2): 159–188.
——(2007) ‘Judgement in court: evaluating participants in courtroom discourse’, in K. Kredens and S.
Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the Law: International Outlooks, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang,
145–79.
——(2008a) ‘Report of Dr. Christopher Heffer dated 28 August 2008. re Bambino Mio Limited,
Claimant and Cazitex N.V., Defendant’, unpublished manuscript.
——(2008b) ‘The language and communication of jury instruction’, in J. Gibbons and M.T. Turell
(eds) Dimensions of Forensic Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 47–65.
——(2010) Forensic Discourse, London and New York: Continuum.
Heinemann, T. (2006) ‘“Will you or can’t you?” Displaying entitlement in interrogative requests’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 38: 1081–1104.
Henning, T. (1999) ‘Judicial summation: the trial judge’s version of the facts or the chimera of neu-
trality’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 12: 171–213.
Heritage, J. (1984) ‘A change-of-state token and aspects of its sequential placement’, in J.M. Atkinson
and J. Heritage (eds) Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 299–346.
——(1985) ‘Analysing news interviews: aspects of the production of talk for an overhearing audience’,
in T.A. van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 3, London: Academic Press, 95–119.
——(2002) ‘Ad hoc inquiries: two preferences in the design of routine questions in an open con-
text’, in D.W. Maynard, H. Houtkoop-Steenstra, N.C. Schaeffer and J. van der Zouwen (eds)
Standardization and Tacit Knowledge: Interaction and Practice in the Survey Interview, Chichester: Wiley,
313–34.
——(2003) ‘Designing questions and setting agendas in the news interview’, in P. Glenn, C.D.
LeBaron, J. Mandelbaum (eds) Studies in Language and Social Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates Inc, 151–77.
Heritage, J. and Clayman, S. (2010) Talk in Action: Interactions, Identities, and Institutions, New York:
Blackwell.
Heritage, J. and Sorjonen, M. (1994) ‘Constituting and maintaining activities across sequences: And-
prefacing as a feature of question design’, Language in Society, 23: 1–29.
REFERENCES
633
Heritage, J. and Watson, D. (1977) ‘Recent developments in the sociology of language in Britain’,
Sociolinguistics Newsletter, 8: 2–6.
——(1980) ‘Aspects of the properties of formulations in natural conversations: Some instances analysed’,
Semiotica 30–33/4: 245–62.
Heritage, J. and Watson, R. (1979) ‘Formulations as conversational objects’, in G. Psathas (ed.) Everyday
Language: Studies in Ethnomethodology, New York: Irvington Press, 123–62.
Hertog, E., Corsellis, A., Rasmussen, K.W., van den Bosch, Y., van der Vlis, E. and Keijzer-Lambooy,
H. (2007) ‘From Aequitas to Aequalitas: Establishing standards in legal interpreting and translation in
the European Union’, in C. Wadensjö, B. Englund Dimitrova and A.L. Nilsson (eds) The Critical
Link 4, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 151–66.
Hewitt, B. (2003) ‘A plea for mercy: as his family fights to free him, convicted murderer Michael
Skakel finally speaks’, People Weekly, 59.18, 12 May 2003.
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: A Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heymann, P. (1984) Testimony before the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the
House Committee on the Judiciary 96th Congress, March 4, 36–39.
Hibbitts, B. (1995) ‘Making motions: the embodiment of law in gesture’, The Journal of Contemporary
Legal Issues, 6: 51–82.
Hickey, L. (1993) ‘Presupposition under cross-examination’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 6
(16): 89–109.
Hill, C.A. and King, C. (2004) ‘How do German contracts do as much with fewer words?’ Chicago-
Kent Law Review, 79: 889–926.
Hill, M. (2003) ‘Identifying the source of critical details in confessions’, Forensic Linguistics, 10(1): 23–61.
Hillenbrand, J., Getty, L.A., Clark, M.J. and Wheeler, K. (1995) ‘Acoustic characteristics of American
English vowels’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97: 3099–3111.
Hiltunen, R. (1984) ‘The type and structure of clausal embedding in legal English’, Studies of Legal
Discourse, 4(1/3): 107–21.
——(1996) ‘“Tell me, be you a witch?”: questions in the Salem witchcraft trials of 1692’, International
Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 9(25): 17–37.
——(2004) ‘Salem 1692: a case of courtroom discourse in a historical perspective’, in R. Hiltunen and
S. Watanabe (eds) Approaches to Style and Discourse in English, Osaka: Osaka University Press, 3–21.
Hirsch, S. (1998) Pronouncing and Persevering: Gender and the Discourses of Disputing in an African Islamic
Court, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hobbs, P. (2003a) ‘“Is that what we’re here about?” A lawyer’s use of impression management in a
closing argument at trial’, Discourse and Society, 14(3): 273–90.
——(2003b) ‘“You must say it for him”: reformulating a witness’ testimony on cross-examination at
trial’, Text, 23(4): 477–511.
——(2008) ‘It’s not what you say, but how you say it: the role of personality and identity in trial suc-
cess’, Critical Discourse Studies, 5(3): 231–48.
Hoey, M. (2005) Lexical Priming. A New Theory of Words and Language, London: Routledge.
Hollien, H. (1990) The Acoustics of Crime, New York: Plenum.
——(2002) Forensic Voice Identification, London: Academic Press.
Holmberg, U. (2004) ‘Crime victims’ experiences of police interviews and their inclination to provide
or omit information’, International Journal of Police Science and Management, 6: 155–70.
Holmberg, U. and Christianson, S.A. (2002) ‘Murderers’ and sexual offenders’ experiences of police
interviews and their inclination to admit or deny crimes’, Behavioural Sciences and the Law, 20(1–2):
31–45.
Holmes, D.I. (1998) ‘The evolution of stylometry in the humanities’, Literary and Linguistic Computing,
13(3): 111–17.
Holt, E. (2009) ‘Reported speech’, in S. D’Hondt, J.O. Östman and J. Verschueren (eds) The Pragmatics
of Interaction: Handbook of Pragmatics Highlights 4, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 190–205.
Holt, E and Clift, R. (eds) (2007) Reporting Talk: Reported Speech in Interaction (Studies in Interactional
Sociolinguistics 24). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
REFERENCES
634
Holt, E.J. and Johnson, A.J. (2006) ‘Formulating the facts: Questions and repeats in police/suspect
interviews’, Paper at International Conference on Conversation Analysis, Helsinki, May 2006.
Home Office (1989) Pigot Committee: Report of the Advisory Group on Video Evidence, London: HMSO.
——(1992) Circular 22, HMSO: London.
——(1998) Speaking up for Justice: Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of Vul-
nerable or Intimidated Witnesses in the Criminal Justice System, London: HMSO.
——(2002/2007) Achieving the Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance for Vulnerable and Intimi-
dated Witnesses, including Children, London: Home Office.
——(2007) Achieving the Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Wit-
nesses, and Using Special Measures, London: Home Office.
——(2008) PACE Code C: Code of Practice for the Detention, Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police
Officers, London: HMSO.
Home Office and the Department of Health (1992) Memorandum of Good Practice on Video-recorded
Interviews with Child Witnesses for Criminal Proceedings, London: HMSO.
Home Office, Crown Prosecution Service and Department for Constitutional Affairs (2005) Code of
Practice for Victims of Crime, London: Office for Criminal Justice Reform.
Hostettler, J. (2006) Fighting for Justice: The History and Origins of Adversary Trial, Hook: Waterside Press.
Hotta, S. (2007a) ‘A linguistic exploration of trademark dilution’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J.
Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the
Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 179–86.
——(2007b) ‘Morphosyntactic structure of Japanese trademarks and their distinctiveness: a new model
for linguistic analysis of trademarks’, in K. Kredens and S. Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the
Law: International Outlooks, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang, 379–92.
Hotta, S. and Fujita, M. (2007) ‘The psycholinguistic foundation of trademarks: an experimental study’,
in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on
Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 173–78.
House, J. (1977) A Model of Translation Quality Assessment, Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
van der Houwen, F. (2005) Negotiating Disputes and Achieving Judgments on Judge Judy, unpublished PhD
dissertation, University of Southern California.
Howald, B.S. (2009) ‘Authorship attribution under the rules of evidence: empirical approaches in the
layperson legal system’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 15: 219–47.
Howard, R.M. (1995) ‘Plagiarisms, authorships, and the academic death penalty’, College English, 57,
788–805.
——(1999) ‘The new abolitionism comes to plagiarism’, in L. Buranen and A.M. Roy (eds). Perspectives
on Plagiarism and Intellectual Property in a Postmodern World, Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 87–95.
Huckin, T. (2002) ‘Textual silence and the discourse of homelessness’, Discourse and Society, 13: 347–72.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G.K. (2002) The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hudson, T., de Jong, G., McDougall, K., Harrison, P. and Nolan, F. (2007) ‘F0 statistics for 100 young
male speakers of standard southern British English’, Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, Saarbrücken, Germany, 1809–12. Available online at: www.icphs2007.de/con-
ference/papers/1570/1570.pdf.
Hunston, S. and Sinclair, J. (2000) ‘A local grammar of evaluation’, in S. Hunston and G. Thompson
(eds) Evaluation in Text: Authorial Stance and the Construction of Discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hunt, J. and Borgida, E. (2001) ‘“Is that what I said?”: witnesses’ responses to interviewer modifica-
tions’, Law and Human Behaviour, 25: 583–603.
Hunt, M. (1996) ‘The sociolinguistics of tagging and Chicano gang graffiti’, unpublished PhD dis-
sertation, U. Southern California.
Huntington, R. (1991) ‘European unity and the tower of Babel’, Boston University International Law
Journal, 9: 321–46.
Hutchby, I. and Wooffitt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis, Oxford: Polity Press.
REFERENCES
635
Hymes, D. (1977) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach, London: Tavistock Publica-
tions.
——(1981) “In Vain I Tried to Tell You”: Essays in Native American Ethnopoetics, Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Ibrahim, A. (1999) ‘Becoming black: rap and hip-hop, race, gender, identity and the politics of ESL
learning’, TESOL Quarterly, 33: 349–69.
Ibrahim, R. (2008) ‘Performance in L1 and L2 observed in an Arabic–Hebrew bilingual aphasic following brain
tumor: A case constitutes double dissociation’, Psychology Research and Behaviour Management, 1: 11–9.
Ibrahim, Z. (2007) ‘The interpreter as advocate. Malaysian court interpreting as a case in point’, in C.
Wadensjö, B. Englund Dimitrova and A.L. Nilsson (eds) The Critical Link 4. Professionalisation of
Interpreting in the Community, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Ikane, J. (2007) ‘Problems in communicating the suspect’s rights in interpreted police interviews’,
Applied Linguistics, 28(1): 87–112.
Inbau, F.E., Reid, J.E. and Buckley, J.P. (1986) Criminal Interrogation and Confessions, Baltimore, MN:
Williams and Wilkins.
Istratescu, C. (2007) Fighting Gang Allegations: A Conceptual and Methodological Approach, CPDA:
Advanced Trial Skills Institute.
Jackson, A. (2004) Prosecuting Gang Cases: What Local Prosecutors Need to Know, Los Angeles, CA:
American Prosecutors Research Institute.
Jackson, B.S. (1988) Law, Fact and Narrative Coherence, Liverpool: Deborah Charles Publications.
——(1995) Making Sense in Law, Liverpool: Deborah Charles Publications.
Jacquemet, M. (1996) Credibility in Court: Communicative Practices in the Camorra Trials, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Janney, R.W. (2002) ‘Cotext as context: vague answers in court’, Language and Communication, 22: 457–75.
Javan, S. (2009) Little Bodies don’t mean Little Minds: An Investigation into Children’s Facilitation of Audience
Design when Constructing Referring Expressions in the Context of an Investigative Police Interview. Unpub-
lished dissertation.
Jaworski, A. and Galasiński, D. (2004) ‘Vocative address forms and ideological legitimization in political
debates’, Discourse Studies, 2: 35–53.
Jefferson, G. (1989) ‘Preliminary notes on a possible metric which provides for a “standard maximum”
silence of approximately one second in conversation’, in D. Roger and P. Bull (eds) Conversation: An
Interdisciplinary Perspective, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 166–96.
——(2004) ‘Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction’, in G. Lerner (ed.) Conversation Ana-
lysis: Studies from the First Generation, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 13–31.
Jessen, M. (2007a) ‘Forensic reference data on articulation rate in German’, Science and Justice, 47: 50–67.
——(2007b) ‘Speaker Classification in forensic phonetics and acoustics’, in C. Müller (ed.) Speaker clas-
sification I: Fundamentals, Features, and Methods, Berlin: Springer.
——(2008a) ‘Forensic phonetics’, Language and Linguistics Compass 2: 671–711.
——(2008b) ‘Continuous v. categorical variations between speakers’, paper presented at the 17th
Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, Lausanne.
Jessen, M., Köster, O. and Gfroerer, S. (2005) ‘Influence of vocal effort on average and variability of
fundamental frequency’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 12: 174–213.
Johnson, A. (1997) ‘Textual kidnapping: a case of plagiarism among three student texts’, International
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 4(ii): 210–25.
——(2002) ‘So … ? pragmatic implications of so-prefaced questions in formal police interviews’, in J.
Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 91–110.
——(2006) ‘Police questioning’, in K. Brown (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, Vol. 9,
Oxford: Elsevier, 661–72.
——(2008a) ‘Changing stories: Achieving a change of state in suspect and witness knowledge through
evaluation in police interviews with suspects and witnesses’, Functions of Language, 15(1): 84–114.
——(2008b) ‘“From where we’re sat … ”: negotiating narrative transformation through interaction in
police interviews with suspects’, Text & Talk, 28(3): 327–49.
REFERENCES
636
——(2008c) ‘From interview to courtroom – the evidential narrative as courtroom object’, paper pre-
sented at Georgetown University Roundtable, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Johnson, K. (2006) ‘Speaker normalization in speech perception’, in D.B. Pisoni and R.E. Remez (eds)
The Handbook of Speech Perception, Oxford: Blackwell.
Johnstone, B. (1996) The Linguistic Individual, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2000) Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2002) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2009) ‘Stance, style, and the linguistic individual’, in A. Jaffe (ed.) Sociolinguistic Perspectives on
Stance, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jones, S. and LeBaron, C. (2002) ‘Research on the relationship between verbal and nonverbal com-
munication: emerging integrations’, Journal of Communication, 52(3): 499–521.
Jönsson, L. and Linell, P. (1991) ‘Story generations: from dialogical interviews to written reports in
police interrogations’, Text, 11(3): 419–40.
Jucker, A.H. and I. Taavitsainen (2000) ‘Diachronic speech act analysis: insults from flyting to flaming’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 1(1): 67–95.
Judicial Council of California (2003) Civil Jury Instructions, Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.
——(2006) Criminal Jury Instruction, Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.
Kadric, M. (2000) ‘Interpreting in the Austrian courtroom’, in R. Roberts, S. Carr, D. Abraham and A. Dufour
(eds) The Critical Link 2: Interpreters in the Community, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Kaldor, S. and Malcolm, I. (1991) ‘Aboriginal English – an overview’, in S. Romaine (ed.) Language in
Australia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 67–83.
Kamisar, Y. (2007) ‘On the fortieth anniversary of the Miranda case: why we needed it, how we got it –
and what happened to it’, Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 5, 163–203.
Kandel, E. (1998) ‘A new intellectual framework for psychology’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 155:
457–69.
——(2006) In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind, New York: W. W. Norton.
Kandel, R.F. (2002) ‘Why evidence scholars should study conversation’, International Commentary on
Evidence, 1(2): article no. 7. Available online at: www.bepress.com/ice/vol1/iss2/art7.
Kaplan, J.P., Green, G.M., Cunningham, C.D. and Levi, J.N. (1995) ‘Bringing linguistics into judicial
decision making: semantic analysis submitted to the US Supreme Court’, Forensic Linguistics: Interna-
tional Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 2(1): 81–98.
Karton, J. (2008) ‘Lost in translation: international criminal tribunals and the legal implications of
interpreted testimony’, Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 41(1): 1–54. Available online at: www.
translationsdecoder.com/lostintranslationvanderbiltschooloflaw.htm (accessed 12 July 2009).
Kassin, S. (2002) ‘False confessions and the jogger case’, The New York Times OP-ED, 1 November
2002, p. A31.
——(2005) ‘On the psychology of confessions: does innocence put innocents at risk?’, American Psy-
chologist, 60: 215–28.
Kassin, S. and Gudjonsson, G.H. (2004) ‘The psychology of confession evidence: a review of the lit-
erature and issues’, Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5(2), 33–67. Available online at: www.
williams.edu/Psychology/Faculty/Kassin/research/confessions.htm.
Kassin, S., Leo, R.A., Meissner, C.A., Richman, K.D., Colwell, L.H., Leach, A. and La Fon, D. (2007)
‘Police interviewing and interrogation: a self-report survey of police practices and beliefs’, Law and
Human Behaviour, 31(4): 381–400.
Kassin, S. and Sukel, H. (1997) ‘Coerced confessions and the jury: an experimental test of the “harmless
error” rule’, Law and Human Behavior, 21: 27–47.
Katz, E. and Lazarsfeld, P. (1955) Personal Influence, Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Katz, J. (2009) ‘When cops speak Spanglish to a non-English speaker’, Simple Justice Blog. Available
online at: www.katzjustice.com/underdog/permalink/LanguageIssues.html (accessed 1 May 2009).
Keane, A. (1996) The Modern Law of Evidence, 4th edn, London: Butterworths.
Kearns, J. (2006) ‘Lodi Muslims: under the “eye of suspicion”’, Public Broadcasting Station PBS, 24
July 2006.
REFERENCES
637
Keen, L. (2009) ‘Judge is horrified by quality of video evidence’, South Wales Echo, 30 January 2009.
Available online at: www.walesonline.co.uk/news/cardiff-news/2009/01/30/ (accessed 16 June
2009).
Kelso, J.C. (1996) ‘Final report of the blue ribbon commission on jury system improvement’, Hastings
L.J., 47: 1433.
Kendon, A. (2003) Gesture, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kendon, A. and Versante, L. (2003) ‘Pointing by hand in “Neopolitan”’, in S. Kita (ed.) Pointing: Where
Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 109–37.
Kennedy, L. (1961) 10 Rillington Place, London: Victor Gollancz.
Kerr-Thompson, J. (2002) ‘“Powerful/powerless” language in court: a critical re-evaluation of the
Duke Language and Law Programme’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 9(2): 153–67.
Kidwell, M. (2006) ‘“Calm down!”: the role of gaze in the interactional management of hysteria by the
police’, Discourse Studies, 8(6): 771–96.
King, M. (1997) A Better World for Children? Explorations in Morality and Authority, London: Routledge.
Kintsch, W. (1995) ‘How readers construct situation models for stories: the role of syntactic cues and
causal inferences’, in M. Gernsbacher and T. Givón (eds) Coherence in Spontaneous Text, Amsterdam
and Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 139–60.
Kirsch, I., Jungeblut, A., Jenkins, L. and Kolstad, A. (2002) Adult Literacy in America, 3rd edn,
Washington DC: US Department of Education. Available online at: http://nces.ed.gov/pubs93/
93275.pdf (accessed 10 December 2008).
Kita, S. (2003) ‘Pointing: a foundational building block of human communication’, in S. Kita (ed.)
Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1–8.
Klein, M. (1996) ‘Framing the juvenile justice problem: the reality behind the problem’, Pepperdine Law
Review, 23: 860–67.
——(1997) ‘What are street gangs when they get to court?’, Valparaiso University Law Review, 31: 515–21.
Klein, S.R. (2001) ‘Identifying and (re)formulating prophylactic rules, safe harbors, and incidental rights
in constitutional criminal procedure’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 1030–80.
Kniffka, H. (2007) Working in Language and Law: A German Perspective, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koegel, T. (2007) The Exceptional Presenter, Austin, TX: Greenleaf Book Group Press.
Kolb, W. and Pöchhacker, F. (2008) ‘Stories retold: interpreting in asylum appeal hearings’, in D.
Russell and S. Hale (eds) Interpreting in Legal Settings, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Komter, M.L. (1998) Dilemmas in the Court Room. A Study of Trials of Violent Crime in the Netherlands,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
——(2002) ‘The suspect’s own words: the treatment of written statements in Dutch courtrooms’, For-
ensic Linguistics, 9(2): 168–92.
——(2003) ‘The interactional dynamics of eliciting a confession in a Dutch police interrogation’,
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 36(4): 433–70.
——(2005) ‘Understanding problems in an interpreter-mediated police interrogation’, in S. Burns (ed.)
Ethnographies of Law and Social Control: Sociology of Crime, Law & Deviance, Vol. 6, Amsterdam: Else-
vier, 203–24.
——(2006) ‘From talk to text: the interactional construction of a police record’, Research on Language
and Social Interaction, 39(3): 201–28.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., and Argamon, S. (2009). ‘Computational methods in authorship attribution’,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1), 9–26.
Koskoff, T.I. (1983) ‘The language of persuasion’, in The Litigation Manual: A Primer for Trial Lawyers,
Chicago: Section of Litigation, American Bar Association, 110–111.
Köster, O. and Köster, J-P. (2004) ‘The auditory-perceptual evaluation of voice quality in forensic
speaker recognition’, The Phonetician, 89: 9–37.
Kotadia, M. (2004) ‘MikeRoweSoft settles for an Xbox’, c|netNews.Com, January 26. Available online
at: http://news.com.com/2100–1014_3–5147374.html (accessed 20 December 2008).
Koven, M. (2002) ‘An analysis of speaker role inhabitance in narratives of personal experience’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 34: 167–217.
REFERENCES
638
Kozin, A.V. (2008) ‘Unsettled facts: on the transformational dynamism of evidence in legal discourse’,
Text & Talk, 28(2): 219–38.
Kredens, K. (2002) ‘Idiolect in authorship attribution’, in P. Stalmaszczyk (ed.), Folia Linguistica Anglica
4, Lodz: Lodz University Press.
——(2003) ‘Towards a corpus-based methodology of forensic authorship attribution: a comparative
study of two idiolects’, in B. Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk (ed.) PALC’01: Practical Applications in
Language Corpora, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang.
Kremer-Sadlik, T. (2004) ‘How children with autism and Asperger Syndrome respond to questions: a
“naturalistic” theory of mind task’, Discourse Studies, 6(2): 185–206.
Kress, G. (ed.) (1976) Halliday: System and Function in Language, London: Oxford University Press.
Krouglov, A. (1999) ‘Police interpreting: Politeness and sociocultural context’, The Translator, 5: 285–302.
Kryk-Kastovsky, B. (2000) ‘Representations of orality in Early Modern English trial records’, Journal of
Historical Pragmatics, 1(2): 201–30.
——(2006) ‘Impoliteness in Early Modern English courtroom discourse’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics,
7(2): 213–44.
——(2009) ‘Speech acts in Early Modern English court trials’, Journal of Pragmatics, 41(3): 440–57.
Künzel, H.J. (1987) Sprechererkennung: Grundzüge forensischer Sprachverarbeitung, Heidelberg: Kriminalistik Verlag.
——(1989) ‘How well does average fundamental frequency correlate with speaker height and weight?’,
Phonetica, 46: 117–25.
——(1995) ‘Field procedures in forensic speaker recognition’, in J. Windsor Lewis (ed.) Studies in
General and English Phonetics. Essays in Honour of Professor J. D. O’Connor, London: Routledge.
——(2001) ‘Beware of the “telephone effect”: The influence of telephone transmission on the mea-
surement of formant frequencies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(1) 80–99.
——(2004) ‘Tasks in forensic speech and audio analysis: a tutorial’, The Phonetician, 90: 9–22.
Kurzon, D. (1997) ‘Legal languages: varieties, genres, registers and discourses’, International Journal of
Applied Linguistics, 7(2): 119–39.
——(1998a) ‘Language of the law and legal language’, in L. Christer and M. Nordman (eds) Special
Language: From Humans Thinking to Thinking Machines, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 283–90.
——(1998b) Discourse of Silence, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin, Y., Boyle, B., Hsu, Y. and Dunleavy, E. (2007) Literacy in Everyday
Life: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy, Washington, DC: US Department
of Education. Available online at: http://nces.ed.gov/Pubs2007/2007480.pdf (accessed 11 December
2008).
Kwarciński, W. (2006) ‘A diachronic speech act analysis of sworn testimonies in Polish criminal trials’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 293–314.
Kytö, M. and Culpeper, J. (2006) A Corpus of English Dialogues 1560–1760, Oxford Text Archive.
Available online at: http://ota.ahds.ac.uk/ (accessed 24 August 2009).
Labov, W. (1966a) ‘The linguistic variable as a structural unit’, Washington Linguistics Review, 3: 4–22.
——(1966b) The Social Stratification of English in New York City, Washington, DC: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
——(1972) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English Vernacular, Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
——(1994) Principles of Linguistic Change, vol. 1: Internal Factors, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1996) ‘When intuitions fail’, in L. McNair, K. Singer, L. Dolbrin and M. Aucon (eds) Papers from
the Parasession on Theory and Data in Linguistics, Chicago Linguistic Society, 32: 77–106.
——(1997) ‘Some further steps in narrative analysis’, Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4): 395–415.
——(2002) ‘Driving forces in linguistic change’, International Conference on Korean Linguistics, Seoul National
University, 2 August 2002. Available online at: www.ling.upenn.edu/~wlabov/Papers/DLFC.htm.
——(2004) ‘Quantitative reasoning in linguistics’, in Ulrich Ammon, Norbert Dittmar, Klaus J. Mat-
theier, and Peter Trudgill (eds) Sociolinguistics/Soziolinguistik: An international handbook of the science of
language and society/Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft von Sprache und Gesellschaft, Vol 1. 2nd
edition, New York and Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 6–22.
REFERENCES
639
Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis: oral versions of personal experience’, in J. Helms
(ed.) Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts: Proceedings of the 1996 Annual Spring Meeting of the American
Ethnological Society, Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 12–44.
Lakoff, G. (1988) ‘Cognitive semantics’, in U. Eco (ed.) Meaning and Mental Representation, Bloo-
mington: Indiana University Press.
Lakoff, R.T. (1996) ‘True confessions? pragmatic competence and criminal confession’, in Gerhardt, J.,
Guo, J., Kyratzis, A. and Slobin D.I. (eds) Social Interaction. Social Context, and Language: Essays in
Honor of Susan Ervin-Tripp, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lally, C. (2009) ‘Interpreters for gardaí are not vetted abroad’, Irish Times, 30 April 2009. Available
online at: www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/ireland/2009/0430/1224245683458_pf.html (accessed 12
July 2009).
Landau, S. (2001) Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Landsman, S. (1984) The Adversary System: A Description and Defense, Washington, DC: American
Enterprise Institute.
——(1990) ‘The rise of the contentious spirit: adversary procedure in eighteenth century England’,
Cornell Law Review, 50: 498–609.
Langbein, J.H. (1978) ‘The criminal trial before the lawyers’, University of Chicago Law Review, 45: 263–316.
——(1999) ‘The prosecutorial origins of defence counsel in the eighteenth century: the appearance of
solicitors’, Cambridge Law Journal, 58(2): 314–65.
——(2003) The Origins of the Adversary Criminal Trial, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lantigua, J. (2002) ‘Unraveling the mystery of Petrona’, Palm Beach Post, 24 November 2002. Available
online at: www.racematters.org/petronatomas.htm (accessed 9 July 2009).
Larkin, W. and Burns, D. (1977) ‘Sentence comprehension and memory for embedded structure’,
Memory and Cognition, 5(1): 17–22.
Lassiter, G.D. (ed.) (2004) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Lassiter, G.D. and Geers, A.L. (2004) ‘Bias and accuracy in the evaluation of confession evidence’,
in G.D. Lassiter (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum, 197–
265.
Lassiter, G.D., Ratcliff, J., Ware, J., Lezlee, J. and Irvin, C.R. (2006) ‘Videotaped confessions: panacea or
pandora’s box?’, Law & Policy, 28(2): 192–210. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=889148.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Laver, J. (1980) The Phonetic Description of Voice Quality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Law Commission (2009) The Admissibility of Expert Evidence in Criminal Proceedings in England and Wales.
Consultation Paper 190. Available online at: www.lawcom.gov.uk/docs/cp190.pdf.
LeBaron, C.D. and Streeck, J. (1997) ‘Built space and the interactional framing of experience during a
murder interrogation’, Human Studies, 20: 1–25.
Lee, D. (1987) ‘The semantics of just’, Journal of Pragmatics, 11: 377–98.
Lee, J. (2008) ‘City room; female smokers, and a P.R. coup’, The New York Times, 11 October 2008 (A16).
——(2009a) ‘Interpreting inexplicit language during courtroom examination’, Applied Linguistics, 30:
93–114.
——(2009b) ‘Conflicting views on court interpreting examined through surveys of legal professionals
and court interpreters’, Interpreting, 11(1): 35–56.
Lees, S. (1996) Carnal Knowledge: Rape on Trial, London: H. Hamilton.
de Leeuw, E. (2007) ‘Hesitation markers in English, German, and Dutch’, Journal of Germanic Linguistics,
19: 85–114.
van Leeuwen, T. (2002) ‘The representation of social actors’, in M. Toolan (ed.) Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge, 302–39.
——(2007) ‘Legitimation in discourse and communication’, Discourse and Communication, 1(1): 91–112.
Lehiste, I. and Meltzer, D. (1973) ‘Vowel and speaker identification in natural and synthetic speech’,
Language and Speech, 16: 356–64.
REFERENCES
640
Lehto, M.R. and Miller, J.M. (1986) Warnings, Vol. 1: Fundamental, Design, and Evaluation Methodologies,
Ann Arbor, MI: Fuller.
Lempert, L. (1996) ‘Women’s strategies for survival: developing agency in abusive relationships’, Journal
of Family Violence, 11: 269–89.
Lentine, G. and Shuy, R. (1990) ‘Mc-: meaning in the marketplace’, American Speech, 65: 349–66.
Leo, R.A. (1998) ‘Miranda and the problem of false confessions’, in R. A. Leo and G. C. Thomas (eds)
The Miranda Debate: Law, Justice and Policing, Boston: Northeastern University Press, 271–82.
——(2001) ‘Questioning the relevance of Miranda in the twenty-first century’, The Michigan Law
Review, 99(5): 1000–1029.
——(2009) ‘False confessions: causes, consequences and implications’, The Journal of the American Acad-
emy of Psychiatry and the Law, University of San Francisco Law Research Paper No. 2009–11. Avail-
able online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1328623.
Leo, R.A. and Davis, D. (2009) ‘From false confession to wrongful conviction: seven psychological
processes’, Journal of Psychiatry and Law. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1328622.
Leo, R.A., Drizin, S.A., Neufeld, P.J., Hall, B.R. and Vatner, A. (2006) ‘Bringing reliability back in:
false confessions and legal safeguards in the twenty-first century’, Wisconsin Law Review, 2006(2): 479–
538 University of San Francisco Law Research Paper No. 2009–04. Available online at: www.ssrn.
com/abstract=1134948.
Leo, R.A. and Liu, B.L. (2009) ‘What do potential jurors know about police interrogation techniques
and false confessions?’, Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 27(3): 381–99. Available online at: www.ssrn.
com/abstract=1404078.
Leo, R.A. and Ofshe, R.J. (1998) ‘The consequences of false confessions: deprivations of liberty and
miscarriages of justice in the age of psychological interrogation’, Journal of Criminal Law and Crimin-
ology, 88(2): 429–96.
Leo, R.A. and Richman, K.D. (2008) ‘Mandate the electronic recording of police interrogations’, Crime
and Public Policy, 6(4): 791–98. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1141335.
Leo, R.A. and White, W.S. (1999) ‘Adapting to Miranda: modern interrogators’ strategies for dealing
with the obstacles posed by Miranda’, Minnesota Law Review, 84: 397–472.
Lerm, H. (1997) ‘Language manipulation in court cross-examination: “how powerful is the sword”’, in
K. Müller and S. Newman (eds) Language in Court, Port Elizabeth: Vista University.
Lerner, G.H. (1991) ‘On the syntax of sentences-in-progress’, Language in Society, 20: 441–58.
Levi, J (1993) ‘Evaluating jury comprehension of the Illinois capital sentencing instructions’, American
Speech, 68, i: 20–49
Levinson, S. (1992) ‘Activity types and language’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Inter-
action in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 66–100.
Levy, L.W. (1999) The Palladium of Justice: Origins of Trial by Jury, Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Lieberman, J. and Sales, B. (1997) ‘What social science teaches us about the jury instruction process’,
Psychology, Public Policy and Law, 3(4): 589–644.
——(1999) ‘The effectiveness of jury instructions’, in W.F. Abbott and J. Batt (eds) A Handbook of Jury
Research, Philadelphia, PA: American Law Institute, 18–73.
Lin, J.W. (2006) ‘Time in a language without tense: the case of Chinese’, Journal of Semantics, 23: 1–53.
Linde, C. (1993) Life Stories: The Creation of Coherence, New York: Oxford University Press.
Lindsey, J.M. (1990) ‘The legal writing malady: causes and cures’, New York Law Journal, 12
December 1990.
Lindström, A. (2005) ‘Language as social action: a study of how senior citizens request assistance with
practical tasks in the Swedish home help service’, in A. Hakulinen and M. Selting (eds) Syntax and
Lexis in Conversation, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 209–33.
Linell, P. (1998) ‘Discourse across boundaries: on recontextualisation and the blending of voices in
professional discourse’, Text, 18: 143–57.
Linell, P. and Jönsson, L. (1991) ‘Suspect stories: perspective-setting in an asymmetrical situation’, in
Marková, I. and Foppa, K. (eds) Asymmetries in Dialogue, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf,
75–100.
REFERENCES
641
Linell, P. and Luckmann, T. (1991) ‘Asymmetries in dialogue: some conceptual preliminaries’, in
Marková, I. and Foppa, K. (eds) Asymmetries in Dialogue, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf,
1–20.
Linell, P., Alemyr, L. and Jönsson, L. (1993) ‘Admission of guilt as a communicative project in judicial
settings’ Journal of Pragmatics, 19: 153–76.
Linville, S.E. (2001) Vocal Aging, San Diego, CA: Singular.
Loftus, E. (1979) Eyewitness Testimony, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
——(1992) Witness for the Defence, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
——(1996) Eyewitness Testimony: With a New Preface, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Long, L.N. and Christensen, W.F. (2008) ‘Clearly, using intensifiers is very bad – or is it?’, Idaho Law
Review, 45:171–89.
López, J. (2002) Gangs: Casualties in an Undeclared War, Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Pub. Co.
Lord, C. (2002) ‘Are subordinate clauses more difficult?’, in J. Bybee and M. Noonan (eds) Complex
Sentences in Grammar and Discourse: Essays in Honor of Sandra A. Thompson, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia, PA: John Benjamins, 223–34.
Louw, B. (1993) ‘Irony in the text or insincerity in the writer? The diagnostic potential of semantic
prosodies’, in M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology, Amsterdam:
Benjamins, 157–76.
Luchjenbroers, J. (1997) ‘“In your own words … ” Questions and answers in a supreme court trial’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 27: 477–503.
Luchjenbroers, J. and Aldridge, M. (2007) ‘Conceptual manipulation with metaphors and frames:
dealing with rape victims in legal discourse’, Text & Talk, 27(3): 339–59.
Lucy, D. (2005) Introduction to Statistics for Forensic Scientists, London: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. (2004) Law as a Social System, trans. Klaus Ziegert, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lundeberg, M. (1987) ‘Metacognitive aspects of reading comprehension: studying understanding in
legal case analysis’, Reading Research Quarterly, 22(4): 407–32.
Lundquist, L. (1995) ‘Indefinite noun phrases in legal texts: use, function and construction of mental
spaces’, Journal of Pragmatics, 23(1): 7–29.
Luntz, F. (2007) Words That Work: It’s Not What You Say – It’s What People Hear, New York: Hyperion.
da Luz, C.M. and Weckerly, P.C. (1993) ‘The Texas “condom-rape” case: caution construed as con-
sent’, UCLA Women’s Law Journal, 3: 95–104.
Lynch, M. (2007) ‘Law courts as perspicuous sites for ethnomethodological investigations’, in S. Hester and
D. Francis (eds)Orders of Ordinary Action: Respecifying Sociological Knowledge, Aldershot: Ashgate, 107–19.
Lyons, J. (1977) Semantics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDavid, R. (1977) ‘Evidence’, in D. Shore and C. Hines (eds) Papers in Language Variation: SAMLA-
ADS Collection, Alabama: University of Alabama Press, 125–32.
McDonald, D. (1986) The Language of Argument, New York: Harper & Rowe Publishers, Inc.
McDougall, K. (2006) ‘Dynamic features of speech and the characterization of speakers: towards a new
approach using formant frequencies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13: 89–126.
McGreevy, P. and Banks, S. (2006) ‘On paper, leaving a gang is difficult; L.A. uses injunctions to fight
thugs, but those who go straight find it’s hard to get off the list’, Los Angeles Times, 23 March 2006.
Mackay, J. 1997 Little Boss: A Life of Andrew Carnegie, Edinburgh, Mainstream.
MacLachlan, G. and Reid, I. (1994) Framing and Interpretation, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
The McLibel Trial: Court Transcripts, 1 June 2006. Available online at: www.mcspotlight.org/case/trial/
transcripts/index.html.
McMenamin, G.R. (1993) Forensic Stylistics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
——(2001) ‘Style markers in authorship studies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8: 93–97.
——(2002) Forensic Linguistics – Advances in Forensic Stylistics, Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.
——(2004) ‘Disputed authorship in U.S. law’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(1):
73–82.
McNamara, T. (2000) Language Testing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNeill, D. (1992) Hand and Mind, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
REFERENCES
642
——(2005) Gesture and Thought, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Macro International (16 March 2007) Design and Testing of Effective Truth in Lending Disclosures, sub-
mitted to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC. Available online
at: www.federalreserve.gov/dcca/regulationz/20070523/execsummary.pdf (accessed 5 January 2009).
——(15 December 2008) Design and Testing of Effective Truth in Lending Disclosures: Qualitative Study,
submitted to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC. Available online
at: www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20081218a7.pdf (accessed 5 January 2009).
Madden, H. (2007) ‘Zooting up/brighten prom night with flash, dash – and panache’, San Francisco
Chronicle, 29 April 2007.
Madsen, D. (1997) ‘Towards a description of communication in the legal universe: translation of legal
texts and the Skopos theory’, Fachsprache – International Journal of LSP, 19(3): 17–27.
Mahoney, P. (2004) ‘Houses built on sand: police expert testimony in California gang prosecutions: did
Gardeley go too far?’, Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly, 31: 385–410.
Maira, S. (2007) ‘Deporting radicals, deporting La Migra: the Hayat case in Lodi’, Cultural Dynamics, 19
(1): 39–66.
Maley, Y. (1985) ‘Judicial discourse: the case of legal judgment’, in J. E. Clark (ed.) The Cultivated
Australian, Hamburg: Buske, 159–75.
——(1987) ‘The language of legislation’, Language and Society, 16: 25–48.
——(1994) ‘The language of the law’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 11–50.
——(2000) ‘The case of the long-nosed Potoroo: the framing and construction of witness testimony’,
in S. Sarangi and M. Coulthard (eds) Discourse and Social Life, London: Longman, 246–69.
Maley, Y. and Fahey, R. (1991) ‘Presenting the evidence: constructions of reality in court’, International
Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 4(10): 3–17.
Mandler, J.M. (1984) Stories, Scripts and Scenes: Aspects of Schema Theory, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Manzo, J. (1996) ‘Taking turns and taking sides: opening scenes from two jury deliberations’, Social
Psychology Quarterly, 59: 107–25.
Manzoor, S. (2007) ‘The language of loneliness’, The Guardian, 12 September 2007.
Marchant, R. and Page, M. (1997) ‘The memorandum and disabled children’, in H. Westcott and J.
Jones (eds) Perspectives on the Memorandum: Policy, Practice and Research in Investigative Interviewing,
Aldershot: Arena.
Marshall, C. (2007) ‘24-year term for Californian in terrorism training case’, New York Times, 11 Sep-
tember 2007.
Maryns, K. (2004) ‘Identifying the asylum speaker: reflections on the pitfalls of language analysis in the
determination of national origin’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 240–60.
——(2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, London/Manchester: St.
Jerome Publishing.
Mason, I. and Stewart, M. (2001) ‘Interactional pragmatics, face and the dialogue interpreter’, in I.
Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges: Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St Jerome.
Matoesian, G. (1993) Reproducing Rape: Domination through Talk in the Courtroom, Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1995) ‘Language, law and society: policy implications of the Kennedy Smith rape trial’, Law and
Society Review, 29: 669–701.
——(1997) ‘“You were interested in him as a person”: Rhythms of domination in the Kennedy Smith
Rape Trial’, Law & Social Inquiry, 22(1): 55-93.
——(1999) ‘The grammaticalization of participant roles in the constitution of expert identity’, Language
in Society, 28(4): 491–521.
——(2000) ‘Intertextual authority in reported speech: Production media in the Kennedy Smith rape
trial’, Journal of Pragmatics, 32: 879–914.
——(2001) Law and the Language of Identity: Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith Rape Trial, Oxford/
New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2005a) ‘Nailing down an answer: participations of power in trial talk’,Discourse Studies, 7(6): 733–59.
——(2005b) Review of J. Cotterill, “Language and power in court: a linguistic analysis of the O.J.
Simpson trial”’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9: 619–22.
REFERENCES
643
——(2008a) ‘You might win the battle but lose the war: multimodal, interactive, and extralinguistic
aspects of witness resistance’, Journal of English Linguistics, 36(3): 195–219.
——(2008b) ‘Role conflict as an interactional resource in the multimodal emergence of expert iden-
tity’, Semiotica, 171(1/4): 15–49.
Matsumoto, K. (1999) ‘And-prefaced questions in institutional discourse’, Linguistics, 37(2): 251–74.
Mayer, J. (1993) ‘Individual moral responsibility and the criminalization of youth gangs’, Wake Forest
Law Review, 28: 943–86.
Mayes, P. (1990) ‘Quotation in spoken English’, Studies in Language, 14(2): 325–63.
Maynard, D.W. (1984) Inside Plea Bargaining: The Language of Negotiation, New York: Plenum Press.
——(2006) ‘Comment – bad news and good news: losing vs. finding the phenomenon in legal set-
tings’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 477–97.
Medford, S., Gudjonsson, G.H. and Pearse, J. (2003) ‘The efficacy of the appropriate adult safeguard
during police interviewing’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 8: 253–66.
Meehan, A.J. (1986) ‘Record-keeping practices in the policing of juveniles’, Urban Life, 15(1): 70–102.
——(1989) ‘Assessing the “police-worthiness” of citizen’s complaints to the police: accountability and
the negotiation of “facts”’, in D.T. Helm, W.T. Anderson, A.J. Meehan and A.W. Rawls (eds) The
Interactional Order: New Directions in the Study of Social Order, New York: Irvington, 116–40.
Mehan, H. (1996) ‘The construction of an LD student: a case study in the politics of representation’, in
M. Silverstein and G. Urban (eds)Natural Histories of Discourse, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Mellinkoff, D. (1963) The Language of the Law, Boston, MA: Little Brown and Co.
Mencap (1999) Bullying Wrecks Lives: The Experience of Children and Young People with a Learning Disability.
Available online at: www.mencap.org.uk/document (accessed 16 July 2009).
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008) Homegirls: Language and Cultural Practice among Latina Youth Gangs, New
York/Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2009) ‘McJob’, Merriam-Webster Online: www.merriam-webst
er.com/dictionary/McJob (accessed 23 March 2009).
Mertz, E. (2007) The Language of Law School: Learning to Think Like a Lawyer, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Mesthrie, R., Swann, J., Deumert, A. and Leap, W. (2000) Introducing Sociolinguistics, Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Mey, J.L. (2001) Pragmatics: An Introduction, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Meyer, P.N. (1996) ‘Desperate for love II: further reflections on the interpenetration of legal and
popular storytelling in closing arguments to a jury in a complex criminal case’. Available online at:
http://tarlton.law.utexas.edu/lpop/etext/usf/meyer30.htm.
Mildren, D. (1999) ‘Redressing the imbalance: aboriginal people in the criminal justice system’, Forensic
Linguistics, 6(1): 137–60.
Miller, G.A. (1956) ‘The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for
processing information’, The Psychological Review, 63: 81–97.
Miller, J.M. and Lehto, M.R. (1987) Warnings, Vol. 2: The Annotated Bibliography with Topical Index,
Ann Arbor, MI: Fuller.
Milne, R. and Bull, R. (1999) Investigative Interviewing: Psychology and Practice, Chichester: Wiley.
Milne, R., Savage, S. and Williamson, T. (eds) (2006) Investigative Interviewing, Uffcolme, Devon: Willan
Publishing.
Milton, J. and de Sena França, L.H. (2001) ‘The selection and training of interpreters in the community
at the Catholic University, São Paulo (PUC-SP)’, paper presented at the Critical Link 3 conference.
Available online at: www.criticallink.org/files/CL3_Milton_deSenaFranca.pdf (accessed 12 July 2009).
Minnick, W. (1968) The Art of Persuasion, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Mir, M. (1993) ‘Direct requests can also be polite’, paper presented at the 7th Annual International
Pragmatics Conference, University of Illinois.
Mnookin, J.L. (2001a) ‘Fingerprint evidence in an age of DNA profiling’, Brooklyn Law Review, 67: 13–70.
——(2001b) ‘Scripting expertise: the history of handwriting identification evidence and the judicial
construction of reliability’, Virginia Law Review, 87: 1723–1845.
REFERENCES
644
Moenssens, A.A. (1997) ‘Handwriting identification evidence in the post-Daubert world’, UMKC Law
Review, 66: 251–343.
Moffett, D. (2003) ‘Petrona’s story’, Palm Beach Post, 28 September 2003. Available online at: www.
petronatomas.com/article.shtml (accessed 9 July 2009).
Moje, E. (2000) ‘“To be part of the story”: the literacy practices of gangsta adolescents’, Teachers College
Record, 102(3): 651–90.
Mojediddi, W. (2006) ‘How politics influenced the case of US v. Hamid Hayat’, Chance Lecture, Boalt
Law School, UC Berkeley, 5 September 2006.
Moore, A. (1989) ‘Trial by schema: cognitive filters in the courtroom’, UCLA Law Review, 37: 273–340.
Moore, C. (2006) ‘The use of videlicet in Early Modern slander depositions: A case of genre-specific
grammaticalization’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 245–263.
Moos, A. (2008a) ‘Forensische Sprechererkennung mit der Messmethode LTF (long-term formant dis-
tribution)’, unpublishedMA thesis, Universität des Saarlandes, Department of Phonetics and Phonology.
Available online at: www.psy.gla.ac.uk/docs/download.php?type=PUBLS&id=1286
——(2008b) ‘Long-term formant distribution (LTF) based on German spontaneous and read speech’,
paper presented at the 17th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and
Acoustics, Lausanne.
Moosmüller, S. (1997) ‘Phonological variation in speaker identification’, Forensic Linguistics, 4: 29–47.
Moreno, J. (2004) ‘What happens when Dirty Harry becomes an (expert) witness for the prosecution?’,
Tulane Law Review, 79: 1–54.
Morris, D. (1977) Manwatching, New York: Abrams.
Morris, R. (1999) ‘The gum syndrome: predicaments in court interpreting’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(1): 6–29.
——(2008) ‘Missing stitches: An overview of judicial attitudes to interlingual interpreting in the crim-
inal justice systems of Canada and Israel’, Interpreting, 10: 34–64.
Morrison, G.S. (2008) ‘Forensic voice comparison using likelihood ratios based on polynomial curves
fitted to the formant trajectories of Australian English /ai/’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
the Law, 15: 249–66.
——(2009) ‘Comments on Coulthard & Johnson’s (2007) portrayal of the likelihood-ratio framework’,
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences, in press.
Mortimer, A. (1994) ‘Asking the right questions’, Policing, 9: 111–24.
Moser-Mercer, B. (2003) ‘Remote interpreting: assessment of human factors and performance para-
meters’. Available online at: http://aiic.net/ViewPage.cfm/article879 (accessed 23 May 2009).
Moston, S. and Stephenson, G. (1993) ‘The changing face of police interrogation’, Journal of Community
and Social Psychology, 3: 101–15.
Mulholland, M., Pullan, B.S., Melikan, R.A. and Pullan, A. (2003) The Trial in History, Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Mullennix, J.W., Johnson, K.A., Topcu-Durgun, M. and Farnsworth, L.M. (1995) ‘The perceptual
representation of voice gender’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 98: 3080–95.
Müller, C. (ed.) (2007) Speaker Classification, Vols. 1 and 2, Berlin: Springer.
Munson, B. and Babel, M. (2007) ‘Loose lips and silver tongues, or, projecting sexual orientation
through speech’, Language and Linguistics Compass, 1: 416–49.
Myers, C. (1997) ‘Note: encouraging allocution at capital sentencing: a proposal for use immunity’,
Columbia Law Review, 97: 787–818.
Myers, M.L., Iscoe, C., Jennings, C., Lenox, W., Minsky, E. and Sacks, A. (1981) Federal Trade Com-
mission Staff Report on the Cigarette Advertising Investigation, Washington, DC: Federal Trade Commission.
Nakane, I. (2007) ‘Problems in communicating the suspect’s rights in interpreted police interviews’,
Applied Linguistics, 28(1): 87–112.
National Association of Judiciary Interpreters & Translators Position Paper (February 2009) ‘Telephone
interpreting in legal settings’. Available online at: www.najit.org/Publications/Position Papers/Tele-
phone Interpreting.pdf (accessed 9 July 2009).
National Crime Faculty (2000) A Practical Guide to Investigative Interviewing, National Crime Faculty,
Bramshill: National Crime Faculty and National Police Training.
REFERENCES
645
National Research Council of the National Academies (NRC) (2004) Forensic Analysis: Weighing Bullet
Lead Evidence, Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
——(2009) Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward, Washington, DC: The
National Academy Press.
Nelson, L.D.M. (1987) ‘The drafting committee of the third United Nations conference on the law of
the sea: the implications of multilingual texts’, British Yearbook of International Law, 57: 169–99.
New Oxford American Dictionary (2001) Oxford: Oxford University Press.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) (2004) Blind or Deaf Jurors (Discussion paper
No 46). Sydney: New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
Newbury, P. and Johnson, A. (2006) ‘Suspects’ resistance to constraining and coercive questioning
strategies in the police interview’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2): 213–40.
Nichols, S. and Good, T. (2004) America’s Teenagers – Myths and Realities: Media Images, Schooling and the
Social Costs of Careless Indifference, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Nickerson, R.S. (1998) ‘Confirmation bias: an ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises’, Review of
General Psychology, 2: 175–220.
Nieland, R.G. (1979) Pattern Jury Instructions: A Critical Look at a Modern Movement to Improve the Jury
System, Chicago: American Judicature Society.
Nolan, F. (1983) The Phonetic Bases of Speaker Recognition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1997) ‘Speaker recognition and forensic phonetics’, in W.J. Hardcastle and J. Laver (eds) The
Handbook of Phonetic Sciences, Oxford: Blackwell, 744–67.
——(2003) ‘A recent voice parade’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 10: 277–91.
——(2005) ‘Forensic speaker identification and the phonetic description of voice quality’, in W.J.
Hardcastle and J. Mackenzie Beck (eds) A Figure of Speech: A Festschrift for John Laver, Mahwah:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Nolan, F. and Grigoras, C. (2005) ‘A case for formant analysis in forensic speaker identification’, Inter-
national Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 12: 143–73.
Nord, C. (1997) Translating as a Purposeful Activity: Functionalist Approaches Explained, Manchester: St
Jerome.
Norris, S. (2004) Analyzing Multimodal Interaction, New York: Routledge.
Nowak, A. (2004) Power Speaking, New York: Allworth Press.
Nunan, D. (1993) Introducing Discourse Analysis, London: Penguin.
Nunberg, G. (2001) ‘That’s correct’, California Lawyer. July, Available online at: www-csli.stanford.edu/
~nunberg/CLRedskins.pdf.
O’Barr, W.M. (1982) Linguistic Evidence: Language, Power and Strategy in the Courtroom, New York:
Academic Press.
O’Barr, W.M. and Conley, J.M. (1990) ‘Litigant satisfaction versus legal adequacy in small claims court
narratives’, in J.N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds), Language in the Judicial Process, New York and London:
Plenum.
Ochs, E. (1979) ‘Transcription as theory’, in E. Ochs and B.B. Schiefflen (eds) Developmental Pragmatics,
New York: Academic Press, 43–72.
Ochs, E. and Capps, L. (2001) Living Narrative: Creating Lives in Everyday Storytelling, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Ofshe, R. and Leo, R. (1997a) ‘The decision to confess falsely’, Denver Law Review, 74(4): 979–1122.
——(1997b) ‘The social psychology of police interrogation: the theory and classification of true and
false confessions’, Studies in Law, Politics and Society, 16: 189–251.
Okawara, M. (2006) ‘Linguistic analysis of some Japanese trademark cases’, unpublished doctoral thesis,
University of Sydney.
Oksaar, E. (1987) ‘Idiolekt’, in U. Ammon, N. Dittmar and K.J. Mattheier (eds) Soziolinguistik: Ein
internationales Handbuch, Vol.1, Berlin: de Gruyter.
Old Bailey Proceedings Online (www.oldbaileyonline.org), May 1856, trial of William Palmer
(t18560514–490).
Oliver, R. (1957) The Psychology of Persuasive Speech, New York: David McKay Company, Inc.
REFERENCES
646
Olsson, J. (2003) ‘Preliminary observations on author variation in mobile phone texting’, unpublished
ms. Available online at: http://www.thetext.co.uk (accessed 29 August 2009).
——(2008a) Forensic Linguistics, 2nd edn, New York: Continuum.
——(2008b) ‘Statement of witness: report into allegations of intellectual property infringement with
respect to the Internet domain name www.oraclecontractors.com’, unpublished manuscript.
Oppel, R. (1999) ‘No small change as pension plans are converted’,New York Times, 24 October 1999: 3, 12.
OPSI (2008) The Criminal Justice and Immigration Act. Available online at: www.opsi.gov.uk/acts.htm
(accessed 1 July 2009).
Ornstein-Galicia, J. (1987) ‘Chicano Caló: description and review of a border variety’, Hispanic Journal of
Behavioural Sciences, 9(4): 359–73.
Ortega Herráez, J.M. and Foulquié Rubio, A.I. (2008) ‘Interpreting in police settings in Spain. Service
providers and interpreters perspectives’, in C. Valero Garcés and A. Martin (eds) Crossing Borders in
Community Interpreting: Definitions and Dilemmas, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Oxford English Dictionary Online (2009) ‘McJob’. http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/00303924?quer-
y_type=wordandqueryword = McJobandfirst = 1andmax_to_show = 10andsingle = 1andsort_type
= alphaandcase_id = SWfP-3czyuD-15006andp = 1andd = 1andsp = 1andqt = 1andct = 0andad =
1andprint = 1. [entry dated March 2001] (accessed 23 March 2009).
Oyandel, M. and Samaniego, J. (2004) ‘Report written for the court’s consideration in a likelihood-of-
confusion case in 2005 involving rival trademarks Paltomiel and Palto con Miel’, Tribunal de Defensa
de la Libre Competencia, Sentencia N 24/2005, Republica de Chile, 4. Available online at: http://
mail.fne.cl/db/tabla.nsf/f34cb3b7c2bb5deb8425733e005faa18/4a2b5134307725af0425705a0052ecfe/
$FILE/Sentencia-24-2005.pdf (accessed December 2008).
Ozolins, U. and Hale, S. (2009) ‘Introduction: Quality in interpreting: a shared responsibility’, in S.
Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Critical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting. A Shared Responsibility, Amsterdam
and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Pacenti, J. (2002) ‘Secret safe place for newborn: teen’s statement on dead baby contradictory’, Palm
Beach Post, 4 December 2002. Available online at: www.mobile-da.org/secretsafeplacefornewborns/
newslistdetail.php?storyID=258 (accessed 10 July 2009).
Pahl, K. (2002) ‘Ephemera, mess and miscellaneous piles: texts and practices in families’, Journal of Early
Childhood Literacy, 2: 145–65.
Pascual, E. (2006) ‘Questions in legal monologues: fictive interaction as argumentative strategy in a
murder trial’, Text & Talk, 26(3): 383–402.
Pavlenko, A. (2008) ‘“I’m very not about the law part”: non-native speakers of English and the Mir-
anda Warnings’, TESOL Quarterly, 42: 1–30.
Payne, C. (2007) ‘The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion: implications for trial advocacy’,
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(2): 309–12.
Pecorari, D.E. (2002) Original Reproductions: An Investigation of the Source Use of Postgraduate Second Lan-
guage Writers, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Birmingham.
——(2008) Academic Writing and Plagiarism: A Linguistic Analysis, London: Continuum.
Pennington, N. and Hastie, R. (1986) ‘Evidence evaluation in complex decision making’, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51(2): 242–58.
——(1991) ‘A cognitive theory of juror decision making: the story model’, Cardozo Law Review, 13:
519–57.
——(1993) ‘The story model for juror decision making’, in R. Hastie (ed.) Inside the Juror: The Psy-
chology of Juror Decision Making, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pennycook, A. (1996) ‘Borrowing others’ words: text, ownership, memory and plagiarism’, TESOL
Quarterly, 30, 201–30.
——(2001) Critical Applied Linguistics: A Critical Introduction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pérez González, L. (2006) ‘Interpreting strategic recontextualization cues in the courtroom: corpus-
based insights into the pragmatic force of non-restrictive relative clauses’, Journal of Pragmatics, 38:
390–417.
REFERENCES
647
Petty, R. and Cacioppo, J. (1986) ‘The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion’, Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 19: 123–205.
Petty, R. and Wegener, D. (1998) ‘Attitude change: multiple roles for persuasion variables’, in D. Gil-
bert and S. Fiske (eds), The Handbook of Social Psychology, New York: McGraw-Hill, 323–90.
Philips, S.U. (1986) ‘Reported speech as evidence in an American trial’, in D. Tannen and J. Alatis.
(eds) Language and Linguistics: The Interdependence of Theory, Data, and Application. Georgetown University
Round Table on Languages and Linguistics (GURT) 1985, Washington, DC: Georgetown University,
154–79.
——(1987) ‘On the use of WH Questions in American courtroom discourse: a study of the relation
between language form and language function’, in L. Kedar (ed) Power through Discourse, Norwood: Ablex.
——(1992) ‘Evidentiary standards for American trials: just the facts’ in J.H. Hill and J.T. Irvine (eds)
Responsibility and Evidence in Oral Discourse, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 248–59.
Phillips, S.A. (1999) Wallbangin’: Graffiti & Gangs in L.A., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Phoenix, A. (2008) ‘Analysing narrative contexts’, in M. Andrews, C. Squire and M. Tamboukou (eds)
Doing Narrative Research, London: Sage Publications Ltd, 64–77.
Pinker, S. and Ullman, M.T. (2002) ‘The past-tense debate: the past and future of past tense’, Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6: 456–63.
Plotnikoff, J. and Woolfson, R. (2004) ‘In their own words; the experience of 50 young witnesses in
criminal proceedings’, NSPCC Policy Practice Research Studies, London: HMSO.
Poe-Yamagata, E. and Jones, M.A. (2000) And Justice for Some, Washington, DC: National Council on
Crime & Delinquency.
Polack, K. and Corsellis, A. (1990a) ‘Non-English speakers and the criminal justice system part 1’, New
Law Journal, 1634–36.
——(1990b) ‘Non-English speakers and the criminal justice system, part 2’, New Law Journal, 1676–77.
Pöllabauer, S. (2004) ‘Interpreting in asylum hearings: issues of role, responsibility and power’, Inter-
preting, 6: 143–80.
Pollner, M. (1974) ‘Mundane reasoning’, Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 4: 35–54.
Pomerantz, A.M. (1987) ‘Descriptions in legal settings’, in G. Button and J.R.E. Lee (eds) Talk and
Social Organization, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 226–43.
Post, R. (1987) ‘On the popular image of the lawyer: reflections in a dark glass’, California Law Review,
75: 379–89.
Pound, L. (1938) ‘Jottings’, American Speech, 13: 157–58.
Preston, D.R. (1993) ‘Folk dialectology’, in D. Preston (ed.) American Dialect Research, Philadelphia:
John Benjamins, 333–78.
Prince, E. (1981), ‘Language and the law: a case for linguistic pragmatics’, Working papers in Socio-
linguistics, Austin: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory, 112–60.
——(1984) ‘Language and the law: reference stress and context’, in D. Schiffrin (ed.) Meaning, Form and
Use in Context, Washington DC: Georgetown University, 240–52.
Pronin, E. and Kugler, M. (2007) ‘Valuing thoughts, ignoring behavior: the introspection illusion as a
source of the bias blind spot’, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43: 565–78.
Pronin, E., Lin, D.Y. and Ross, L. (2002) ‘The bias blind spot: perception of bias in self and others’,
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28: 369–81.
Pullum, G. (2004a) ‘Don’t say “lexeme” or we’ll break your legs’, Language Log. Available online at:
http://158.130.17.5/~myl/languagelog/archives/000618.html (accessed January 2008).
——(2004b) ‘It wasn’t Lexus, it was Lexis!’, Language Log. Available online at: http://158.130.17.5/
~myl/languagelog/archives/000632.html (accessed January 2008).
——(2004c) ‘Database company to Toyota: rename that automobile!’, Language Log. Available online
at: http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/000728.html (accessed January 2008).
Radelet, M., Bedau, H.A. and Putnam, C.E. (1992) In Spite of Innocence, Boston: Northeastern Press.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity among Adolescents, London: Longman.
Raymond, G. (2003) ‘Grammar and social organization: Yes/No interrogatives and the structure of
responding’, American Sociological Review, 68: 939–67.
REFERENCES
648
——(2004) ‘Prompting action: the stand-alone “so” in ordinary conversation’, Research on Language and
Social Interaction, 37(2): 185–218.
Read, D.S. (2007) Winning at Trial, Louisville, CO: National Institute for Trial Advocacy.
Reali, F. and Christiansen, M. (2006) ‘Processing of relative clauses is made easier by frequency of
occurrence’, Journal of Memory and Language, 57(1): 1–23.
Redlich, A.D and Goodman, G.S. (2003) ‘Taking responsibility for an act not committed: the influence
of age and suggestibility’, Law and Human Behavior, 27: 141–56.
Redlich, A.D., Silverman, M., Chen, J. and Steiner, H. (2004) ‘The police interrogation of children
and adolescents’, in Lassiter, G.D. (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/
Plenum, 107–25.
Redmayne, M. (2001) Expert Evidence and Criminal Justice, Oxford: OUP.
Reetz, H. and Jongman, A. (2009) Phonetics: Transcription, Production, Acoustics, and Perception, Chiche-
ster: Wiley-Blackwell.
Reid, J. and Associates (online) www.reid.com for a frequently updated compendium of trial and appeal
court decisions regarding Miranda, police interrogation and confession evidence.
Rendall, D., Kollias, S. and Ney, C. (2005) ‘Pitch (F0) and formant profiles of human vowels and
vowel-like baboon grunts: the role of vocalizer body size and voice-acoustic allometry’, Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 117: 944–55.
Rendle-Short, J. (2007) ‘“Catherine, you’re wasting your time”: address terms within the Australian
political interview’, Journal of Pragmatics, 35: 1503–25.
Renoe, C. (1996) ‘Seeing is believing? Expert testimony and the construction of interpretive authority
in an American trial’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, IX(26): 115–37.
Renton, D. (1975) The Preparation of Legislation, London: HMSO.
Revell, D.L. (2004) ‘Authoring bilingual laws: the importance of process’, Brooklyn Journal of Interna-
tional Law, 29(3): 1085–1105.
Reyes, A. (2005) ‘Appropriation of African American slang by Asian American youth’, Journal of Socio-
linguistics, 9(4): 509–32.
Richardson, M. (2004) ‘Trade marks and language’, Sydney Law Review, 9: 193. Available online at:
www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/journals/SydLRev/2004/9.html?query=%22Trade%20Mark
%22%20AND%20linguist (accessed December 2008).
Richardson, P.J. (ed.) (2006)Archbold 2006: Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, London: Sweet &Maxwell.
Riding, A. (1999) ‘The crown court witness service: little help in the witness box’, The Howard Journal,
38(4): 411–20.
Rigney, A. (1999) ‘Questioning in interpreted testimony’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(1): 83–108.
Risinger, D.M. (2000) ‘Navigating expert reliability: are criminal standards of certainty being left on the
dock?’, Albany Law Review, 64: 99–152.
Risinger, D.M. and Saks, M.J. (1996) ‘Science and nonscience in the courts: Daubert meets hand-
writing identification expertise’, Iowa Law Review, 82: 21–74.
Risinger, D.M., Saks, M.J., Thompson, W.C. and Rosenthal, R. (2002) ‘The Daubert/Kumho impli-
cations of observer effects in forensic science: hidden problems of expectation and suggestion’, Cali-
fornia Law Review, 90: 1–56.
Roach, K. and Trotter, G. (2005) ‘Miscarriages of justice in the war against terrorism’, Pennsylvania State
Law Review, 109: 4. 967–1041. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=742628.
Robertshaw, P. (1998) Summary Justice, London: Cassell.
Roberts-Smith, L. (2009) ‘Forensic interpreting – trial and error’, in S. Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Cri-
tical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting: A Shared Responsibility, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benja-
mins Publishing Company, 13–36.
Robinson, W. (2005) ‘How the European commission drafts legislation in 20 languages’,Clarity, 53: 4–10.
Rock, F. (2001) ‘The genesis of a witness statement’, Forensic Linguistics, 8(2): 44–72.
——(2006) ‘Looking the other way: linguistic ethnography and forensic linguistics’, UK Linguistic Eth-
nography Forum Papers. Available online at: www.ling-ethnog.org.uk/documents/papers/rock2006.
pdf (accessed 12 July 2009).
REFERENCES
649
——(2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention, Basingstoke, London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Rogers, R., Harrison, K.S., Shuman, D.W., Sewell, K.W. and Hazelwood, L.L. (2007) ‘An analysis of
Miranda warnings and waivers: comprehension and coverage’, Law and Human Behavior, 31: 177–92.
Romero, B.G. (2008) ‘Here are your right hands: exploring interpreter qualifications’, University of
Dayton Law Review, 34(1): 15–33.
Rose, P. (2002) Forensic Speaker Identification, London: Taylor and Francis.
——(2006) ‘Technical forensic speaker recognition: evaluation, types and testing of evidence’, Computer
Speech and Language, 20: 159–91.
Rose, P. and Morrison, G.S. (2009) ‘A response to the UK position statement on forensic speaker
comparison’ International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 16(1): 139–63.
Rosen, L. (2006) Law as Culture: An Invitation, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rosenne, S. (1983) ‘The meaning of “authentic text” in modern treaty law’, in R. Bernhardt, W.K.
Geck, G. Jaenicke and H. Steinberger (eds), Festschrift für Herrmann Mosler, Berlin and New York:
Springer, 759–84.
Ross, S. (1998) ‘Self-assessment in second language testing: a meta-analysis and analysis of experiential
factors’, Language Testing, 15: 1–20.
Rosulek, L.F. (2008) ‘Legitimation and the heteroglossic nature of closing argument in criminal trials’,
paper presented at Georgetown University Roundtable 2008, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
RRT (Refugee Review Tribunal, Australia). (28 August 2000). N00/34478. Decision and reasons for
decision. Available online at: www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/rrt/2000/835.html (accessed 19
March 2008).
RSAA (Refugee Status Appeals Authority, New Zealand) (2002) Refugee Appeal No. 73545/02.
Aviailable online at: www.refugee.org.nz/Fulltext/73545–02.htm (accessed 29 October 2004).
Rumelhart, D.E. and McClelland, J. (1986) ‘On learning the past tenses of English verbs’, in D.E.
Rumelhart and J. McClelland (eds) Parallel Distributed Processing, Boston, MA: MIT Press, 216–71.
Russell, S. (2000) ‘“Let me put it simply … ”: the case for a standard translation of the police caution
and its explanation’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 26–48.
Saarni, C. and Harris, P.L. (eds) (1989) Children’s Understanding of Emotion, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sabat, S. and Harré, R. (1992) ‘The construction and deconstruction of self in Alzheimer’s disease’,
Ageing and Society, 12: 443–61.
Sacks, H. (1972) ‘Notes on police assessment of moral character’, in D. Sudnow (ed.) Studies in Social
Interaction, Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 280–93.
——(1984) ‘Notes on methodology’ (edited by Gail Jefferson). in J.M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds),
Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 21–27.
——(1992) Lectures on Conversation, vols. I and II, (edited by G. Jefferson), Oxford: Blackwell.
Sacks, H. and Schegloff, E. (2002) ‘Home position’, Gesture, 2: 133–46.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation’, Language, 50(4): 696–735.
Salfati, C.G. and Bateman, A.L. (2005) ‘Serial homicide: an investigation of behavioural consistency’,
Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 2: 121–44.
Sanchez, R. (1983) Chicano Discourse: Sociohistoric Perspectives, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Sanday, P.R. (1996) A Woman Scorned: Acquaintance Rape on Trial, New York: Doubleday.
Sanders, A., Creaton, J., Bird, S. and Weber, L. (1997) Victims with Learning Disabilities: Negotiating the
Criminal Justice System, Oxford: University of Oxford Occasional Papers.
Sanders, J. (2001) ‘Complex litigation at the millenium: Kumho and how we know’, Law and Con-
temporary Problems, 64: 373–415.
——(2007) ‘Expert witness ethics’, Fordham Law Review, 76: 1539–84.
Sanderson, P. (2007) ‘Linguistic analysis of competing trademarks’, Language Matters, 38: 132–49.
Santtila, P., Fritzon, K. and Tamelander, A.L. (2005a) ‘Linking arson incidents on the basis of crime
scene behaviour’, Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 19: 1–16.
REFERENCES
650
Santtila, P., Junkkila, J. and Sandnabba, N.K. (2005b) ‘Behavioural linking of stranger rapes’, Journal of
Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 2: 87–103.
Sarcevic, S. (1997) New Approach to Legal Translation, The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Savage, C. (14 May 2009) ‘A judge’s view of judging is on the record’, The New York Times. Available
online at: www.nytimes.com/2009/05/15/us/15judge.html (accessed 31 August 2009).
Saxton, B. (1998) ‘How well do jurors understand jury instructions? A field test using real juries and real
trials in Wyoming’, Land and Water Literary Review, 33: 59.
Saywitz, K. (1995) ‘Improving children’s testimony: the question, the answer and the environment’, in
M.S. Zaragoza, J. Graham, G.C.N. Hall, R. Hirschman, and S. Yossef (eds) Memory and Testimony in
the Child Witness, London: Sage, Vol 1: 109–40.
Scelfo, J. (2001) ‘When law goes pop’, An Interview with Richard Sherwin, Stayfree Magazine, Issue 18.
Available online at: www.stayfreemagazine.org/archives/18/sherwin.html.
Schachter, D. (2001) The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind Forgets and Remembers, Boston, MA and
New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Schane, S. (2006) Language and the Law, London: Continuum.
Schank, R.C. and Abelson, R.P. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human
Knowledge Structures, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scheck, B., Neufeld, P. and Dwyer, J. (2000) Actual Innocence, New York: Doubleday.
Schegloff, E.A. (1987) ‘Some sources of misunderstanding in talk-in-interaction’, Linguistics, 25: 201–18.
——(1988) ‘Presequences and indirection: applying speech act theory to ordinary conversation’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 12: 55–62.
——(2007) Sequence Organization: A Primer in Conversation Analysis, Vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schiffrin, D. (1981) ‘Tense variation in narrative’, Language, 57(1): 45–62.
——(1994) Approaches to Discourse, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1996) ‘Narrative as self-portrait: sociolinguistic constructions of identity’, Language in Society, 25:
167–203.
Schötz, S. (2006) ‘Perception, analysis and synthesis of speaker age’, unpublished PhD. dissertation,
Lund University, Sweden. Available online at: http://person2.sol.lu.se/SusanneSchotz/downloads/
Thesis_S_Schoetz_2006.pdf
——(2007) ‘Acoustic analysis of adult speaker age’, in C. Müller (ed.) Speaker Classification I: Funda-
mentals, Features, and Methods, Berlin: Springer.
Schriver, K. (1997) Dynamics in Document Design, New York: Wiley.
Schulhofer, S. (1996) ‘Miranda’s practical effects: substantial benefits and vanishingly small social costs’,
Northwestern Law Review, 90: 500–563.
——(1998) Unwanted Sex: The Culture of Intimidation and the Failure of Law, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Schwarzer, W.W. (1981) ‘Communicating with juries: problems and remedies’, California Law Review,
69: 731.
Schweda Nicholson, N. (22 November 2008) Unpublished interview with Rabbi Fred Neulander’,
New Jersey State Prison, Trenton.
Scollon, R. (1998) Mediated Discourse as Social Interaction: A Study of News Discourse, London: Longman.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2003) Discourses in Place: Language in the Material World, London:
Routledge.
Searle, J. (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, London: Cambridge University Press.
——(1975) ‘Indirect speech acts’, in J. Cole and J. Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics Vol. 3, Speech Acts,
New York: Academic Press: 59–82.
Seebohm, T. (2004) Hermeneutics: Method and Methodology, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Seidman, A.W., Seidman, R.B. and Abeyesekere, N. (2001) Legislative Drafting for Democratic Social
Change: A Manual for Drafters, London: Kluwer Law International.
Sharrock, W.W. and Watson, D.R. (1989) ‘Talk and police work: notes on the traffic in information’,
in H. Coleman (ed.) Working with Language, New York: Norton, 431–49.
REFERENCES
651
Shaw, S and Weir, C.J. (2007) Examining Writing in a Second Language, Studies in Language Testing 26,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press and Cambridge ESOL.
Shepherd, E. (1991) ‘Ethical interviewing’, Policing, 7: 42–60.
Shepherd, E. and Milne, R. (2006) ‘“Have you told management about this?” Bringing witness inter-
viewing into the 21st century’, in A. Heaton-Armstrong, E. Shepherd, G. Gudjonsson and D.
Wolchover (eds) Witness Testimony: Psychological, Investigative and Evidential Perspectives, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 131–52.
Sherwin, R.K. (2002) When Law Goes Pop, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shipman interviews audio files. Available online at : http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/uk/2000/
the_shipman_murders/the_shipman_files/613627.stm (accessed 31 March 2009).
Shipman trial transcript. Available online at: www.the-shipman-inquiry.org.uk/trialtrans.asp (accessed
12 August 2009).
Shoop, J. (1994) ‘Image of fear: minority teens allege bias in gang profiling’, Trial, 30(3): 12–16.
Shuy, R.W. (1982) ‘Topic as the unit of analysis in a criminal law case’, in D. Tannen (ed.) Analyzing
Discourse: Text and Talk, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 113–26.
——(1990a) ‘The analysis of tape recorded conversations’, in P.P. Andrews and M.B. Peterson (eds)
Criminal Intelligence Analysis, Loomis, CA: Palmer Press, 117–48.
——(1990b) ‘Warning labels: language, law, and comprehensibility’, American Speech, 65(4): 291–303.
——(1993a) Language Crimes: The Use and Abuse of Language Evidence in the Courtroom, Malden, MA and
Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1993b) ‘Using language evidence in money laundering trials’, American Speech, 68(1):3–19.
——(1997) ‘Ten unanswered language questions about Miranda’, Forensic Linguistics, 4(2): 175–95.
——(1998a) Bureaucratic Language in Government and Business, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
——(1998b) The Language of Confession, Interrogation, and Deception, Thousand Oaks, CA and London:
Sage Publishing.
——(2001) ‘Discourse analysis in the legal context’, in D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton (eds)
The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell, 437–52.
——(2002) Linguistic Battles in Trademark Disputes, Basingstoke/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2005) Creating Language Crimes, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2006) Linguistics in the Courtroom: A Practical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2008) Fighting over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shuy, R.W. and Staton, J.J. (2000) ‘Review of Grisso, Thomas “Instruments for assessing understanding
and appreciation of Miranda Rights”’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 131–36.
Sieberg, D. (20 January 2004) ‘Microsoft takes on teen’s site MikeRoweSoft.com.’ CNN News. Avail-
able online at: http://edition.cnn.com/2004/TECH/internet/01/20/rowe.fight/index.html (accessed
25 August 2009).
Silverstein, M. (1998) ‘The improvisational performance of culture in realtime discursive practice’, in R.
K. Sawyer (ed.), Creativity in Performance, London: Ablex, 266–312.
Silverstein, M. and Urban, G. (1996) ‘The natural history of discourse’, in M. Silverstein and G. Urban
(eds), Natural Histories of Discourse, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1–17.
Simo Bobda, A.S., Wolf, H.G. and Lothar, P. (1999) ‘Identifying regional and national origin of Eng-
lish-speaking Africans seeking asylum in Germany’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(2): 300–319.
Simon, D. (2004) ‘A third view of the black box: cognitive coherence in legal decision making’, Uni-
versity of Chicago Law Review, 71: 511–84.
Simons, H. (2001) Persuasion in Society, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Simpson, A.P. (2001) ‘Dynamic consequences of differences in male and female vocal tract dimensions’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109: 2153–64.
Simpson, A.P. and Ericsdotter, C. (2007) ‘Sex-specific differences in f0 and vowel space’, Proceedings of
the 16th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Saarbrücken, Germany, 933–36. Available online at:
www.icphs2007.de/conference/Papers/1333/1333.pdf.
Simpson, A.W. (ed.) (1984) Biographical Dictionary of the Common Law, London: Butterworths.
REFERENCES
652
Sinclair, J.M. and Coulthard, M. (1992) ‘Towards an analysis of discourse’, in M. Coulthard (ed.),
Advances in Spoken Discourse Analysis, London and New York: Routledge, 1–34.
Sinclair, J.M. and Renouf, A. (1988) ‘A lexical syllabus for language learning’, in R. Carter and M.
McCarthy (eds) Vocabulary and Language Teaching, Harlow: Longman, 140–58.
Singler, J. (2004) ‘The “linguistic” asylum interview and the linguist’s evaluation of it, with special
reference to applicants for Liberian political asylum in Switzerland’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 11(2): 222–39.
Skehan, P. (1998) A Cognitive Approach to Learning Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slater, S. and Valente, C. (2009) ‘Barclays to end final salary pensions’. Available online at: http://uk.
reuters.com/article/idUKTRE5522Y620090603 (accessed 3 June 2009).
Slembrouck, S. (1992) ‘The parliamentary Hansard “Verbatim” Report: the written construction of
spoken discourse’, Language and Literature, 1(2): 101–19.
Slobin, D.I. (1966) ‘Grammatical transformations and sentence comprehension in childhood and
adulthood’, Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 5(3): 219–27.
——(1996) ‘Two ways to travel: verbs of motion in English and Spanish’, in M. Shibatani and A.
Thompson (eds), Grammatical Constructions. Their Form and Meaning, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——(2001) ‘Discourse analysis in the legal context’, in D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton (eds)
The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell, 437–52.
Sloboda, J. (1986) ‘Reading a case study of cognitive skills’, in A. Gellatly (ed.) The Skillful Mind,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slobogin, C. (2003) ‘Toward taping’, Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 1: 309–22.
Smart, C. (1986) ‘Feminism and the law: some problems of analysis and strategy’, International Journal of
the Sociology of Law, 14: 109–23.
——(1989) Feminism and the Power of Law, London: Routledge.
Smith, B.H. (1980) ‘Narrative versions, narrative theories’, Critical Inquiry, 7: 209–18.
Smith, V.L. (1991) ‘Prototypes in the courtroom: lay representations of legal concepts’, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 61: 857–72.
——(1993) ‘When prior knowledge and law collide: helping jurors use the law’, Law and Human
Behavior, 17(5): 507–36.
Snedaker, K. (1991) ‘Storytelling in opening statements: framing the argumentation of the trial’, in D.
Papke (ed.) Narrative and the Legal Discourse: A Reader in Storytelling and the Law, Liverpool: Deborah
Charles Publications, 132–57.
Solan, L. (1993) The Language of Judges, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
——(1998) ‘Linguistic experts as semantic tour guides’, Forensic Linguistics, 5 (ii): 87–106.
——(1999) ‘Can the legal system use experts on meaning?’, Tennessee Law Review, 66: 1167–99.
——(2008) ‘Talking like a person, thinking like a lawyer (and vice versa)’, in M. Solly, M. Conoscenti
and S. Campagna (eds) Verbal/Visual Narrative Texts in Higher Education, Bern: Peter Lang.
Solan, L.P. and Tiersma, P. (2004) ‘Author identification in American courts’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4):
448–65.
——(2005) Speaking of Crime: The Language of Criminal Justice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Solomon, N. (1996) ‘Plain English: From a perspective of language in society’, in R. Hasan and G.
Williams (eds) Literacy in Society, London: Longman, 279–307.
Spassova, M.S. and Grant, T. (2008) ‘Categorizing Spanish written texts by author gender and origin by
means of morpho-syntactic trigrams’, paper presented at the Conference, Curriculum, Language and the
Law, Dubrovnik, 18–21 September.
Spence, G. (1995) How to Argue and Win Every Time, New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.
Spence, L. (1997) Legacy, Athens, OH: Swallow Press/Ohio University Press.
Spencer-Wendel, S. (10 July 2004) ‘Teen suspect gets probation in baby’s death’, Palm Beach Post.
Available online at: www.palmbeachpost.com/news/content/auto/epaper/editions/saturday/news_0
4fe26f6f445312f003f.html (accessed 9 July 2009).
Spiecker, S. and Worthington, D. (2003) ‘The influence of opening statement/closing argument orga-
nizational strategy on juror verdict and damage awards’, Law and Human Behavior, 27(4): 437–56.
REFERENCES
653
Springer, J. (16 April 2008) Unpublished interview, Port Jefferson, NY.
Stamatatos, E. (2006) ‘Authorship attribution based on feature set subspacing ensembles’, International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Tools, 20: 1–16.
Stanisławski, J., Billip, K. and Chociłowska, Z. (1986) Podręczny słownik angielsko-polski [A Practical
English–Polish dictionary], 7th edn, Warsaw: Wiedza Powszechna.
Stayfree Magazine, Issue 18. Available online at: www.stayfreemagazine.org/archives/18/sherwin.html.
Stephen, F. ([1863] 1890) A General View of the Criminal Law, 2nd edn, London: Macmillan.
Stephen, L. (1991) Hours in a Library, London: The Folio Society.
Stokoe, E. (2009) ‘“For the benefit of the tape”: formulating embodied conduct in designedly uni-
modal recorded police-suspect interrogations’, Journal of Pragmatics, 41 (10): 1887–1904.
Stokoe, E. and Edwards, D. (2007) ‘“Black this, black that”: racial insults and reported speech in
neighbour complaints and police interrogations’, Discourse & Society, 18(3): 355–90.
——(2008) ‘“Did you have permission to smash your neighbour’s door?” Silly questions and their
answers in police-suspect interrogations’, Discourse Studies, 10(1): 89–111.
Stone, M. (1995) Cross-examination in Criminal Trials, 2nd edn, London: Butterworths.
Storey, R. (1997) The Art of Persuasive Communication, Farnham: Gower Publishing Limited.
Stratman, J.F. and Dahl, P. (1996) ‘Readers’ comprehension of temporary restraining orders in domestic
violence cases: a missing link in abuse prevention?’ Forensic Linguistics, 3 (ii): 211–31.
Streeck, J. (2008) ‘Gesture in political communication: a case study of the democratic presidential can-
didates during the 2004 primary campaign’, Research in Language and Social Interaction, 41(2): 154–86.
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture, Oxford: Blackwell.
Stuntz, W.J. (2001) ‘Miranda’s mistake’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 975–99.
Stygall, G. (1991) ‘Texts in oral contexts: the “transmission” of jury instructions in an Indiana trial’, in
C. Bazerman and J. Paradis (eds) Textual Dynamics of the Professions, Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.
——(1994) Trial Language: Differential Discourse Processing and Discursive Formation, Amsterdam and Phi-
ladelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
——(2002) ‘Textual barriers to United States immigration’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal
Process, Houndmills: Palgrave.
Stylianou, Y. (2008) ‘Voice transformation’, in J. Benesty, M.M. Sondhi and Y. Huang (eds) Springer
Handbook of Speech Processing, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sudnow, D. (1965) ‘Normal crimes: sociological features of a penal code in a public defender’s office’,
Social Problems, 12: 255–76.
Sullivan, M. (2005) ‘Maybe we shouldn’t study “gangs”: does reification obscure youth violence?’,
Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 21: 170–90.
Sullivan, R. (2002) Sullivan and Driedger on the Construction of Statutes, 4th edn, Toronto: Butterworths.
Summerfield, T. and McHoul, A. (2005) ‘Family as a commonsensical device and its place in law’,
International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 18(3): 242–61.
Svartvik, J. (1968) The Evans Statements: A Case for Forensic Linguistics, Göteborg: University of
Gothenburg Press.
Swales, J.M. and Bhatia, V.K. (1983) ‘An approach to the linguistic study of legal documents’, Fach-
sprache, 5(3): 98–108.
Swann, J., Deumert, A., Lillis, T. and Mesthrie, R. (2004) A Dictionary of Sociolinguistics, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Szymczak, M. (ed.) (1978) Słownik języka polskiego [Dictionary of the Polish Language], Warsaw: PWN.
Tabory, M. (1980) Multilingualism in International Law and Institutions, New York: Sijthoff & Noordhoff.
Tagg, C. (2009) A Corpus Linguistics Study of SMS Text Messaging, unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Birmingham.
Tamony, P. (1986) ‘Coca-Cola: the most-lawed name’, in K. Harder (ed.) Names and Their Varieties: A
Collection of Essays on Onamastics, Lanham, MD: American Name Society/University Press of Amer-
ica, 197–202.
REFERENCES
654
Tannen, D. (1986) ‘Introducing constructed dialogue in Greek and American conversational and lit-
erary narrative’, in F. Coulmas (ed.) Direct and Indirect Speech, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 311–32.
——(1989) Talking Voices, New York: Cambridge University Press.
——(1993) Framing in Discourse, New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2004) Conversational Style, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue and Imagery in Conversational Discourse, 2nd edn, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, N. and Joudo, J. (2005) The Impact of Pre-Recorded Video and Closed Circuit Television Testimony by
Adult Sexual Assault Complainants on Jury Decision Making: An Experimental Study, Canberra: Australian
Institute of Criminology. Available online at: www.aic.gov.au/publications/rpp/68/index.html
(accessed 16 June 2009).
Tennessee Pattern Jury Instructions – Criminal, 4th edn (1995) New York: West.
Thomas, G.C. (1996) ‘Plain talk about the Miranda empirical debate: a “steady-state” theory of con-
fessions’, UCLA Law Review, 43: 933–59.
——(2004) ‘History’s lesson for the right to counsel’, University of Illinois Law Review, 545–97.
Thornborrow, J. (2002) Power Talk: Language and Interaction in Institutional Discourse, London: Longman.
Thornton, G.C. (1996) Legislative Drafting, London: Butterworth.
Tiersma, P. (1993) ‘Reforming the language of jury instructions’, Hofstra Law Review, 22: 37.
——(1995) ‘Dictionaries and death: do jurors understand mitigation?’, Utah Law Review, 1.
——(1999) Legal Language (hbk), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2000) Legal Language (pbk), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2002) ‘The language and law of product warnings’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Pro-
cess, Basingstoke, Hampshire and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 54–71.
——(2005) ‘The new Black’s’, Journal of Legal Education, 55: 386.
——(2007) ‘The language of consent in rape law’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language of Sexual Crime,
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 83–103.
Tiersma, P. and Solan, L. (2002) ‘The linguist on the witness stand: forensic linguistics in American
courts’, Language, 78: 221–39.
Titze, I. (1994) Principles of Voice Production, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Todd, R. (2008) ‘Court interpreters inadequate?’, Law Times, 21 April.
Tonkin, M., Grant, T. and Bond, J.W. (2008) ‘To link or not to link: a test of the case linkage prin-
ciples using serial car theft data’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 5: 58–77.
Toolan, M. (2001) Narrative: A Critical Linguistic Introduction, 2nd edn, London: Routledge.
Towner, B. (2008) ‘What are they talking about? 50 words that kids think you don’t know’, AARP
Bulletin, 39.
Tracy, K. (1997) ‘Interactional trouble in emergency service requests: a problem of frame’, Research on
Language and Social Interaction, 30: 315–43.
——(2009) ‘How questioning constructs judge identities: oral argument about same-sex marriage’,
Discourse Studies, 11(2):199–221.
Tracy, K. and Craig, R.T. (2009) ‘Membership category terms in court discourse about same-sex
marriage’, paper presented at 9th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and Law, Amsterdam.
Travers, M. (1997) The Reality of Law: Work and Talk in a Firm of Criminal Lawyers, Aldershot: Ashgate.
——(2006) ‘Understanding talk in legal settings: what law and society studies can learn from a con-
versation analyst’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 447–65.
Trenholm, S. (1989) Persuasion and Social Influence, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Trinch, S. (2005a) ‘Acquiring authority through the acquisition of genre: latinas, intertextuality and
violence’, Speech, Language, and the Law, 12(1): 19–47.
——(2005b) ‘Disappearing discourse: performative texts and identity in legal contexts’, paper presented
at the International Linguistic Association, 50th Anniversary Conference on Language and Law, New
York City, April 2005.
——(forthcoming) ‘Disappearing discourse: performative texts and identity in legal contexts’, Critical
Inquiry in Language Studies, 7(1–2).
REFERENCES
655
Trinch, S. and Berk-Seligson, S. (2002) ‘Narrating in protective order interviews: a source of interac-
tional trouble’, Language in Society, 31: 383–418.
Trosborg, A. (1995) ‘Statutes and contracts: an analysis of legal speech acts in the English language of
the law’, Journal of Pragmatics, 23: 31–53.
——(1997) Rhetorical Structures in Legal Language: Discourse Analysis of Statutes and Contracts, Tübingen:
Gunter Narr Verlag.
Trudgill, P. (1988) ‘Norwich revisited: recent linguistic changes in an English urban dialect’, English
World-Wide, 9: 33–49.
Tschäpe, N., Trouvain, J., Bauer, D. and Jessen, M. (2005) ‘Idiosyncratic patterns of filled pauses’, paper
presented at the 14th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics,
Marrakesh.
Tuebner, G. (1993) Law as an Autopoietic System, Oxford: Blackwell.
Tully, B. and Cahill, D. (1984) Police interviewing of the mentally handicapped: an experimental study, The
Police Foundation, UK.
Turell, T. (2004) ‘Textual kidnapping revisited: the case of plagiarism in literary translation’, in Speech,
Language and the Law, 11(i): 1–26.
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) (2007) The 1951 Refugee Convention:
Questions and Answers, Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
——(2008) 2007 Global Trends: Refugees, Asylum-seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Per-
sons, Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Uviller, R.H. (1988) Tempered Zeal, Chicago: Contemporary Books.
——(1996)Virtual Justice: The Flawed Prosecution of Crime in America, NewHaven CT: Yale University Press.
Valentine, B. (1995) The Gang Intelligence Manual, Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Vanderveken, D. (1990) Meaning and Speech Acts, Volume I: Principles of Language Use, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Vernon, M. and Coley, J. (1978) ‘Violation of constitutional rights: the language impaired person and
the Miranda Warnings’, Journal of Rehabilitation of the Deaf, 11(4): 1–8.
Vihman, M. (1996) Phonological Development: The Origins of Language in the Child, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Vinkhuyzen, E. and Szymanski, M.H. (2005) ‘Would you like to do it yourself? Service requests and
their non-granting responses’, in K. Richards and P. Seedhouse (eds) Applying Conversation Analysis,
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 91–106.
de Vries, L. (2002) ‘Guilt by association: proposition 21’s gang conspiracy law will increase youth vio-
lence in California’, University of San Francisco Law Review, 37: 191–225.
Wachal, R.S. (1966) ‘Linguistic evidence, statistical inference and disputed authorship’, unpublished
PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin.
Wadensjö, C. (1998) Interpreting as Interaction, London and New York: Longman.
Wagenaar, W.A., van Koppen, P.J. and Crombag, H.F.M. (1993) Anchored Narratives: The Psychology of
Criminal Evidence, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Wagner, A. (2002) ‘The legal discourse of the Common Law: a game of chess’, International Journal for
the Semiotics of Law, 15: 345–60.
Waldman, A. (2006) ‘Prophetic justice’, The Atlantic, October issue.
Walker, A.G. (1986a) ‘Context, transcripts, and appellate readers’, Justice Quarterly, 3(4): 409–27.
——(1986b) ‘The Verbatim Record: the myth and the reality’, in S. Fisher and A.D. Todd (eds), Dis-
course and Institutional Authority, Norwood, NJ: Erlbaum, 205–22.
——(1987) ‘Linguistic manipulation, power and the legal setting’, in L. Kedar (ed.), Power through Dis-
course, Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 57–80.
——(1990) ‘Language at work in the law: the customs, conventions, and appellate consequences of
court reporting’, in J.N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds), Language in the Judicial Process, New York:
Plenum Press, 203–44.
——(1999) Handbook on Questioning Children: A Linguistic Perspective, 2nd edn, Washington, DC: ABA
Center on Children and the Law.
REFERENCES
656
Walker, A.G. and Warren, A. (1995) ‘The language of the child abuse interview: Asking the questions,
understanding the answers’, in T. Ney (ed.) True and False Allegations of Child Sex Abuse: Assessment
and Case Management, New York: Bruner-Mazel, 153–62.
Walkley, J. (1987) Police Interrogation: A Handbook for Investigators, London: Police Review Publications.
Wall, J.F. (1970) Andrew Carnegie, New York: Oxford University Press.
Walter, B. (1988) The Jury Summation as Speech Genre, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benja-
mins Publishing Company.
Walton, D. (1989) Informal Logic: A Handbook for Critical Argumentation, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Wang, W.S-Y. (1980) ‘Assessing language incompetence’, The Linguistic Reporter, 22(8): 2.
Wardhaugh, R. (1985) How Conversation Works, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wason, P.C. and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1972) Psychology of Reasoning: Structure and Content, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Watson, D.R. (1983) ‘The presentation of victim and motive discourse: the case of police interrogations
and interviews’, Victimology, 8: 31–52.
——(1990) ‘Some features of the elicitation of confession in murder interrogations’, in G. Psathas (ed.)
Interaction Competence: Studies in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis, Washington, DC: Uni-
versity Press of America, 263–95.
Watson, E.R. (1952) Trial of William Palmer, revised edition, London and Edinburgh: William Hodge.
Watts, R.J. (2003) Politeness, Cambridge: CUP.
Webb, V. and Katz, C. (2006) ‘A study of police gang units in six cities’, in A. Egley. C.L. Maxson, J.
Miller, M.W. Klein. (eds) The Modern Gang Reader, 3rd edn, Los Angeles CA: Roxbury, 349–60.
Wei, L. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2000) ‘Dimensions of bilingualism’, in L.Wei (ed.) The Bilingualism Reader, London: Routledge, 3–25.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M.I. (1968) ‘Empirical foundations for a theory of language
change’, in W. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds) Directions for Historical Linguistics, Austin, TX: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 95–195.
Weir, C. (1990) Understanding and Developing Language Tests, London: Prentice Hall.
Weisflog, W.E. (1987) ‘Problems of legal translation’, Swiss Reports presented at the XIIth International
Congress of Comparative Law, Zürich: Schulthess, 179–218.
Weisselberg, C.D. (2001) ‘In the stationhouse after Dickerson’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 1121–67.
Wells, J.C. (1999) ‘British English pronunciation preferences: a changing scene’, Journal of the Interna-
tional Phonetic Association, 29: 33–50.
Wells, W.A.N. (1991) An Introduction to the Law of Evidence, S. Australia: A. B. Caudell.
Westcott, H. and Cross, M. (1996) This Far and No Further: Towards Ending the Abuse of Disabled Chil-
dren, Birmingham: Venture Press.
Whalen, J. (1995) ‘A technology of order production: computer-aided dispatch in public safety com-
munications’, in P. ten Have and G. Psathas (eds) Situated Order: Studies in the Social Organization of
Talk and Embodied Activities, Washington, DC: University Press of America, 187–230.
Whalen, J., Zimmerman, D.H. and Whalen, M.R. (1988) ‘When words fail: a single case analysis’,
Social Problems, 35: 335–62.
Whalen, M.R. and Zimmerman, D.H. (1990) ‘Describing trouble: practical epistemology in citizen calls
to the police’, Language in Society, 19: 465–92.
Whipple, G. (1911) ‘The psychology of testimony’, Psychological Bulletin, 8: 307–9.
White, A. and Mansfield, C. (2002) ‘Literacy and contract’, Stanford Law and Policy Review, 13: 233–66.
White, J.B. (1982) ‘The invisible discourse of the law: reflections on legal literacy and general educa-
tion’, Michigan Quarterly Review, 420–38.
White, W.S. (2001) ‘Miranda’s failure to restrain pernicious interrogation practices’, Michigan Law
Review, 99: 1211–47.
——(2006) ‘Deflecting a suspect from requesting an attorney’,University of Pittsburgh Law Review, 68: 29–75.
Whiteside, S. (2001) ‘Sex-specific fundamental and formant frequency patterns in a cross-sectional
study’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 110: 464–78.
REFERENCES
657
Wieder, D.L. (1974) ‘Telling the code’, in R. Turner (ed.) Ethnomethodology: Selected Readings, Har-
mondsworth: Penguin, 144–72.
Wigmore, J.H. (1913) The Principles of Judicial Proof, Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company.
Wikipedia (2008) ‘Microsoft vs. MikeRoweSoft’. Available online at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Mike_Rowe_(student) (accessed December 2008).
Williams, A. (1939) ‘Hamburger progeny’, American Speech, 14(2): 154.
Williams, A., Garrett, P. and Coupland, N. (1999) ‘Dialect recognition’, in D. Preston (ed.) Handbook of
Perceptual Dialectology, Philadelphia: Benjamins, 345–58.
Williams, J. (1992) ‘The question of plagiarism and breach of copyright in the dictionary-making pro-
cess (with particular reference to the UK)’, in H. Tommola, K. Varantola, T. Salmi-Tolonen and J.
Schopp (eds.), Euralex ‘92 Proceedings. Papers submitted to the 5th EURALEX International Congress on
Lexicography in Tampere, Finland, 4–9 August 1992, Department of Translation Studies, University of
Tampere: Tampere, 561–70.
Williamson, T.M. (1993) ‘From interrogation to investigative interviewing: strategic trends in police
questioning’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 3: 89–99.
——(2006) Investigative Interviewing, Uffcolme, Devon: Willan Publishing.
Winter, E. (1994) ‘Clause relations as information structure: two basic structures in English’, in M.
Coulthard (ed.) Advances in Written Text Analysis, London: Routledge, 46–68.
Winton, R. (10 October 2008) ‘Gang member is first to be lifted from city’s court-imposed limits’, San
Francisco Chronicle, p. B4.
Wodak, R. (2007) ‘Pragmatics and critical discourse analysis: a cross-disciplinary inquiry’, Pragmatics and
Cognition, 15(1): 203–25.
Wolchover, D. (1989) ‘Should judges sum up on the facts?’, Criminal Law Review, 781–92.
Wood, L. and Kroger, R. (2000) Doing Discourse Analysis: Methods for Studying Action in Talk and Text,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Woodbury, H. (1984) ‘The strategic use of questions in court’, Semiotica, 48(3/4): 197–228.
Woodhams, J. and Hollin, C. (2008) ‘Incorporating context in linking crimes: an exploratory study of situa-
tional similarity and if-then contingencies’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 5: 1–23.
Woodhams, J. and Toye, K. (2007) ‘An empirical test of the assumptions of case linkage and offender
profiling with serial commercial robberies’, Psychology, Public Policy, Law, 13: 59–85.
Woodhams, J., Grant, T.D. and Price, A.R.G. (2007) ‘From marine ecology to crime analysis:
improving the detection of serial sexual offences using a taxonomic similarity measure’, Journal of
Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 4: 17–27.
Woodhams, J., Hollin, C. and Bull, R. (2007) ‘The psychology of linking crimes: review of the evi-
dence’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 12.: 233–49.
——(2008) ‘Incorporating context in linking crimes: an exploratory study of situational similarity and
if-then contingencies’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 5: 1–23.
Woods, N. (2006) Describing Discourse: A Practical Guide to Discourse Analysis, London: Hodder Arnold.
Wooffitt, R. (1991) ‘“I was just doing X … when Y”: some inferential properties of a device in
accounts of paranormal experiences’, Text, 11(2): 267–88.
Woolls, D. (2003) ‘Better tools for the trade and how to use them’, International Journal of Speech, Lan-
guage and the Law, 10(i): 102–12.
——(2006) ‘Plagiarism’, in K. Brown (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd edn, Vol. 9,
Oxford: Elsevier.
——(forthcoming) ‘Detecting plagiarism’, in L. Solan and P. Tiersma (eds), The Oxford Handbook of
Language and Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woolls, D. and Coulthard, R.M. (1998) ‘Tools for the trade’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
the Law, 5(i): 33–57.
Wootton, A.J. (1981) ‘Two request forms of four year olds’, Journal of Pragmatics, 5: 511–23.
——(2005) ‘Interactional and sequential features informing request format selection in children’s
speech’, in A. Hakulinen and M. Selting (eds) Syntax and Lexis in Conversation, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 185–207.
REFERENCES
658
Worth, R. (2004) ‘Translating crime reports by cellphone’, New York Times, 22 April. Available online
at: www.nytimes.com/2004/04/22/nyregion/translating-crime-reports-by-using-a-cellphone.html
(accessed 8 August 2009).
Wowk, M.T. (1984) ‘Blame allocation, sex and gender in a murder interrogation’, Women’s Studies
International Forum, 7: 75–82.
Wright, J. (2005) ‘The constitutional failure of gang databases’, Stanford Journal of Civil Rights & Civil
Liberties, 2: 115–42.
Wrightsman, L.S. and Kassin, S.M. (1993) Confessions in the Courtroom, Newbury Park: Sage.
Yarmey, D. (forthcoming) ‘Factors affecting lay persons’ identification of speakers’, in L.M. Solan and
P.M. Tiersma (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Language and Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ye, Z. and Zhou, X. (2008) ‘Involvement of cognitive control in sentence comprehension: evidence
from ERPs’, Brain Research, 1203(8): 103–15.
Yermish, S. (2006) ‘Crawford v. Washington and expert testimony: limiting the use of testimonial
hearsay’, Champion Magazine, 30 November: 12–16.
Yoo, I.W. and Blankenship, B. (2003) ‘Duration of epenthetic [t] in polysyllabic American English
words’, Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 33: 153–64.
Zgółkowa, H. (ed.) (1994) Praktyczny słownik współczesnej polszczyzny [Practical Dictionary of Con-
temporary Polish], Poznań: Kurpisz.
Zimmerman, D. (1984) ‘Talk and its occasion: the case of calling the police’, in D. Schiffrin (ed.)
Meaning, Form and Use in Context: Linguistic Applications, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press, 210–28.
——(1992a) ‘The interactional organization of calls for emergency assistance’, in P. Drew and J. Heri-
tage (eds) Talk at Work: Social Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 418–69.
——(1992b) ‘Achieving context: openings in emergency calls’, in G. Watson and R.M. Seiler (eds)
Text in Context: Contributions to Ethnomethodology, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 35–51.
Zimmerman, D. and Wakin, M. (1995) ‘Thank You’s and the management of closings in emergency
calls’, paper given at the 90th Annual Meetings of the American Sociological Association, Washington, DC.
REFERENCES
659
