Statistical Analysis and Transfer of Coarse-Grain
Pictorial Style
by
Soonmin Bae
B.S. Computer Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (2003)
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
September 2005
( Soonmin Bae, MMV. All rights reserved.
The author hereby grants to MIT permission to reproduce and
distribute publicly paper and electronic copies of this thesis document
· . . . ._
in whole or in part.
A 1hr _.-
Department of Electrical En g i g and Computer Science
June 27, 2005
Certified by........
/
. .o o . . . .. . . .~. .. . . .... .o. .
Fredo Durand
/ -- - Assistant Professor
- V/J 
"/1
Accepted by .......
· ' '_CJ~. ....
Afhe <uperv.isor
APthur C. Smith
Chairman, Department Committee on Graduate Students
ARCHIV.
OF TECHNOLOGY
MAR 2 8 2006
LIBRARIES
Ism's MTRUM.tE~MASSACHL
. ... . . .- AV. . . . .. . . .. . .. . .. . I. . . .. . .. . .. . .. . .
r
Statistical Analysis and Transfer of Coarse-Grain Pictorial
Style
by
Soonmin Bae
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
on June 27, 2005, in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Abstract
We show that image statistics can be used to analyze and transfer simple notions of
pictorial style of paintings and photographs. We characterize the frequency content
of pictorial styles, such as multi-scale, spatial variations, and anisotropy properties,
using a multi-scale and oriented decomposition, the steerable pyramid. We show that
the average of the absolute steerable coefficients as a function of scale characterizes
simple notions of "look" or style. We extend this approach to account for image
non-stationarity, that is, we capture and transfer the spatial variations of multi-scale
content. In addition, we measure the standard deviation of the steerable coefficients
across orientation, which characterizes image anisotropy and permits analysis and
transfer of oriented structures.
We focus on the statistical features that can be transferred. Since we couple analysis
and transfer, our statistical model and transfer tools are consistent with the visual
effect of pictorial styles. For this reason, our technique leads to more intuitive ma-
nipulation and interpolation of pictorial styles. In addition, our statistical model can
be used to classify and retrieve images by style.
Thesis Supervisor: Fr6do Durand
Title: Assistant Professor
2
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank God for His unfailing love and grace. Without his help,
this thesis would not have been possible.
Thanks to my advisor Professor Fredo Durand, not only for his scholarly guidance
and keen insight, but also for his patient and friendly support. I am grateful to him
for letting me work on this exciting research topic. He has been a true mentor and
been enthusiastic throughout the work on this thesis.
I also appreciate the encouragement and help of the whole Computer Graphics
Group at MIT. They deserve my deepest thanks.
I thank my family and my friends. Their support and encouragement has been
invaluable for me.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Samsung Lee Kun Hee Scholarship Foundation
and the National Science Foundation for their financial support.
3
Contents
1 Introduction 6
1.1 Overview of the Approach ........................ 8
1.2 Thesis Overview ............................. 10
2 Background 11
2.1 Art Movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... 11
2.2 The Human Visual System and Visual Information Encoding ..... 16
2.3 Multi-Scale and Oriented Image Representation ............ 20
2.4 Machine Learning Techniques for Feature Extraction ......... 23
3 Image Statistics 26
3.1 Marginal Statistics ............................ 27
3.2 Joint Statistics ............................. . 28
3.3 Non-stationary Statistics ......................... 29
3.4 Applications ................................ 31
4 Previous Work 32
4.1 Statistical Analysis on Sound and Music ................ 32
4.2 Image Retrieval and Classification ................... . 33
4.3 Pictorial style Retrieval and Classification ............... 34
4.4 Style Transfer ............................... 36
5 Image Features 38
5.1 Multi-scale Amplitude .......................... 38
4
5.2 Non-stationarity .............................. 48
5.3 Anisotropy ................................. 54
5.4 High and Low Residual features ................... .. 58
5.5 Summary ................................. 58
6 Style Analysis 59
6.1 Principal Component Analysis (PCA) .................. 60
6.1.1 Multi-scale Analysis ....................... 61
6.1.2 Non-stationarity Analysis ................... . 64
6.11.3 Anisotropy Analysis ....................... 68
6.11.4 Correlation and Dependency Analysis .............. 72
6.2 Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) .................. 74
6.3 Summary ................................. 78
7 Style Transfer 79
7.1 Multi-scale Content Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 80
7.2 Non-stationarity Transfer. ........................ 83
7.3 Anisotropy Transfer ............................ 87
7.4 Comparison ................................ 89
8 Discussion 94
5
Chapter 1
Introduction
Our goal is to analyze and transfer coarse-grain aspects of pictorial style. We char-
acterize them using quantitative features and show how such features are relevant to
simple notions of pictorial styles. In particular, we are interested in features that can
be transferred between images. We seek to separate style and content and build a
statistical model of pictorial styles, with applications such as style transfer between
images and image retrieval based on styles of images.
The goal of computer graphics has been a faithful illustration of the real world.
Recently, along with the new field of non-photorealistic rendering, interest in broaden-
ing rendering styles has increased. Many researchers have developed tools for design
and reproduction of pictorial styles. However, in general, pictorial styles have been
explored implicitly, without explicit characterization. In this work, we seek to char-
acterize pictorial styles of images quantitatively.
We are interested in coarse-grain notions of style. We restrict the aspects of style to
the very noticeable visual qualities that humans detect before they scrutinize images
closely. For example, the difference between a Pointillist painting and a Renaissance
painting is obvious since the former uses small dots whereas the latter uses smooth
brush strokes. We aim to parameterize and transfer such visible differences of the
styles.
We focus on features that we can measure and analyze quantitatively. Subjective
feeling about the color schemes and contents of images is not discussed in this thesis.
6
Certainly, we do not pursue the characterization of the original and creative skills of
artistic geniuses. Moreover, labeling pictorial styles by artist or time periods is not
our main concern. Instead, we are interested in the visual similarities and differences
of pictorial styles.
The main originality of this work is the development of statistical features that
permit both the characterization and transfer of pictorial styles. We decouple the
visual effect of pictorial styles from contents of images and statistically characterize
them. We seek to change and transfer the style without changing the original content.
We believe that style transfer is a powerful evaluation tool that validates the visual
relevance of our features.
Our technique is useful for image retrieval, classification, and manipulation, while
providing easy and intuitive user interfaces. Our tool facilitates achieving images
with the visual appearance a user seeks.
Motivation Users have been empowered by a large amount of available digital
images and by powerful hardware and software. They make images, share images
with their friends and families, and sometimes make the images public. Moreover,
they modify and enhance images using image editing software. In addition, users can
search images using content-based image retrieval systems.
However, it is not always straightforward to obtain images with a desired look
and feel. Existing hardware and software tools tend to be complicated. They require
a large amount of skill and effort. Casual users need a more intuitive way to obtain
an image with the style they want. One way to achieve an image with a given look
is to take advantage of model images that already have the desired characteristics
and transfe5r such a look. This method is useful, because it does not require refined
artistic skills. Using a model image, users can search for images with the desirable
look. Alternatively, users can transfer visual qualities of the model image to their
own image.
7
Background We analyze the styles of notable artists and photographers, which
provide good insights for the characterization of pictorial styles. In this thesis, we
compare our notions of style with those of art history, although we do not seek a
strict match.
In addition, our approach is inspired by knowledge about the low-level human
visual system. An understanding of the human visual system helps us connect elusive
notions of style with computational features. Ideally, we try to characterize styles
using the features that humans use to appreciate images.
It must be understood that the goal of this project is not to reproduce the stylistic
notions in art history or the inference mechanism in the human visual system. We
focus on stylistic features that are content-independent, transferrable or parameteri-
zable, and free of high-level visual processing.
1.1 Overview of the Approach
In this work, we focus on style analysis and transfer. We use image-processing and
statistical tools to extract features characterizing pictorial styles. We validate the
correlation of the features with pictorial styles using machine learning techniques.
Transferring style from one picture to another further assesses the visual relevance of
the features.
To build our descriptive model of pictorial styles, we use a data-driven inductive
method: we propose assumptions on the visual regularities and variations in visual
arts, and validate the assumptions by finding statistical features. The statistical
features should be relevant to the visual regularities and variations, and generate the
visual appearance in the paintings and photographs. To validate the statistical model
we take advantage of machine learning techniques, Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). These two tools are used to examine
whether the features represent the styles consistently.
We perform our analysis and transfer based on frequency content. For the sta-
tistical model and representation of styles, we use a multi-scale and oriented image
8
Artist Nationality Year Art movement
Beckmann German 1884-1950 Expressionism
Bohrod American 1907-1992 Surrealism
Chagall Russian 1887-1985 Expressionism
Degas French 1834-1917 Impressionism
Kandinsky Russian 1866-1944 Expressionism
Manet French 1832-1883 Impressionism
Monet French 1840-1926 Impressionism
Rembrandt Dutch 1606-1669 Baroque
Renoir French 1841-1919 Impressionism
Rubens Italian 1577-1640 Baroque
Signac French 1863-1935 Pointillism
Van Gogh Dutch 1853-1890 Expressionism
Table 1.1: The list of artists we analyze in this project
representation. Such a representation has decomposition properties that resemble
the low-level stages of the human visual system. Among multi-scale and -oriented
image representation techniques, we choose the steerable pyramid [23, 61, 62]. The
steerable pyramid has good reconstruction properties: it is free of aliasing and uses a
smooth reconstruction basis. We perform image-processing and statistical analysis in
the CIELab color space [46]. The CIELab color space is perceptually uniform and has
uncorrelated color axes that correspond to the color opponents in the visual system.
Our Image Set We selected twelve artists from the 1600s to the 1900s, from Mark
Harden's Artchive [1]. We also use casual photographs as references, as well as pho-
tographs from masters such as Ansel Adams, Doisneau, Steve McCurry and famous
photos froni National Geographic. The artists are selected to span a wide range of
style variation: some artists have very distinctive styles and others might have some-
what similar styles. Table 1.1 lists the artists we study in this work. They have
various nationalities, were of different periods, and followed different art movements.
For faithful comparison, the images are all down-sampled so that the minimum di-
mension is 512 pixels.
9
1.2 Thesis Overview
This thesis addresses the statistical analysis and transfer of pictorial style. We seek to
find a relevant feature set that characterizes style similarities and differences. Chap-
ter 2 introduces some background information that is useful for this thesis. Chapter 3
demonstrates previous work of image statistics and our relevant findings. Chapter 4
presents previous work including statistical analysis of sound and music, image clas-
sification and retrieval, pictorial style classification and retrieval, and style transfer.
Chapter 5 discusses the set of features we use. Chapter 6 validates how those features
are relevant to pictorial styles using machine learning techniques. Chapter 7 shows
the results of the style transfer. Chapter 8 summarizes our work and discusses our
future work.
10
Chapter 2
Background
Art history and our simple notions of pictorial styles have different perspectives as
well as common viewpoints. We want to discuss these discrepancies and congruencies.
Research on image statistics and the mechanics of the human visual system provides
important tools for the analysis and transfer of these regularities and variations of
pictorial styles. Our work is facilitated by tools in computer vision and image process-
ing. We use machine learning techniques to validate our analysis of these statistical
features.
The first section in this chapter covers an informal discussion of stylistic trends
that prevailed from the 1600s to the 1900s. The second section introduces the basic
mechanism in the human visual system (HVS), which covers the eye and a part of the
human brain that is responsible for processing of the visual image. The next section
discusses various image representations related to the human visual system. The last
section in this chapter reviews machine learning techniques we use to validate our
statistical model.
2.1 Art Movement
We selected. twelve artists from the 1600s to the 1900s, where each movement has
distinct characteristics. The rest of this section describes several categories used as
illustrations in this thesis such as Baroque, Impressionism, Pointillism, and Expres-
11
sionism and discusses the issues between the conventional labeling and our simple
notion of styles. The purpose of this section is not to provide an introduction to art
history. Moreover, the goal of this thesis is not to find a style model that matches
notions of pictorial styles of art history. We refer interested readers to Gombrich's
The Story of Art [24].
We focus on characterizing the visual similarities and differences between pictor-
ial styles of paintings, rather than labeling styles by movements or by time periods.
Pictorial styles are usually characterized based on aspects such as time periods, na-
tionality, subject, and the intent of artists. However, neither the definition of indi-
vidual styles nor the categorization of the artists is unanimous even among critics.
As artists explore original pictorial styles, two different artists in the same category
do not necessarily share the similar visual styles. In addition, the pictorial style of
an artist might vary significantly during his or her career, which is in the case for
painters such as Picasso or Kandinsky. This ambiguity and complexity of the notion
of style makes the labeling of data for our study a difficult issue.
Figure 2-1: Rubens' Daniel in the Lion's Den and Rembrandt's The Feast of Bels-
hazzar
The work of Rubens and Rembrandt belongs to the Baroque movement that
emerged in Europe around 1600. At that time, art was used to present religious
subjects or portraits in a very realistic way. Paintings played the role of photographs,
which did not exist at that time. Objects were drawn with details and each painting
12
had a specific subject and real objects to depict. To present the subject and the main
object, the degree of details was carefully arranged. (See Fig. 2-1.)
Between Baroque movement and Impressionism, there exists several movements
such as Neoclassicism and Romanticism. Neoclassicism sought to revive the ideals
of ancient Greek and Roman art, and Romanticism painted emotions in a romantic
manner. Since our data set does not have any artist categorized as these movements,
we do not describe them in detail.
Considering subject matter and pictorial style, more diverse exploration had
started around the 1800s, and various art movements were founded in the 1800s
and 1900s, which included Post-impressionism, Pointillism, Fauvism, Expressionism,
Cubism, and Surrealism. Above all, the aim of painting shifted from an imitation of
nature to an expression of the artist's impression and emotion. For example, impres-
sionists focused on visual perception and aesthetics, expressing what they perceived.
Expressionists explored ways of using paint and brushes to express what they imag-
ined or what they felt.
Impressionism was developed in France in the late 1800s and early 1900s. The
Impressionists include Degas, Manet, Monet, Pissarro, Renoir, and Sisley. Artists
turned to drawing daily-life subjects instead of focusing on the biblical stories and
portraying noble people. They tried to capture an immediate visual impression of
their subjects by using color rather than well delineated figures. They applied colors
separately onto the canvas in small dabs and dashes instead of mixing pigments. They
focused on an overall effect rather than on details using much more visible strokes.
Pointillists, such as Seurat and Signac, used point-shaped brush strokes instead
of traditional brush strokes to achieve the overall effect by blending the colors of the
dots to form a picture in the hope of creating more vivid colors. The similarities and
differences between Impressionism and Pointillism are presented in Monet's painting
and Signac's painting in Figure 2-2. Both depict natural scenes using distinct brush
strokes and bright colors, while their ways of using colors and small dots distinguish
each other.
A comparison between Figure 2-2 and 2-1 reveals that various degrees of differences
13
Monet Signac
Degas Renoir
Figure 2-2: Monet's Poplars along the River Epte, Autumn, Signac's The Papal
Palace, Avignon, Degas's The Cotton Exchange in New Orleans, and Renoir's Portrait
of Bazille
14
exist between pictorial styles of Baroque artists and Impressionists. Although Degas
and Renoir are Impressionists, their paintings in Figure 2-2 are very realistic and more
similar to the paintings of Baroque artists in Figure 2-1 than to Monet's painting in
Figure 2-2. Although Signac painted in the similar time period as Degas and Renoir
did, the paintings by Degas and Renoir is very different from that by Signac in Figure
2-2, but rather similar to Baroque artists, who had lived two hundred years before they
did. This shows that categorization by time period and movement can be different
from that Ibzy visual difference and similarity.
Kandinsky Chagall
Figure 2-3: Kandinsky's Composition VIII and With Black Arch and Chagall's Ma-
ternity
15
Expressionists explored the expressive potential of paintings and used more vivid
colors and distortion for expressing the artist's ideas on emotion. The objects were
not necessarily things in the real world and the objects were not depicted as they
looked in real life. The arrangement of objects was explored and the color and shape
was carefully designed. In a broad sense, Expressionists include Chagall, Kandinsky,
and Beckmann. Although they were not formally expressionists, the work of Gau-
guin and van Gogh had a critical impact on this movement. In addition, Kandinsky
is considered to be a founder of abstract art. Since individual artist explore different
pictorial styles, it is difficult to categorize each artist. Figure 2-3 shows some exam-
ples. The visual difference between two paintings by Kandinsky is larger than the
difference between Kandinsky's With Black Arch and Chagall's Maternity.
We have shown that labeling pictorial styles is complex and can be ambiguous.
Conventional labeling of pictorial styles such as time periods and artists can be differ-
ent from labeling based on visual differences and similarities. In our work, we study
pictorial styles using coarse-grain notions of styles based on visual aspects such as
large-scale contrast, spatial distribution of details, and the use of texture, lines, and
edges.
2.2 The Human Visual System and Visual Infor-
mation Encoding
Studies of human visual perception provide insights for computer vision and computer
graphics. Our work benefits from these studies. While considering image features for
quantitative style characterization, we take into account their relevance to properties
of the human visual system such as color perception, contrast sensitivity and multi-
scale and oriented encoding schemes. In this section, we describe how our choices of
image processing techniques are linked to such properties of the human visual system.
The first phase of the human visual perception occurs in the retina of the human
eye. Figure 2-4(a) illustrates the structure of the human eye. The retina, the thin
16
Cca)
,0
la
E
oz
WUu bUO /UU
- VdVI~IILI-I~ ii
(a) (b)
Figure 2-4: (a) The human eye. The structure of the retina is zoomed in. (b) The
wavelengths to which the three different types of cones are sensitive. (Image courtesy
of Fredo Durand)
layer at the back of the eye, contains the photoreceptors and has retinal ganglion cells
on its surface.
The retina has two types of photoreceptors, the cones and the rods. Rods are
more sensitive to light than cones [66]. On the other hand, color perception is mainly
performed according to the responses of the cones. There are three types of cone
photoreceptors, called L cones, M cones, and S cones, distinguished by different wave-
length sensitivity. Figure 2-4(b) shows the wavelength sensitivity of these cones: L
cones are most sensitive to the long wavelength, M cones to the middle wavelength,
and S cones to the short wavelength. The relative spectral power distribution of the
incident light plays an important role in the discrimination of the color appearance
of light.
The perception of color is determined by the relative magnitude of the signals from
these cones., as described by the trichromatic theory of color vision [66]. According
to the color opponent theory, the responses of the three cones are then remapped
into three neural channels: one achromatic channel and two chromatic channels, that
is, black-white, red-green, and blue-yellow. The black-white channel sums responses
from all three cones. The ratio of response of the L cones in contrast; to that of the M
cones determines the red-green channel. The blue-yellow channel encodes the ratio
of the response of S cones in contrast to the sum of L and M cones' responses.
17
rod neurons
LI Crob Ji complexL=~cr~~z~x~~7A inter-
connexion
. S'e0
photochemical neural neural
reaction signal processing
E
-
a,
U
uc
c
-oI-,
0I-)
C
M
C
-,
Z0
-C
-
M
no
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 -
Frequency (cycles/degree) log Background luminance (cd/m2)
(a) (b)
Figure 2-5: (a) The contrast sensitivity function. (b) The threshold-versus-intensity
curve in the log-log domain (Image courtesy of Fr6do Durand)
For luminance, the human visual system has been shown to be more sensitive to
local contrast than to absolute luminance. The contrast sensitivity function illus-
trates that contrast perception shows different sensitivities across spatial frequencies
in Fig. 2-5(a). In addition, it is known that just-noticeable contrast perception is con-
sistent across most of the useful range of luminance: the Weber-Fechner law [18, 69]
states that the logarithm of intensity threshold increases linearly as the logarithm
of background intensity. (See Fig. 2-5(b).) In addition to the Weber-Fechner law,
there have been a number of studies on the perception of luminance and contrast.
While these issues are related, they focus on different aspects of light perception. In
particular, the Weber-Fechner law characterizes near-threshold perception, that is,
at which level of difference humans can see the difference between two colors. In
contrast, other studies deal with supra-threshold perception.
For example, Stevens related subject brightness to intensity, according to the
following power law [66].
B = kI,
where B is subjective brightness, I is intensity, and a is 0.33 in the case of brightness.
Munsell sought to identify equal perceived color differences [16]. The Munsell
18
N^
6
color appearance model has three attributes: Value(V), Hue(H), and Chroma(C) [16].
According to the Munsell Value scale, 10 corresponds to white and 0 to black. The
Munsell Hue circle is divided into five principal hues: red, yellow, green, blue, and
purple. The Munsell Chroma scale has a maximum depending on the Munsell Value
and hue: yellow at its highest chroma has a much lighter value than does blue at
its highest chroma, since the Munsell color space is not a cylinder nor a sphere.
The CIELab color space is similar to the Munsell color model and designed to be
perceptually uniform: the Euclidean distance in the 3D Lab space corresponds to
perceptual color difference. However, this is true only for small distances. These
properties of the CIELab color space are favorable for image analysis and transfer.
For the same reason, we perform multi-scale decompositions in the CIELab color
space.
t I ,,A , -
I Hi
I I
_)
~ < ) w
eye 
(a) (b)
Figure 2-6: The human visual system. (a) Light goes from eye to the lateral genicu-
late nucleus (LGN) and then to primary visual cortex (Vi) from Polyak(1957) [48].
(b) The illustration of the receptive fields of three hypothetical neurons. Each has
different degrees of orientation selectivity from Wandell(1995) [66].
After the visual information passes through the photoreceptors of the retina, it
is processed through the center-surround receptive fields of the retinal ganglion cells
and the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) [66]. The response properties of these
receptive fields have been hypothesized to be consistent with those of linear-systems
19
[66]. Once the visual information is processed in the retina and LGN, it is passed to
the primary visual cortex, called V1. (See Fig. 2-6(a).) Studies on the human visual
system propose that V1 encodes visual information in terms of spatial frequencies and
orientation. Accordingly, the receptive fields of simple V1 cells have been shown to
have preferred orientation and scale [66]. Figure 2-6(b) illustrates receptive fields with
different degrees of orientation selectivity. Multi-scale image representations such as
the 2D Gabor wavelet have been found to be consistent with the structure of simple
cell receptive field properties in the visual cortex [7-9].
Thus, multi-scale and oriented image representations are consistent with measure-
ments of the receptive field properties in the primary visual cortex. For this reason,
among image processing tools, we choose steerable pyramids [19,61,62] to compute
image statistics, since the steerable pyramids provide multi-scale and oriented decom-
position, which we describe in the next section.
2.3 Multi-Scale and Oriented Image Representa-
tion
We perform our analysis and transfer using a multi-scale and oriented image repre-
sentation called steerable pyramid. The steerable pyramid is suitable for our work
in terms of their decomposition and reconstruction properties. In this section, we
describe these properties of the steerable pyramid compared to those of the Fourier
transform and wavelet transforms.
The Fourier transform is a classic tool in image processing. It is a simple lin-
ear basis transform where an image is represented as a sum of different frequencies.
Unfortunately, the Fourier transform is not suitable for a signal localized in space be-
cause of its infinite support basis. For this reason, wavelet transforms have provided
a powerful alternative. An additional advantage of wavelet transforms is that the
coefficients of wavelet subbands are suitable for a sparse encoding. These properties
have been used for image compression, restoration, and analysis and synthesis [4, 59].
20
O
_x
0 5 10 15 20
Approx. coef. for haar
0 5 10
Detail coef. for haar
0 5 10
L
0
0 5 10 15 20
Approx. coef. for haar
0
0
0 5 10
Detail coef. for haar
2
0
0 5 10
representation does not have shift-invariance. We
a Haar wavelet.
21
Original Signal Shifted Signal
0
-')
0
Figure 2-7: Orthnormal wavelet
demonstrate such property using
I
I
I
i_
l
However, orthonormal wavelet representations are not band-limited and suffer
from a lack of translation-invariance, which causes artifacts in applications like texture
analysis and synthesis [62]. Figure 2-7 shows an example of the lack of shift-invariance.
The steerable pyramid [23, 61,62] is a good substitute for the wavelet transform.
Unlike the orthogonal separable wavelet, the steerable pyramid is translation-invariant
and rotation-invariant, which lead to good reconstruction properties: it is free of
aliasing and uses a smooth reconstruction basis. However, a shortcoming of this
representation is overcompleteness.
I 1 -a X -/ - H -l e I-,--
., BO X,-.S. *.il 0
71 " , 2 L~w ~·I I4 Bi1
I '> > z Tf7j8 ' AmEv9I'
-Flis {r I .
* tly
I; \~
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 2-8: (a) A spectral representation of the steerable pyramid with 4 ori-
entations. (Images from Simoncelli and Freeman [61] (b) A 2-level decomposi-
tion of an image of a white disk using the steerable pyramid with 4 orientations.
(c) The block diagram for the decomposition and reconstruction. (Images from
http://www.cns.nyu.edu/-eero/STEERPYR/)
In addition to localization in space and frequency, the steerable pyramid provides
subbands localized in orientation. (See Fig. 2-8 (a) and (b).) The steerable pyramid is
constructed as follow. First, the image is decomposed into low and highpass subbands.
Then the lowpass subband is divided into a set of oriented bandpass subbands and a
lower-pass subband. The lower-pass subband is subsampled by a factor of 2 in the X
and Y directions. This process is done recursively to construct a pyramid. (See Fig.
2-8 (c).) In summary, each subband is tuned to be localized in scale and orientation.
The multi-scale and oriented decomposition properties of the subbands of the
steerable pyramid resemble the simple cell receptive fields in the human visual sys-
tem. On account of its oriented multi-scale decomposition and good reconstruction
22
properties, we choose the steerable pyramid for our analysis and transfer.
2.4 Machine Learning Techniques for Feature Ex-
traction
The extraction of relevant and useful information from a large set of high-dimensional
data is not trivial. The sheer amount of data makes it difficult to visualize and un-
derstand. Moreover, the features might be neither independent nor uncorrelated, and
the examination of data along an individual dimension does not reveal the underlying
trends. Machine learning techniques can be used to reduce the number of dimensions
for the purpose of analysis. Machine learning techniques are suitable to extract the
meaningful projection of features, i.e. to reveal correlations and dependencies.
Before extracting a projection of features, we need to choose a set of features.
This is called feature selection. In this phase, we should be inclusive and not discard
meaningful aspects or dimensions of data. Once we have selected features, we can use
machine learning techniques to transform the set of features into a more interpretable
and compact feature set that specifies meaningful correlations and dependencies. Such
feature transform techniques include Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and Independent Component Analysis (ICA).
PCA and ICA are unsupervised learning techniques, and LDA is a supervised
learning technique. The basic difference between supervised learning and unsuper-
vised learning is whether labels are given or not in the training data. In the supervised
learning, input-output pairs are given during a training phase. The goal of super-
vised learning is to find a function that generalizes the mapping between inputs and
outputs. In contrast, outputs are not given for unsupervised learning. The unsuper-
vised learning methods try to find suitable representations of inputs, which possibly
generalize underlying structures of inputs. In our case, we use both learning without
labels and with labels.
PCA finds the directions in the feature space along which data points are well-
23
spread. PCA uses second order statistics to decorrelate features. The principal direc-
tions of PCA are orthogonal to one another, and projections of data onto them are lin-
early decorrelated. With the decorrelated features, we can analyze additional aspects
of data. However, imposing orthogonality might cause some underlying structures of
data to be lost, and the inherent scaling indeterminacy can mislead the principal axis
of PCA. That is, if the relative scaling of features is arbitrary, relevant features might
be scaled down and irrelevant features are not scaled down properly.
Like PCA, ICA decorrelates features. However, ICA assumes that features are
statistically independent, not merely decorrelated. Therefore, it is not appropriate
for data that are not independent.
For LDA, we assign labels to the data points of two different classes, then LDA
computes a linear classifier that separates data points of different classes by a hy-
perplane, finding the direction and offset of the hyperplane. LDA assumes that the
densities p(i is in class 1) and p(Y is in class 2) are both normally distributed, with
identical covariance, but possibly different means, ll and Al2. P(which class is x in)
is then determined by x. wi, where
Thus LDA maximizes the ratio of the distance between groups to the distance within
group. When labels are available, LDA has the advantage over PCA that it can
extract the relative scaling of features to achieve optimal linear classification.
When we use these machine learning techniques to find a model that approximates
and generalizes trends in data, we should be careful not to choose a model that overfits
the training data. When a classifier is overfitting the training data, it might not able
to give good predictions on new unseen data. Overfitting occurs when the learner
tries to fit very specific features, such as random noise, which are not relevant to
regularities. A complex model may increase the performance on the training data,
while making the performance on unseen data worse.
We use PCA and LDA to validate our statistical model. These two tools examine
24
whether the features represent the styles consistently. When we use machine learning
tools, we restrict our generalization to linear modeling. Linear modeling is usually
simple enough to prevent overfitting of training data. This property of linear modeling
is necessary, since we have a limited number of images corresponding to each style.
A complex model is likely to fit random noise or content, not just the regularities of
pictorial styles, leading to overfitting.
25
Chapter 3
Image Statistics
Statistical characterization has been applied to measure regularities and differences
among so-called "natural" images. The striking insight of this new field is that not all
random 2D signals look like natural images. This has led to the development of tools
to statistically characterize what is specific to natural images, and how to distinguish
classes of natural images. We use the comparable statistical characterizations to
analyze and transfer pictorial styles. In this chapter, we review statistical features
studied in the fields of natural image statistics and show corresponding statistical
features of paintings and artistic photographs.
Many researchers in various fields including human vision, machine vision, and
image processing have explored the statistical characterizations of natural images
and found statistical regularities among them [20,28,29,53-55,58, 60]. Image analysis
has used these regularities, and the variation of the statistical properties has been
applied to image classification and synthesis [10, 11, 25, 50, 64]. This chapter shows
that we observe those regularities present in paintings and artistic photographs. In
this thesis, we propose that certain properties of image statistics can be used to
analyze and transfer the similarities and differences of pictorial styles.
This chapter describes previous work in natural image statistics and our corre-
sponding results for paintings and artistic photographs. The first three sections dis-
cuss marginal statistics, joint statistics, and non-stationary statics. The last section
introduces applications of these tools.
26
3.1 Marginal Statistics
.7
-6
-5
4
-3
-2
-1
I\
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
U I . / u I L I
Logo spatial requencylcycles/limage)
Figure 3-1: The average amplitude curves in the log-log domain. Their slopes show
that average amplitude falls as "l/f'.
Statistical characteristics of natural images are often measured in the frequency
domain. Frequency analysis provides the nice property that the power spectrum is
the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function. Field investigated the two-
dimensional amplitude spectra and found regularity among natural images [20], as
the average amplitude falls as "fi". This property is called scale invariance [52, 54,
55]. In Fourier terms, this implies that any spatial frequency band with the same
octave bandwidth has an equal amount of energy. We observe that this statistical
regularity is mostly shared by paintings. The average amplitude curves in Figure
3-1 show examples of scale invariance in paintings. In addition, we find statistical
regularities can be represented in terms of an average of scaled coefficients of the
steerable pyramids. The fiat curve of Fig. 3-2(c) corresponds to the scale invariance.
In this thesis, we will focus more on the differences of frequency content we found in
the curves.
27
a)
a
E
Ca
0
.7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
U 1 2 3
1'*
11'*
I
Nt'14-
'
I I 1 9 .
-'-ANL-~~
-~~~~~~~~~~4 
I
·~- -4 ' 0.8c
>4., 8 ~-6 '~~~0.6u~~~
U E
- -10 1,1%I.. 6 0.2
2- >
X - n IO_ .r6 7 8- -100 -50 U )u uU L 4 5 6 7 8
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
u
I C
(U
A 1
4 0.8
-, 0.6
*,L 0.4
E
0
'5 0.2
-100 -50 0 50 100 4 0 o 0
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3-2: (a) Natural images. (b) The marginal distribution of Haar wavelet co-
efficients in the log domain. (c) The scaled average amplitude of steerable pyramid
coefficients.
Regularities have also been found in other image features. Huang et al. [28, 29]
discuss statistical regularities in the wavelet domain. Figure 3-2 shows some examples,
such as non-Gaussian shape and a long tail in the distribution of coefficients.
In addition, the marginal distribution of the derivative, one calculated from the
difference between two adjacent pixels, has been studied [11,28,29] and shown to have
a high kurtosis with large tails and a peak at 0 in natural images.
3.2 Joint Statistics
Simoncelli [60] and Huang and Mumford [29] have explored the joint distribution of
two adjacent pixels and have found a rough independence. In contrast, they have
studied joint statistics in the wavelet domain and have found that coefficients of
adjacent scales and orientations are not independent. That is, in natural images,
higher-order statistics reveal high correlation between coefficients in the wavelet do-
28
.
J a ~ ~ ~ N
153
89
24
-4
-10
-16
153
89
24
-40
-104
-168
-19Y 2 ZbU
cH2 cH2
(a) Signac (b) Manet
Figure 3-3: The conditional histogram H((C)(P)) for horizontal wavelet coefficients.
Bright parts mean high values.
main. We propose that the corresponding results for paintings are relevant to some
characteristics of pictorial styles. Figure 3-3 illustrates that the joint statistics can
capture the difference between Manet's and Signac's pictorial styles. The plots are
conditional histograms of fine-scale coefficients given coarse-scale coefficients. Manet's
conditional histogram shows stronger correlation than Signac's. In this thesis, we do
not discuss pictorial styles in terms of joint statistics, but we will explore pictorial
styles using joint statistics in our future work.
3.3 Non-stationary Statistics
So far, we ]:ave discussed statistical properties over the full image. However, image
statistics have been shown to be non-stationary [64]: local statistical features vary
with spatial location. Figure 3-4 shows an example where local frequency content
varies according to its spatial location. The local spectral signatures are obtained
by taking spectrum of each window, where we remove boundary effects by using a
smooth windowing function. We use a hamming window in practice. The degree of
29
·_^
U-I-
- ll-- mm-- mm--I
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3-4: (a) The input image (b) The global spectral signatures. (c) The local
spectral signatures. The color spectra represents the degree of the magnitudes. The
color close to red means the high value and that close to blue means the low value.
30
I
the non-stationarity varies in different images. We will show that the variations in
non-stationarity are relevant to pictorial styles.
3.4 Applications
We have discussed several statistical regularities in natural images, such as scale in-
variance, highly correlated joint statistics, and non-stationarity. These statistical
regularities distinguish natural images from random two-dimensional signals such as
white noise. The discriminative power of natural image statistics, in addition to the
statistical regularities, have led to the exploration of the relationship between image
statistics and the human visual system [2, 20]. The human visual system is hypoth-
esized to efficiently encode the visual information using the statistical regularities
present in natural images.
Statistical properties of natural images provide a prior on the set of relevant output
images, which is fruitful in image processing applications such as denoising, compres-
sion, and texture analysis and synthesis. Marginal statistics and joint statistics in the
wavelet domain have been used for image compression [4,59] and denoising [49,51].
Buccigrossi and Simoncelli [4] use the heavy-tailed and non-Gaussian marginal sta-
tistics and highly correlated magnitudes at adjacent scales, orientations, and spatial
locations to build an image coder. Portilla et al. [51] use a statistical model of coef-
ficients at adjacent positions and scale to remove noise.
While statistical regularities are used to analyze and encode natural images, the
differences in image statistics can be used to classify and synthesize images [10, 11,
25, 50, 64]. Wle discuss previous work on image classification and synthesis in the next
chapter. In this thesis, we propose that statistical properties can be used to analyze
and transfer pictorial styles.
31
Chapter 4
Previous Work
In the previous chapter, we discussed statistical analysis of natural images. Statis-
tical characterization has been applied to music, image classification and retrieval,
and style transfer. Statistics are used to measure regularities and differences among
images, musical genres, and pictorial styles. In this chapter, we review statistical
features studied in the fields of musical genre and image retrieval and classification,
and pictorial style retrieval, classification, and transfer.
4.1 Statistical Analysis on Sound and Music
Research on modeling music regularities and variations provides inspiration and in-
sights on the scope and potential applications of analysis and transfer of pictorial
styles. Widmer et al. provides very useful insights on possible goals and scope [72].
In general, music classifiers [43,65, 70] classify songs into genres such as classical,
rock, and so on. The success rate of classification is high, yet the level of discrimina-
tion is not fine enough to distinguish subtle differences between artists. This suggests
that our expectation for pictorial style classifications should be bound to a coarse-
grain level.
Most music classifiers use features that represent the spectral properties of music
and their change in time. Some have also tried to characterize each instrument's
timbre [13, 71]. This characterization of the timbres of each instrument permits sep-
32
aration of timbres from other perceptual aspects of music, such as dynamic, melody,
tempo and so on. The decoupled timbre has been recombined with a set of perceptual
parameters to produce a new music [31, 73]. As the decoupling of timbres ends in
powerful music synthesis techniques, we propose that the separation of pictorial styles
from content can lead to a direct manipulation and interpolation of pictorial styles.
Music analysis and synthesis has widely used spectral analysis to characterize
musical styles or genres. However, not much research on pictorial styles has focused
on the spectral aspects. We conduct our analysis and transfer in the frequency domain
to characterize coarse-grain pictorial styles.
4.2 Imnage Retrieval and Classification
Since the early 1990s, image retrieval has drawn ever-increasing attention in the
fields of computer vision, machine learning and databases in both the commercial and
academic communities. Due to the rapid growth in the size of digital image collections,
there is a growing need for efficient and easy-to-use image retrieval systems. A variety
of content-based image retrieval (CBIR) systems have been developed [56,63]. These
CBIR systems retrieve images according to the contents of images instead of keywords.
However, current CBIR systems do not search by semantic content, but by low-level
visual features like color, texture, and shape [5,21,42,47,68,74]. Some systems [21,47]
represent images using global features such as texture histogram, color histogram, and
color layout of the whole image, whereas others use local features [42,68]. Wang et
al. [68] measure the similarity between images based on segmentation and region-
based features, such as color, texture, shape, and location. They use supervised
learning methods to classify the images into rough semantic classes, such as textures
vs. non-text-ures and graph vs. photograph.
Some of CBIR systems use the similarity measure for clustering [74] or for clas-
sification [39]. In addition, there are CBIR systems that use machine learning tech-
niques to build up high-level content, such as segmented objects [5] and semantic
indexes [3,40], for further clustering and classification. Chen et al. [74] use the same
33
features and similarity measure as Wang et al. [68], but cluster images into semantic
groups and retrieve semantic clusters instead of a set of images. Carson et al. [5] con-
nect keywords and image features. Barnard and Forsyth [3] establish a hierarchical
clustering model linking image features to semantic information to organize image
database. Likewise, Li and Wang [40] aim at automatic linguistic indexing of images.
While some of the CBIR systems use statistical models, they do not provide
a model that is intuitively modifiable. We want to build a statistical model that
is transferrable and modifiable and that characterizes visually meaningful features
according to the human visual system.
4.3 Pictorial style Retrieval and Classification
Research on style-based image retrieval and classification has only started recently.
In early work, style-based image retrieval and classification systems mainly depended
on brush strokes [45,57]. Both Melzer et al. [45] and Sablatnig et al. [57] explore the
problem of classifying portrait miniatures. Melzer et al. develop two brush detectors,
a model based and a neural network approach. Sablatnig et al. build a hierarchical
classifier to identify artists, which uses a brush stroke model and consisted of three
classification stages, color classification, shape classification and stroke classification.
Recent style-based image retrieval and classification systems have characterized
more various low-level features using statistical modelings and machine learning tech-
niques. In addition, the range of applications has extended. Classification between
individual artists is a classic example [34,35,41,67], and classifications between pho-
tographs and paintings [6,37,38] and between photographs and computer graphics
images [17] have been explored as well. Leykin and Cutzu [6, 37, 38] distinguish
paintings from photographs with a high success rate of over 90%. They use color
and texture features and pursue a classifier in an image content-independent man-
ner. Their features include the ratio of intensity edges to color edges, the number of
unique colors, the pixel saturation histogram, and the responses of the Gabor filter
across multi-orientations and scales. Farid and Lyu [17] build a linear predictor for
34
the magnitude of the coefficients of the wavelet subbands of natural images based
on joint statistics and use it to distinguish between images with hidden messages,
computer graphic images, and rebroadcast images. Their linear predictor uses a lin-
ear combination of the magnitude of the coefficients of the wavelet subbands of an
image. Li et al. [41] compare painting styles of Chinese ink painting artists. They
use multi-resolution segmentation to characterize strokes and washes. They link local
features with depicted objects using a hidden Markov model.
For European paintings, style-based image retrieval and classification systems have
extracted low-level features such as luminance and color distribution [30], frequency
properties of spatial blocks [33,34] and even both color and frequency features [44] to
build statistical models. These systems use supervised learning to build classifiers for
individual artists or art movements. Keren [34] has proposed a classifier of paintings
based on local features derived from the discrete cosine transform (DCT) coefficients,
which resulted in an 86% success rate on classifying paintings by Rembrandt, Van
Gogh, Picasso, Magritte, and Dali. Lombardi et al. [44] use the set of colors in
a painting and the frequency distribution of those colors. Their classifier produces
an 81 percent success rate. Icoglu et al. [30] have built a classifier that identifies
paintings' art movements, such as classicism, impressionism, and cubism. They use
a six dimensional feature set and explored three different classification approaches,
a Bayesian classifier, a k-NN classifier, and support vector machines. Their features
include the percentage of dark colors, color range, skewness of grey scale, number of
local and global maxima in the luminance histogram, and so on. Their k-NN classifier
shows a high accuracy of over 90%.
Most of these techniques use statistical models and show convincing results. How-
ever either they do not provide intuitive characterization [17] or their statistical fea-
tures are not modifiable and transferable [6,17, 33,34,37,38,44].
35
4.4 Style Transfer
Statistical models are used not only for the measurement of difference or similarity
but also for recognition [10, 64] and synthesis. Dror et al. [10] classify surface re-
flectance properties such as metal, plastic, or paper, based on statistical regularities.
They develop image-based reflectance estimation techniques using the pixel intensity
histogram and histograms of the coefficients of a bandpass filter pyramid. Torralba
and Oliva [64] explore the second-order statistics of natural images and their rele-
vance to image categories. Low-level features are used for the categorization without
grouping or segmentation.
Synthesis is another application of statistical models. In particular, parametric
synthesis leads to the characterization of textures [25, 36, 50]. Lewis [36] develops a
spectral interpretation of textures for digital painting. Heeger and Bergen [25] intro-
duce a method for synthesizing images, matching pixel histograms and the histograms
of filter responses at multi-scales and orientations. Portilla and Simoncelli [50] ex-
tend this synthesis method to capture correlations between subbands for structured
textures.
In recent years, transfer research has focused on methods which copy local textures
between images [12, 14, 15, 26] and between strokes [22,27,32]. Freeman et al. [22]
present one of the first systems for synthesizing line drawings based on example
lines. This algorithm fits each input line as a linear combination of several training
lines. Kalnins et al. [32] describe stroke-based rendering algorithms. Their system
renders silhouettes, synthesizes stroke detail by example, simulates natural media,
and hatches with dynamic behavior. These systems inspired the example-based curve
synthesis of Hertzmann et al. [27]. Hertzmann et al. also learn line styles from input
curves instead of input images.
Much research has explored example-based transfer between images. Efros and
Leung [14] show that a simple recursive method of non-parametric sampling can pro-
duce new textures similar to examples. Efros and Freeman [15] generate an image by
stitching small patches of existing images. Hertzmann et al. [26] learn mapping func-
36
tions between a pair of images in terms of local filters and apply analogous mapping
functions to a target image. Drori et al. [12] introduce a style synthesis technique
using example images. They decompose images into overlapping tiles, synthesize each
block, and compose the local fragments back together.
Although these studies produce more convincing textures, they use a non-parametric
characterization instead of providing statistical models. They cannot be used for
analysis nor can they capture large-scale effects. In this thesis, we present a statisti-
cal model of pictorial styles. Since the statistical model has explicit parameters, our
technique leads to intuitive manipulation and style interpolation.
37
Chapter 5
Image Features
In this work, we analyze and transfer pictorial styles using quantitative features.
We hypothesize that the frequency content of paintings and photographs are related
to intuitive notions of style. We study the characteristics of pictures that can be
captured by the frequency content across scales, spatial locations, and orientations.
In addition, we include features of the low and high residuals of the steerable pyramid.
This chapter describes the image features that we choose and qualitatively discusses
what they characterize.
We build a statistical model of characteristics of pictorial style, which represent
stylistic differences and similarities. We use the steerable pyramid to extract these
features. In particular, we focus on three types of features: multi-scale amplitude, the
spatial variation of the average amplitude, and the variation of the amplitude across
orientations. In this thesis, we concentrate on the stylistic aspects of the luminance
channel.
5.1 Multi-scale Amplitude
The use of small-scale texture, sharp lines, and strong contrast between large re-
gions are relevant to pictorial styles. Figure 5-1 shows such examples. Beckmann's
painting has a number of sharp lines, and Signac's painting consists of point-shaped
brush strokes. These lines and point-shaped brush strokes are the fine-scale or high-
38
Signac Chagall
Figure 5-1: The painting
mann and Chagall do not
Beckmann's and Chagall's
by Signac has lots of small dots, whereas those by Beck-
have a dominant shape or size of brush strokes. Instead,
paintings feature visually clear placement of objects.
39
frequency content. Unlike fine-scale details, the low-frequency description is appro-
priate for the large-scale contrast and variation of objects and colors of paintings such
as in Chagall's work on the right side of Fig. 5-1.
We analyze these multi-scale aspects of pictorial styles in terms of the average
amplitude of the steerable pyramid coefficient across scales. We use the following
parameters for our analysis of the multi-scale aspects of pictorial styles:
, = IB/4 , (5.1)
where s = scale.
B, is the subband of the sth scale of the steerable pyramid. B1[ stands for the
amplitude of the subband coefficient. We denote B, as the average of the amplitude.
Us is the normalized average amplitude of each subband B8 for scales 1 to 5. In
this thesis, scale 1 corresponds to 2(= 256) cycles per image, since the minimum
dimension of each image is 512 pixels. Since each subband has a spatial-frequency
bandwidth of one octave, an increase by one in the number of the scale means the
frequency divides by two. According to the power law of natural images that the
average energy falls as 2", so there is equal energy at all octaves. A normalization
by 48 is necessary because the downsampling of subbands is implemented by cropping
the discrete fourier transform.
For each image, we build a steerable pyramid with five scales and four orientations.
Figure 5-2 shows the representative plots of ,u (Eq.5.2). The average curves in Fig. 5-
2(a) show that the average amplitude curves of different artists have distinct patterns.
Moreover, the curves of paintings in Fig. 5-2(b) reveal the regularities shared by the
paintings of each artist. The paintings by Chagall and Beckmann, who use strong
contrast between large regions, exhibit high average amplitude in low frequencies,
whereas Signac's and Monet's paintings have low average amplitude in low frequencies
due to their low contrast between large regions. The paintings by Beckmann and
Signac have high average amplitude in high frequencies due to their fine-scale features,
40
Chagall
-- Beckmann
.. Signac
- Monet
- Chagall
v,
-r
a~I
:
4 5 6 7 8
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a)
2 Monet
1.5
0.4 5 6 7 8
4 5 6 7 8 4 5 6 7 8
2- Chagall 2 Beckmann
1 '" 1
0.5 0.5
4 5 6 7 8 4 5 6 7
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(b)
Figure 5-2: (a) The mean of the average amplitude curves of paintings of each artist.
The average amplitude curves of different artists have distinct patterns. (b) The aver-
age amplitude curves of paintings of each artist. The curves of paintings demonstrate
the regularities shared among paintings of each artist.
41
2
1.5
1
0.5
I
-!..
"I-1 " 
·  C
· 
4rYI I'''··'-·C.
such as Signac's small dots and Beckmann's sharp lines.
Beckmann Signac
-Beckmann
-...... Signac
a,
0
c)
0
on
6 ·a
0.
a 2
~o ~~~o
I 1Xt)3;~
0 3 0
1 -) ') IV}
.-j
M
'5
log 1 0o(cycles/picture) Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 5-3: Average curves of two paintings of different pictorial styles. (a) The
average power spectrum curves in the log-log domain. (b) The average amplitude
curves of spectrum in the log-log domain. (c) The scaled square root of the average
power curves of the steerable pyramid coefficients in the linear-log domain. (d) The
scaled average amplitude curves of the steerable pyramid coefficients in the linear-log
domain.
Figure 5-3 shows the average power spectrum curves, the average amplitude curves
of spectrum, the scaled square root of the average power curves of the steerable pyra-
mid coefficients, and the scaled average amplitude curves of the steerable pyramid
coefficients. Comparison between the average power spectrum in the log-log domain
(Fig. 5-3(a)) and the average amplitude of the spectrum in the log-log domain (Fig. 5-
3(b)) shows that the average amplitude of the spectrum captures differences between
Beckmann's and Signac's paintings more than the average power does. Accordingly,
we use the scaled average amplitude of steerable pyramid coefficients (d) as our fea-
42
-·.
-
vi I L L·
tures. In fact, in the steerable pyramids, both of the scaled average amplitude of
steerable pyramid coefficients (Fig. 5-3(d)) and the scaled square root of the average
power of the steerable pyramid coefficients (Fig. 5-3(c)) capture differences between
pictorial styles.
(a)
I
E
Do 0.8
o,
) OA
o,
'_ 0.2
r~
4 5 6 7 8 4 5 6 7 
(b)
I
m i0 
0m 0.4
0.2
4 5 6 7
Log2 spatial freqs
(cycles/img.)
4 5 6 7 8
Log2 spatial freq.
(cycles/img.)
Figure 5-4: The normalized average amplitude across scales: on the left is the low
frequency and the right is the high frequency. (a) The average amplitude in casual
photographs is uniformly distributed across frequencies. (b) The average amplitude
in the artistic photographs shows a unique distribution with a U shape or a high
slope.
In addition, the slopes and heights of the average amplitude curves across scales are
relevant to the pictorial styles in photographs. Figure 5-4 shows that the differences
of frequency content are relevant to the stylistic differences in photographs. The
bottom left photograph with the large-scale tonal range from rich black to whitest
white and with delicate illustration of fine leaves and trees shows a U-shaped curve
of the average amplitude across scales. The high slope of the curve of the bottom
right photograph represents the pictorial style of the photograph, which has a blurry
classic-movie look. In contrast to these designed photographs, flat-looking casual
photographs in Fig. 5-4(a) show uniform distribution of the average amplitude.
As we observed that the curve of the average amplitude across scales characterizes
43
l
_ ~~~~~~~~~~~V}
- 0.8
0.6
0.4
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(b)
1.4
1.2
Beckmann Bohrod Chagall
J'O1.1 O1.
<0. 0.55 0
5 7 5 7 5 7
Degas
1.
0.5 
5 7
Manet Monet Rembrandt
1. 1. 1.5
0. 0. 0.
5 7 5 7 5 7
Renoir Rubens Signac Van Gogh
'4 1. 1. 1. 1.
Z 1 11
.'0. 0. 0. 0.
5 7 5 7 5 7 5 7
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a)
Figure 5-5: (a) The mean of the average amplitude curves of paintings. The standard
deviation of each artist shows that the average amplitude curve captures the regu-
larities among paintings of each artist. (b) The mean curves of artists show that the
average amplitude characterizes the differences between different artists. Although, in
general, each artist has a distinct slope and height, some artists show similar trends.
44
Photo
*' 1.5
< 5 7
5 7
Kandinsky
1.5
. o0.
5 7
i
certain aspects of styles, we explore how the stylistic differences among artists are
reflected in the average amplitude. We take the mean of p of eight paintings of each
artist and show the mean curves in Figure 5-5. Figure 5-5(a) displays the standard
deviations in each scale. The plots show that the average amplitude curve captures
the regularities shared by paintings of each artist. Figure 5-5(b) shows that the
average amplitude curves characterize the differences among different artists as well.
We will discuss the correlation between pictorial styles and the average amplitude
curves in the rest of this section.
In Figure 5-5(b), Beckmann's curve is well separated from curves of other artists.
Beckmann's paintings have high averages in all scales. The high amplitudes result
from the sharp edges and lines present in Beckmann's paintings as well as from the
strong contrasts between large regions. In comparison, we can observe Monet's and
Signac's low and relatively flat curves in their average amplitude plots. Their low
amplitudes in low frequencies result from the absence of coarse-grain contrast. Also,
note that S:ignac's curve features high energy in the high frequencies due to his point-
shaped brush strokes.
The average heights of the average amplitude of Degas' and Rembrandt's paintings
are as low as those of Monet and Signac. However, Degas' and Rembrandt's paint-
ings do not have flat average curves; instead they have average amplitude curves with
slopes. Degas and Rembrandt do not use as small brush strokes as Monet and Signac
but paint with more contrast between large regions. In fact, Monet, Signac and Degas
are Impressionists, and Rembrandt's paintings belong to the Baroque style. Compo-
sition and subject matter might separate Degas from Monet and Siganc and group
Degas and Rembrandt. Many of the paintings by Degas and Rembrandt have people
in them, wile the paintings in our data set, by Signac and Monet are landscapes.
Figure 5-6 shows their differences.
The paintings by Chagall, Manet, Renoir, Kandinsky, Rubens, Bohrod and Van
Gogh, and photographs have about the same height of the average amplitude curves.
However, their slopes differ. Van Gogh has a flat average curve. Since Van Gogh
uses visible shapes and sizes of brush strokes, the amplitudes in the high frequencies
45
Degas Hembrandt
Figure 5-6: Signac's and Monet's paintings have low contrast between large regions,
and Degas and Rembrandt have higher large-scale contrast.
46
Bohrod
Van Gogh
Chagall A photo by Sander Studio
Figure 5-7: The differences in the slopes of the average amplitude curves among
artists in Fig. 5-5 are relevant to their uses of brush strokes, the oriented structure
like lines and edges, and the contrast between large regions.
47
are higher than those of the other artists. Photos and paintings by Bohrod do not
have as steep slopes in their average amplitude curves as in other artists, such as
Chagall, Manet, Renoir, Kandinsky and Rubens who have similar heights of curves.
Photos and the paintings by Bohrod have large-scale contrasts that are higher than
Van Gogh, but lower than Chagall, Manet, Renoir, Kandinsky and Rubens. This
leads to their moderate heights in the low frequencies. Regarding high frequency
features, photos and paintings of Bohrod do not have visible marks of brush strokes
like those by Van Gogh, yet they have sharper edges and lines than other paintings.
Those sharp edges and lines cause heights in high frequencies to be higher than those
of Chagall, Manet, Renoir, Kandinsky and Rubens, but less than those by Van Gogh.
(See Figure 5-7.)
So far, we have discussed the relevance of the height and slopes of the curve of
the average amplitude across scales and pictorial styles. The average amplitude can
represent visual differences of the use of brush strokes, oriented structures such as
lines and edges, and large-scale contrast.
5.2 Non-stationarity
In the previous section, we have studied the multi-scale aspects of pictorial styles
using the steerable pyramid. We have shown that the average amplitude across scales
is relevant to the regularities and differences of pictorial styles. However, the average
amplitude curve captures global statistics of pictorial styles and disregards the vari-
ation of the statistics due to spatial location. In this section, we discuss the aspects
of pictorial styles that are related to the spatial variations of multi-scale content.
Some paintings have the same degree of detail over the entire image, while in oth-
ers the degree of detail varies spatially. Figure 5-8 shows example paintings that have
different degrees of spatial distribution of details. Rembrandt's painting has some
detailed regions and other regions that are less detailed. In comparison, Beckmann's
painting has a uniform distribution of details over the image. Images have different
degrees of the spatial variation of detail for many different reasons. The distribution
48
Figure 5-8: Rembrandt's The Blinding of Samson and Beckmann's Family Picture.
Rembrandt's painting has some regions with lots of details and other regions with
less detail. In comparison, Beckmann's painting has uniform distribution of details
over the image.
of the local details is used to draw attention. Also, the variation across the spatial
locations may be intended for the illustration of the realistic perspective. An effec-
tive use of the spatial variation can be used to compensate for the flatness of two
dimensional canvas.
Although our model cannot characterize the purposes of the spatial variations
in pictorial styles, it can parameterize the visual effects according to the spatial
variations. To this end, we first examine the local spectra signatures. The spatial
variations of images correspond to the variation of statistical properties of images,
which leads to the variation of local spectra signatures. In image statistics, this
variation is called non-stationarity. Figure 5-9 shows the correspondence between the
non-stationarity of images and their local spectra signatures. A large spatial variation
in an image leads to a large variation of local spectra signatures.
Since we observed that the local spectra are relevant to the non-stationarity of
styles, we explore how the stylistic differences between artists are reflected in the
spatial variation of average amplitude. We take a k x k size window We,i of B,
around each pixel xi and measure the average amplitude within each subspace I W,il
for all i. We compute the standard deviation of IW,,il over all i and normalize it by
the average amplitude of B, to prevent high average amplitudes from leading to high
49
I---
I
I- - -
I I ll
Is 1 liB · I
Ills in -- mm --
Figure 5-9: The local spectra signatures of images are relevant to the pictorial styles.
A large spatial variation in an image leads to a large variation of local spectra signa-
tures.
50
I
I
I
I
-
5 7
1
IN
5 7 5 7 5 7
5 7 5 7 5 7
5 7 5 7 5 7
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.) Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a) (b)
Figure 5-10: (a) The mean of paintings' a,, the standard deviation of the average
amplitudes of the windows normalized by the average amplitude in the whole image.
The standard deviation of each artist shows that our non-stationary parameters cap-
ture the regularities among paintings of each artist. (b) The mean curves of artists
have various slopes and heights correlated to the differences between pictorial styles
of artists. A high curve represents a large variation of detail in the whole image, such
as in Degas's paintings. In contrast, some artists like Beckmann have low curves due
to the stationarity present in their pictorial styles.
51
nL .Vhntn
acr
I 3i
l
F
[
13.
:6
I
.
.
[
r
I
0c1
13S
S6
I i
I
standard deviation regardless of the actual variation.
as = std(lW, i)llBI , (5.2)
i = spatial location and s = scale.
We use k = 228 + 1 at each scale s, from 1 to 5. A smaller k would divide an
image into many small windows and it is likely that the variations of these windows
would not represent signatures of pictorial style. Instead, the variations of such
windows might characterize random features, which are not relevant to pictorial style.
Furthermore, a larger k would result in large windows, each of which would not
capture local properties of frequency content. Since each window covers a large region,
we might lose features relevant to pictorial styles by taking an average amplitude of
each window.
We plot the mean of as of paintings of each artist in Figure 5-10. Figure 5-10(a)
displays the standard deviations in each scale. The plots show that the standard de-
viation of the average amplitude of windows captures the regularities shared among
paintings of each artist. The standard deviation of our non-stationarity feature over
paintings is higher than the standard deviation of our multi-scale feature over paint-
ings. For some artists such as Degas and Monet, the variation is quite high. Since
these artists are Impressionists who use colors more than lines or brightness to express
their subject, our study using the luminance channel might miss important spatial
color contrast.
Figure 5-10(b) shows that the non-stationarity a, characterizes the differences
among different artists. For example, Rembrandt shows a very distinctive curve
with its sharply descending slope. Rembrandt used localized spatial composition.
However, Rembrandt's lines and brush strokes are not visible. The response of the
steerable pyramid to them is not strong in any region. In addition, Rembrandt's dark
background might generate noisy responses. These non-localized high frequencies
lead to low standard deviations.
52
IVIUI I L 
Rubens Beckmann
Figure 5-11: Monet and Degas show a high spatial variation of detail due to the
presence of the sky and the background. In comparison, Rubens' and Beckmann's
paintings have uniform a distribution of details.
53
uL WC
Over all scales, Degas and Monet exhibit high spatial variation. In fact, the cause
of the high spatial variation is different for the two artists. Monet's paintings are
mostly landscapes with sky which leads to high spatial variation. Degas' paintings
are not usually landscapes but have people in them. However, how Degas places
objects and people locally generates the high spatial variation. In comparison, we
can notice Beckmann's and Rubens' low curves. Beckmann's and Rubens' paintings
have details and objects evenly distributed over whole regions in the images, which
leads to low variation in the spatial domain. Figure 5-11 illustrates these differences
and similarities.
We have discussed the spatial variation aspects of pictorial styles. The spatial
variation of the average amplitude is used to measure the non-stationarity. The
spatial variations are related to the subject matter, composition, use of background,
and so on.
5.3 Anisotropy
In the previous sections, we have shown that the average amplitude across scales
is relevant to pictorial styles. The high amplitude in the coarse scales corresponds
to the contrast between large regions over an image, and the amplitude in the fine
scales is generated by the high frequency details, such as fine-scale brush strokes and
oriented structures like lines and edges. However, the analysis of multi-scale aspects
of pictorial styles does not distinguish the source of the high amplitude in a certain
scale. For example, the high amplitude in the high frequencies does not distinguish
whether it is from non-oriented structures, such as textures or point-shaped brush
strokes, or from oriented structures such as lines and edges. Therefore, a measure
of the orientedness is necessary to distinguish between non-oriented structures and
oriented structures. We explore the anisotropy aspects of pictorial styles using the
standard deviation of the amplitude across orientations.
The orientedness or anisotropy represents whether or not the features in the im-
ages are structured and aligned along particular directions. Lines and edges are
54
Figure 5-12: Signac's The Papal Palace, Avignon and Beckmann's Family Picture.
examples of oriented structures. Figure 5-12 demonstrates the difference between
pictorial styles with non-oriented features and those with oriented features. Signac's
The Papal Palace, Avignon does not have explicit lines, although we can see the
boundaries of the building. In contrast, Beckmann's Family Picture has real line
marks to represent line structures. The steerable pyramid we use is appropriate to
analyze such oriented structures, since we can locate the clear lines where the oriented
filters respond strongly. The analysis of the response of the filters reveals the degree
of the orientedness in an image.
We use the standard deviation of the amplitude across orientations to analyze
the characteristics of the "orientedness." The parameters used in the analysis are the
following:
Ps = std(B,S,k(i))/IB , (5.3)
s = scale, i = pixel location, and k = orientation.
We have the oriented slice B8 ,k of each subband B in the steerable pyramid for the
kth orientation. At each point xi, we compute std(IBs,k(i)), the standard deviation of
IBs,k (i) across four orientations. Then, we take the average of the standard deviations
over the whole image. We normalize this orientation feature by the average amplitude
55
of B8 to prevent high average amplitudes from leading to high standard deviation.
We compute p, at scale 1 to 5.
The high standard deviation across orientations is related to the existence of edges
and lines, but our anisotropy feature is not sufficient to distinguish between features
such as texture and edges and lines. Edges possess additional properties not captured
by anisotropy such as coherence across scale and spatial coherence along the edge.
As we observed that the orientedness is relevant to certain aspects of pictorial
styles in Figure 5-12, we explore how the stylistic differences between artists are
reflected in the standard deviation of amplitude across orientations. We take the
mean of p, (Eq. 5.4) of paintings of each artist and show the mean curves in Figure
5-13. Figure 5-13(a) displays the standard deviation of p, among paintings of each
artist. They show that the average amplitude curve captures the regularities shared
by paintings of each artist. In addition, Figure 5-13(b) shows that the mean of the
standard deviations across orientations characterizes the differences between different
artists as well. In the rest of this section, we discuss the correlation between pictorial
styles and the mean of the standard deviations across orientations.
Beckmann and Kandinsky, whose paintings contain sharp edges and lines, have
high curves and the highest peaks in the 4th scale. In contrast, the paintings by
Monet and Signac show the highest peaks in the 2nd scale and have low curves. This
is related to their pictorial styles not having lines and edges at fine scales. In addition,
in Van Gogh's curve in Figure 5-13, the height of the curve is not as high as the height
of Beckmann's curve, but the curve has a very clear peak in the fourth scale. This
is relevant to the fact that Van Gogh uses very strong lines with a specific width.
In fact, Van Gogh's spin-whirl brush strokes generate quite thick marks, which are
captured by a certain scale.
The anisotropy features distinguish high-frequency content from oriented struc-
tures and those from non-oriented textures or brush strokes. Signac has shown
as much high-frequency contrast as Beckmann in Figure 5-5, but in Figure 5-13,
Signac does not have as high values in the high frequencies as Beckmann does. Using
anisotropy features, we can distinguish the differences of pictorial styles, which could
56
Phntn
0.98
5 7
0.96
5 :7 5 7 5 7
5 7 V.r
5 7 :
eld
-0
0.92
5 7 5 7 5 7 5 7
0.9
c
B C
o'6dS)
C~d
Ev:
:
IN
5 7 5 7 5 7
Log 2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
(a)
5 7 4 5 6 7
Log2 spatial freq. (cycles/img.)
Figure 5-13: (a) The mean of the average amplitude curves of paintings. The stan-
dard deviation of each artist shows that the average amplitude curve captures the
regularities among paintings of each artist. (b) The mean curves of artists show that
the average amplitude characterized the differences between different artists.
57
8
(b)
nave
cis,6r~
not be done by other features.
5.4 High and Low Residual features
In addition to our three main types of features, we include features of low and high
residuals of the steerable pyramid for completeness. We take the average amplitude
of the high residual and take a mean and a standard deviation of the low residual. We
do not analyze these three features in depth as we do for our other fifteen features.
In particular, the low residual is relevant to the pixel histogram, which we do not
analyze in this thesis, and the effect of the high residual is rather redundant as it has
similar values as the high frequency subband.
5.5 Summary
In this chapter, we have described three main types of features that characterize
pictorial styles using the steerable pyramid as well as residual features. We have
shown that the multi-scale amplitude is relevant to the use of brush strokes, oriented
structures such as lines and edges, and large-scale contrast. Furthermore, the spatial
variation of the average amplitude can measure non-stationary aspects of pictorial
styles, that is, the degree of spatial distribution of details. In addition, we have
shown that the variation of the amplitude across orientations captures the differences
between oriented structures such as lines and edges and non-oriented structure such
as textures and brush strokes.
58
Chapter 6
Style Analysis
In the previous chapter, we have discussed how our image features are relevant to
pictorial styles. In this chapter, we will analyze these features using machine learn-
ing techniques to further examine the relevance of our features to regularities and
differences of pictorial styles and to discuss correlations and dependencies among the
features.
Our eighteen features capture the multi-scale, non-stationarity, and anisotropy
aspects of images. However, it is still difficult to visualize and understand eighteen-
dimensional data. Moreover, the features are neither independent nor uncorrelated,
and the examination of paintings along an individual feature does not reveal the
underlying regularities. Machine learning techniques can be used to reduce the num-
ber of dimensions for the purpose of analysis and more importantly to extract the
meaningful projection of features, i.e. to reveal correlations and dependencies.
We employ two kinds of machine learning techniques: Principal Component Analy-
sis (PCA), which is an unsupervised learning technique, and Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA), which is a supervised learning technique. Both of them reduce the
dimensionality of features by projecting the original feature vectors onto a subspace.
The features we selected are the amplitude distribution across scales, the amplitude
distribution across the spatial domain, and the standard deviation of amplitude across
orientations.
We use PI'CA to visualize how the features are relevant to natural style classifica-
59
tion. It is natural to classify style by artist. However, it should be understood that
each artist does not always retain a uniform style. Using PCA not only helps validate
the selected features, but also demonstrates the directions in the feature space along
which data points are well-spread. In addition, PCA decorrelates features so that
we can observe certain aspects that we would not be able to analyze. Therefore we
examine the principal directions to understand the significance of each feature and
the correlation between features.
Unlike PCA, LDA is a supervised learning technique. That is, we assign the
artist labels to the paintings of two different artists, then LDA separates paintings of
different artists while clustering paintings of the same artist. To this end, the LDA
maximizes the ratio of the distance between groups to the distance within group.
LDA is more useful than PCA to extract the projection of features that is actually
relevant to the classification and labeling.
6.1 Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
In this section, we validate the relevance of our features to regularities and differences
of pictorial styles. Using PCA, we transform the feature space into a principal com-
ponent space according to the variance of features. The direction with the largest
variance among paintings and photos in the feature space is assigned to be the first
principal direction in the transformed space. First, we examine each type of feature,
multi-scale, non-stationarity, and anisotropy with PCA. In this way, we can sepa-
rately analyze the relevance of individual features of each type. Once we understand
each type of feature, we analyze all features together.
We do not label the feature vectors by artists. That PCA spreads paintings of
different styles and that PCA does not spread paintings of similar styles validate the
relevance of the features to the pictorial styles. However, that the feature vectors of
paintings by one artist are not clustered does not necessarily mean that the features
are not appropriate for capturing regularities. Artists explore different pictorial styles,
and those images with different styles tend to be more spread than clustered. In
60
addition, that the paintings by different artists are clustered together does not mean
that the features are not characterizing the stylistic differences. Along one type of
notion of pictorial styles, different artists might share the same statistical properties.
6.1.1 Multi-scale Analysis
Among the three types of features, multi-scale, non-stationarity, and anisotropy, the
multi-scale features separate the images by artists the most. In particular, the multi-
scale features are meaningful to capture the differences and similarities in paintings.
Artists have many degrees of freedom to change the multi-scale content. They can
explore the sizes of brush strokes, contrast between large regions and so on.
~-I~
10r
0
U-· r
LL
Component 0
(a) -
0o
a)
(A
-1
0.5 . -1st
- 2nd
0 4,
°_5 " _ -- 2
-0.5 _
I
Principle Componets 4 -2 0 2First
(b) (c)
Figure 6-1: The first and second principal components regarding the multi-scale fea-
tures. (a) The fraction variance of each component. (b) The first and second principal
components. (c) The mean and the standard deviation of paintings by each artist.
The ellipses represent the standard deviation of the components among the paintings
by each artist.
61
1
I
t
4 I I I I I
Figure 6-1 shows how paintings and photographs are spread along the first and
second principal components regarding the multi-scale features. The first principal
component is the height of the average amplitude curve. This represents how much
details are present generally over all scales. The second component is its slope. As the
fraction variances of components show in Figure 6-1 (a), the other three components
do not spread paintings as the first two components do.
Paintings by artists approximately fall into six groups in Figure 6-1 (c). The
first group of Beckmann, the second group of Chagall, Renoir, Manet, Rubes and
Kandinsky, the third group of Bohrod and Photo, the fourth group of Degas and
Rembrandt, the fifth group of Monet and Signac and the sixth group of Van Gogh.
The first component places the second (Chagall, Renoir, Manet, Rubens and
Kandinsky), third (Bohrod and Photo), sixth groups (Van Gogh) in the similar po-
sition, and the fourth (Degas and Rembrandt) and fifth (Monet and Signac) groups
together.
The paintings by Degas, Rembrandt, Monet and Signac tend to have less lumi-
nance contrast. Instead, some of them have more contrast in colors, which we do
not study in this thesis. In comparison, the paintings by Chagall, Renoir, Manet,
Rubens, Kandinsky, Bohrod, and Photographs have more noticeable luminance con-
trast. Figure 6-2 shows example paintings by artists in the relative positions according
to the first and second principal components. We can observe that different degrees
of luminance contrast spans the space along two principal components.
In addition, notice that the first component separates Beckmann's paintings from
the paintings of different artists apart. Beckmann's paintings have sharp edges and
lines as well as strong contrast between large regions. These high contrast features
distinguish Beckmann's paintings from the other paintings.
The paintings of Monet, Signac and Van Gogh have low large-scale contrast com-
pared to the paintings by Chagall, Manet and Renoir. This aspect of pictorial styles
is reflected in their positions of the second principal component.
Another interesting observation is that the paintings of Bohrod and photographs
are plotted in the similar position along the first and second principal components. In
62
Manet
Hemorandt
Van Gogh
High Low
The First Principle Component (The Average Height)
a-
J o
0*(d
J. 
a0d0 _
Co
a0a,0
o0
Ca,
c-
a0O
E)
Figure 6-2: Example paintings by artists in the relative positions according to the
first and second PCA components regarding the multi-scale features
63
A
terms of content, Bohrod's work is classified as Surrealism. However, regarding our
multi-scale aspects of pictorial styles, the photographic looking of Bohrod's paintings
place them with photographs.
As we observed, the paintings are spread by the principal components of the
multi-scale features in a way that they are separated according to the differences and
similarities in terms of visual and intuitive pictorial styles. Moreover, the degree of
intersection between different artists reflects how these two artists share some aspects
of pictorial styles. For example, the large intersection between Renoir and Degas
is relevant because work by both of them is categorized as Impressionism. Another
intersection between two other Impressionists, Signac and Monet is such an example
as well. The co-location of Chagall's and Kandinsky's paintings is somehow natural,
considering that both of them are called Expressionists. However, notice that Manet
and Renoir are positioned very close to Chagall and Kandinsky, although Manet and
Renoir are Impressionists. As we have mentioned, our features are not designed to
draw clear boundaries between conventional art movements. Instead, we capture
the visual differences such as smooth brush strokes, strong luminance contrast and
contrast between large regions. Therefore, it is natural that Manet and Renoir, who
used smooth brush strokes and high luminance contrast, are clustered with Chagall
and Kandinsky.
6.1.2 Non-stationarity Analysis
Non-stationarity is high in an image where some regions have more details than the
rest of the image. The non-stationarity features are more appropriate to analyze
photographs where depth of field plays an important role. Depth of field results in
blurred out-of-focus regions and sharpened focused regions. In paintings, the depth
of field effect is not as strongly employed by all artists. In addition, the variation
of details depends on the subject matter. Images with the sky tend to have large
variation of details because of the absence of detail in the sky. In addition to the
sky, images with a large background are likely to have large variation. The non-
stationarity features depend on whether the image has large background and whether
64
the image is a photograph.
Figure (6-3 shows the first and second components of PCA for the standard devia-
tion across spatial locations. The first principal component is the height of paintings'
standard deviation across spatial locations. A high value in this axis implies the im-
age has high variation of details at all scales. The second principal component is the
slope of paintings' standard deviation across spatial locations, that is, whether the
image changes the degree of detail variation across scales. As the fraction variances
of components show in Figure 6-3 (b), the other three components do not spread
paintings as the first two components do.
In Figure 6-3, paintings and photographs are separated into four groups. The first
group of Beckmann and Rubens, the second group of Van Gogh, Signac, Kandinsky,
Renoir, Bohrod, Manet, and Chagall, the third group of Rembrandt, the fourth group
of Degas, Monet and Photo. The space of the first and second component does
not generate clear boundaries between groups. However, the fact; that the groups
are not clearly separated does not mean these non-stationarity features does not
capture pictorial styles. We discuss the relevance of the features to the differences
and similarities of pictorial styles in the rest of this section.
The first component plots Beckmann and Rubens in similar positions, and Rem-
brandt, Degas, Monet and Photo close to one another. The low first components of
Beckmann and Rubens are relevant to their uniform distribution of details in their
paintings, whereas the dynamic compositions of Rembrandt, Degas, Monet and Photo
result in the high standard deviation across spatial locations. We do not intend to
select specific contents or composition of these paintings and photos. However, in our
data set, most of Beckmann's and Rubens's paintings do not have background, but are
full of people or objects. In comparison, many of the paintings of Rembrandt, Degas
and Monet and photographs in our data set have the sky or background. (See Figure
6-4.) In particular, Rembrandt places objects locally, and a large part of his paintings
is background. This means that low-frequency content is not uniform across spatial
locations. However, his high-frequency content is not captured due to the absence
of sharp lines and visible brush strokes. This leads to non-localized high-frequency
65
2.5
2
1.5
1
O0U
0
-0.5
-1
.Ir"
,1 
1
j
3
Component
(b)
I.:)-2 0 2 Principle Componets
First
(a)
r
Z,:
2
1.5
1
0 0.5U
V 0
-0.5
-1
-1 z
embrandt
r-
o+Signac Degas 
1 ~ Iaiihi Zadd
+Rubens Manet Wvonet
AChagaPhoto
-Z 0 2 4 -2 0 2 4
First First
(d) (e)
Figure 6-3: The first and second components of PCA for the standard deviation
across spatial locations. (a) The mean and the standard deviation of paintings by
each artist. The ellipses represent the standard deviation of the components among
the paintings by each artist.(b) The fraction variance of each component. (c) The
first and second principal components. (e) Marks represent paintings.
66
I
-_I ._
a)
_J
c
co
Rembrandt
Uniform Dynamic
The First Principle Component (The Average Height): Distribution of details
Figure 6-4: Example paintings by artists of the variation of non-stationarity
67
EY
.. a
a)'Eo
a) ,
Q .
za)0
0o
a)_ZSa
W.'
L
onet
content.
Although non-stationarity features does not provide clear separation of paintings
by artists, these features certainly capture visual differences and similarities between
pictorial styles.
6.1.3 Anisotropy Analysis
In the principal component analysis for anisotropy features, the height of paintings'
standard deviation across orientations is the first principal component and the slope
is the second component. (See Figure 6-5.) As the fraction variances of components
show in Figure 6-5 (b), the other three components do not spread paintings as the
first two components do.
The anisotropy features separate images into five groups in Figure 6-5. The first
group of Beckmann, the second group of Van Gogh, Chagall, Bohrod, Manet and
Kandinsky, the third group of Rubens and Photo, the fourth group of Degas and
Renoir, the fifth group of Rembrandt, Monet and Signac.
The first group of Beckmann's paintings is separated well again from the paint-
ings of different artists: Beckmann's paintings have high standard deviation across
orientations in all scales. The high standard deviations result from the oriented struc-
tures, such as sharp edges and lines. However, notice that paintings by Beckmann
are separated into two groups in Fig. 6-5(d). In fact, Beckmann's paintings have two
distinctive pictorial styles. Figure 6-6(a) are some example paintings separated apart
and (b) shows the example paintings close to Signac's data points.
Among our features, anisotropy features separate paintings in the most intuitive
way. The human visual system is sensitive to the oriented images features such as lines
and edges. That the paintings by Degas and Renoir are grouped, the paintings by
Rubens and photographs are grouped, and the paintings by Manet, Chagall, Bohrod,
Kandinsky, and Van Gosh are grouped seem very natural.
68
Uu
C
U.
Li,
Component
(b)
0.:
-0.
-4 -2 0 2
First
(a)
4
Principle Componets
(c)
2
4Rembraijgnac
4Degas 
Wanet iRoo WMonet
Wndinsky
i', . , ' . ! 1) 1, , ,
o0u
-1
-2
2 4
//'
/
-4 -2 0
First
(e)
Figure 6-5: The first and second components of PCA for the standard deviation
across spatial locations. (a) The mean and the standard deviation of paintings by
each artist. The ellipses represent the standard deviation of the components among
the paintings by each artist.(b) The fraction variance of each component. (c) The
first and second principal components. (e) Marks represent paintings.
69
2
1
0
C0
-1
-2
1
0'oC0u
Ia
v)
-1
-2
-4 -2 0
First
(d)
, Beckmann
Signac
2 4
C)1
(a)
(b)
Figure 6-6: Beckmann's paintings of different pictorial styles.
70
LI
A
2
1
o
-1
-2
-3
2
1
(b) _
-1
-2
-3
/
j IIII
\
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4
First
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4
First
Figure 6-7: (a) The first and second components of PCA. (b) The first and third
components of PCA. Oval shapes represent the standard deviation of component
values. The ovals show how spread paintings by each are around the average value of
the components.
71
--
- o -
-714 N, 
I I I
(a) (b) (c)
Multiscale Nonstationality Orientedness
U.:
0.4
..........
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
NI -0.2
-0.3
U.:)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
N
- N~~~~~~1
5 10 15 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
Component Scale Scale Scale
Figure 6-8: (a) The three principal components of PCA for the multi-scale features
(b) The three principal components of PCA for the non-stationarity features (c) The
three principal components of PCA for the anisotropy features.
6.1.4 Correlation and Dependency Analysis
In the previous sections, we have studied the fifteen features separately. We now put
the fifteen features together and add the features of high and low residuals, which are
the average amplitude of the high residual and the average and standard deviation
of the low residual amplitude of the steerable pyramid. We perform PCA on these
eighteen features, as shown in Figure 6-7 and 6-8.
For the average amplitude feature, the first component captures the height of the
average amplitude curve and the second and third components capture the slope of
the average curve. For non-stationarity, the height determines the first component
and most of the second component. The slope determines the third component and
a part of the second component. In the anisotropy, the slope and the location of the
peak of average of standard deviation across orientations contribute to the first and
second components. The third component is about the slope of the average standard
deviation across orientations.
Compared to the previous individual analysis of each type of features, the influ-
72
U.)
1st
- - 2nd 0.4
....... 3rd
0.3
0.2
U3
u
. 2
C
. 1
U-
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
''
.
---------------
ences of heights and slopes are changed. In particular, for the anisotropy features,
the first component is the slope, whereas it is the height when we analyze only the
anisotropy features. The first component for the multi-scale features remains the
same as it is the height. There might be correlation between this change and scaling
issues. As we normalize features, scaling does not affect the analysis of features of one
type. However, each type of feature is expressed with its own "units" and the scale
between them is more or less arbitrary. We will explore this scaling issue in future
study.
In figure 6-7 (a), the first and second components project paintings in a way
that the paintings of each artist are clustered. However, it is possible that the non-
separable boundaries result from the fact that each artist does not retain a uniform
style and two different artists possibly share certain aspects of styles. In fact, the
third component separates some artists clustered along the second component. For
example, Manet and Renoir are separated from Kandinsky and Chagall in the third
component, while they are clustered with them in the second component. This sepa-
ration is possible since the non-stationarity in the third component tells the difference
between these two groups, Manet and Renoir, and Chagall and Kandinsky.
Principal components project the statistical characteristics of each artists in Fig.
6-7. Artists who have visually different styles are separated in the space of the
principal components. For example, Beckmann's paintings are well separated from the
other paintings. Signac and Monet's paintings place close to each other. As Chagall
and Kandinsky share many aspects of styles, such as color schemes, composition,
brush strokes and so forth, Chagall and Kandinsky's paintings are clustered.
Our principal component analysis has validated that our features capture regu-
larities of paintings with similar pictorial styles and the differences of paintings with
distinctive pictorial styles. Our features classify paintings not by artists, but by
coarse-grain pictorial styles. In addition, photographs are clustered although they
are not separated from paintings. This is because some artists like Bohrod follow pic-
torial styles looking like photographs. In terms of our features, the statistical features
of photographs and the paintings of Bohrod are not separable.
73
bec. boh. cha. deg. kan. man. mon. pho. rem. ren. rub. sig. van.
bec. 0.0 1.5 2.4 2.5 1.8 2.2 8.8 1.9 4.9 2.3 3.6 28 4.4
boh. 1.5 0.0 0.7 1.4 0.8 1.2 1.8 0.8 6.8 1.3 1.9 8.2 1.2
cha. 2.4 0.7 0.0 3.2 0.4 0.7 2.6 1.1 4.8 1.2 1.5 23 2.4
deg. 2.5 1.4 3.2 0.0 3.4 1.4 4.8 1.7 1.7 0.7 2.3 9.6 2.5
kan. 1.8 0.8 0.4 3.4 0.0 2.7 8.6 0.7 7.7 1.7 1.7 29 4.2
man. 2.2 1.2 0.7 1.4 2.7 0.0 3.5 0.4 2.2 0.7 1.1 5.4 4.1
mon. 8.8 1.8 2.6 4.8 8.6 3.5 0.0 0.4 13 1.2 3.7 1.7 5.4
pho. 1.9 0.8 1.1 1.7 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 2.5 0.7 1.0 2.0 2.5
rem. 4.9 6.8 4.8 1.7 7.7 2.2 13 2.5 0.0 2.3 2.6 20 19
ren. 2.3 1.3 1.2 0.7 1.7 0.7 1.2 0.7 2.3 0.0 1.1 4.1 2.7
run. 3.6 1.9 1.5 2.3 1.7 1.1 3.7 1.0 2.6 1.1 0.0 7.5 12
sig. 28 8.2 23 9.6 29 5.4 1.7 2.0 20 4.1 7.5 0.0 7.4
van. 4.4 1.2 2.4 2.5 4.2 4.1 5.4 2.5 19 2.7 12 7.4 0.0
Table 6.1: The measure of class separability
6.2 Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
Unlike PCA, LDA is a supervised learning technique that exploits labeling of the
data, by artists in our case. It extracts the direction in the multi-dimensional feature
space that best distinguishes the artists. It tells us which features or combination
of features are most effective to separate two artists apart. We performed LDA on
the same set of eighteen features used for PCA: multi-scale features, non-stationarity
features, anisotropy features, and the features for high and low residuals. LDA helps
to extract the main axes of variation, which are related specifically to the differences
between a pair of artists.
Table 6.2 shows the measure of the class separability between pairs of artists
among 12 artists and that between each artist's paintings and photographs. The
separability is the ratio of the distance between groups to the distance within group.
Small numbers mean the two artists have very similar statistical properties. The
smallest number for each artist is marked with a bold font and the largest number
is denoted with an italic font. Notice, Chagall and Kandinsky show very small sep-
arability, which is relevant to the similarity of their stylistic properties. Signac and
Kandinsky mark the largest separability due to their different pictorial styles.
In most cases, the anisotropy features are assigned the largest absolute weights.
Large absolute weights mean that the features are effective at discriminating between
74
Nonstationarity
100
80
60
40
20
N
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
Figure 6-9: Averaged absolute values of LDA weights for the multi-scale, non-
stationary and anisotropy features.
the two artists, whereas weights close to the zero mean that two artists are not
separable along the axis. Figure 6-9 shows the average absolute weights in our Linear
Discriminant Analysis results. We observe that the weights of the anisotropy features
are larger than the other features. This means that artists are separable along our
anisotropy features consistently. Let us discuss each pair case by case.
The plots in Figure 6-10 and 6-11 show LDA plots for ten pairs of artists. The
separability is the ratio of the distance between groups to the distance within group.
(a) shows how the paintings of those two artists are separated. (b),(c) and (d) are for
LDA weights assigned to the multi-scale, non-stationary and anisotropy features. We
display pairs with large separability in Figure 6-10 and those with small separability in
Figure 6-11. In both cases, anisotropy features are assigned with the largest weight.
In addition, notice that the easily-separable pairs assign much higher weights to
the anisotropy features than non-separable pairs. This suggests a strong correlation
between pictorial styles and the anisotropy features. In particular, we hypothesize
that this features might characterize the scale at which strong edges occur, which
might be an important signature that distinguishes paintings by an artist from others.
We will further study the relative size of weights between features in future work.
75
100
80
60
40
20 _- --Lm~u I
Multiscale Anisotropy
(a)
x VanGogh I
Rembrandt
Separability:
19.0926
Kandinsky
o Signac
Separability:
29.898
20
o20 xxxxxxxx
20
10
(b) (c) (d)
Multiscale Nonstationarity Orientedness
400 400 400
200 200 200
-200 -200 -200
2 4 2 4 2 4
zu
0
") A
-d.1V
1 'z 4 2 4 2
x Signac
o Manet
Separability:
5.4349
x Beckmann
o Signac
Separability:
28.1715
x Photo
o Signac
Separability:
1.9557
5
XXXXXX
0
1
5 xxxxxx
10
2
xxX
0
o
-2
10
100
50
-50
2 4
100
50
-50
2 4
100
50
-50
2 4
2 4
20
10
0
-10
20
10
-10
2 4
20
10 V
2 4
Figure 6-10: LDA plots for five pairs. The separability is the ratio of the distance
between groups to the distance within group. (a) shows how the paintings of those two
artists are separated. (b),(c) and (d) are for LDA weights assigned to the multi-scale,
non-stationary and anisotropy features.
76
)
Photo
'Monet
Separability:
0.37745
(c)
Nonstationarity
(d)
Orientedness
1 0 2 4
10 2 4
2 4 2
2 4 2
Kandinsky
, Chagall
Separability:
0.39095
10 2 4
20
10
0
-10
2 4
20
10
-10 4
2 4
10 2 4 2 4 2
Figure 6-11: LDA plots for five pairs. The separability is the ratio of the distance
between groups to the distance within group. (a) shows how the paintings of those two
artists are separated. (b),(c) and (d) are for LDA weights assigned to the multi-scale,
non-stationary and anisotropy features.
77
(a)
U.
xxx\
(b)
Multiscale
_n
I Photo
Manet
Separability
0.44499
U.
-0.
-1
-I
U.
0.
xxx "
4 
10
x Manet
|; Renoir
Separability:
0.65523
x Degas
i Renoir
Separability:
0.65689
-I
n I
-v.,
A, r
"I
-I
-- I
6.3 Summary
In this chapter, we have analyzed our features using machine learning techniques,
PCA and LDA. The results of PCA and LDA validate that our features are relevant
to regularities and differences of pictorial styles. PCA clusters paintings by one artist
and separates paintings by artists with different pictorial styles. LDA measures the
class separability between a pair of artists, which is consistent with visual differences
between pictorial styles of two artists.
78
Chapter 7
Style Transfer
In the previous chapter, we studied the relevance of the features to stylistic differences
using PCA and LDA. In this chapter, we assess the visual relevance of these statistical
features by transferring them between pairs of images. We match eighteen features
which capture multi-scale, non-stationary and anisotropy aspects of images.
We believe that transfer is an important tool for the evaluation of statistical
image features. While our transfer results are far from perfect from an application
standpoint., they allow us to assess the relevance and orthogonality of our feature set,
and they suggest where future work is needed.
We compare the results obtained by our whole feature set with those by each indi-
vidual feature. In addition, we discuss the limitations and advantages of our method
as compared to previous methods such as Simoncelli and Portilla's textures analysis
and synthesis [50], Heeger and Bergen's histogram matching [25], and Hertzmann et
al.'s image analogies [26], although some of them have not been developed for style
transfer.
The transfer results without certain features assess the compactness of our fea-
tures. The difference between results with and without the features validates that the
features are necessary. The changes of different features are designed to be indepen-
dent to one another. We include the transfer between two images that have similar
features as a sanity check.
The evaluation of transfer is difficult because subjective judgement is involved.
79
Therefore, we try to transfer styles between images with similar content. For example,
transfer between a landscape image and a portrait might not meet the expectation
of viewers.
7.1 Multi-scale Content Transfer
As we have shown in the previous chapters, the average amplitude curve across scales
captures multi-scale stylistic aspects of an image. The transfer of the average ampli-
tude changes the degree of large-scale contrast and the strengths of high-frequency
content such as textures, lines, and edges.
We transfer the multi-scale average amplitude by multiplying coefficients by the
ratio between an input image and a model image at each scale from 1 to 5. This
gives the input image a visual look similar to the model image. B is the subband
of the s th scale of the steerable pyramid of the model image. B is the subband of
the s th scale of the steerable pyramid of the input image. Our transfer generates the
following new subband for the input image:
Bnew - -B.l1B (7.1)
where s = scale.
After this multi-scale transfer, we apply pixel histogram matching, as Heeger and
Bergen transfer [25] does.
Figure 7-1 shows the transfer result. The scale transfer, Fig. 7-1 (c) and the
the whole features transfer (d) achieve the large-scale contrast of Chagall's painting
and remove the point-shaped brush strokes of Pointillism, which cannot be done by
intensity matching (e). The scale transfer (c) and the Heeger and Bergen transfer (f)
create similar results, although the scale transfer (c) transfers only average amplitudes
and (f) transfers full histograms [25].
We show the transfer result with the opposite direction in Figure 7-2, which trans-
fers features from the painting by Signac to one by Chagall. In Figure 7-2, the scale
80
(d)
Scale + Locality + Anisotropy_,W. n
(e)
Intensity Matching
.... ' .? :O ti s
(f)
Heeaer & Beraen
()
Locality + Anisotropv
Figure 7-1: Multi-scale transfer from Chagall's Maternity(a) to Signac's Le Demolis-
seur(b).
81
(a)
Model
(b)
Original
(c)
Scale
(h)
Image Analogies
w 
I . 14 1111T 
.~·w·
., 11 : ' 
(a) (c)
Scale
(d)
Scale + Locality + Anisotropy
(e)
Intensitv Matchinn
(f)
Hpppr & Rrnpn
(g)
I nralitv 4- Anintrnnv
Figure 7-2: Multi-scale transfer
nity(b).
from Signac's Le Demolisseur(a) to Chagall's Mater-
82
(h)
Imann Analnniec
(b)
transfer (c), the whole transfer (d), and the non-stationarity and anisotropy transfer
(g) do not transfer the point-shaped brush strokes of Pointillism since our method
does not capture the correlation of frequency content across spatial domain or across
orientations. However, with the transfer of multi-scale features, the scale transfer
(c) and the whole transfer (d) decrease the large-scale contrast. This generates a
flat look, which is more similar to the model image (a) than the intensity matching
(e) and the non-stationarity and anisotropy transfer (g) images are. On the other
hand, due -to the independent transfer of oriented subbands, the histogram transfer
of Heeger and Bergen [25] (f) generates noise effect, which somehow achieves the style
of pointillism from the model image (a).
Multi-scale transfer changes the large-scale contrast and the strength of high-
frequency content. When the large-scale contrast increases, an image becomes three-
dimensional, whereas an image becomes flat with decreased contrast. Decreasing
high-frequency content can cause two different effects: texture reduction and line
blurring. On the other hand, increasing high-frequency content causes textures and
lines to become sharper. However, our transfer does not separate textures and lines.
This will be discussed in Section 7.3.
7.2 Non-stationarity Transfer
In the previous section, the multi-scale transfer generated a similar look, but the
variation of detail was not transferred. As we discussed in Section 5.2, the distribution
of local detail changes the location that receives attention and the depth of field effect
that can be used to compensate for the flatness of two dimensional canvas.
To transfer the notion of spatial variation, we take a k x k size window Ws,i in the
subband Bs for each pixel xi and compute the average amplitude across all i, W,,i.
We use 28- + 1 for k at each scale s, from 1 to 5. We match the histogram of the
normalized average amplitude, w ,'Il, of an input image and a model image. HT(a,b)
83
stands for histogram transfer from a to b.
s, U ( IB' ' |Bs| )' -(7.2)
IBI ' I BI
where i = spatial location and s = scale
We match two histograms of box-filtered coefficients of steerable pyramid sub-
bands of an image and a model image. We multiply the ratio of W .ne w to Iwi to the
s, IB, I
pixel i at the scale s. After this non-stationarity transfer, we apply pixel histogram
matching, as Heeger and Bergen transfer [25] does.
When we match histograms of the windows, we can transfer the distribution of
contrast over an image. In Figure 7-3, the non-stationarity transfer (c) increases the
contrast inside the tree and blurs the contrast in the background. This enhances
the depth-of-field effect. Note that Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies technique [26]
removes Van Gogh's spin-whirl brush strokes, but does not transfer the depth-of-field
effect.
In Figure 7-4, the non-stationary transfer (c) increases the depth of the field
effect of the same model image to a different image, which is a portrait. The non-
stationarity transfer makes the girl in the foreground focused as opposed to the back-
ground blurred, which cannot be done by the intensity transfer (e) or by the histogram
match of Heeger and Bergen (f).
The non-stationarity transfer makes the regions with lots of details blurred and
some regions without high-frequency features sharper. However, the blurring might
result in artifacts. In addition, the decision on where to blur or sharpen is based on
the initial frequency content. The sharpening might increase noise instead of oriented
features such as lines, edges, or brush strokes. Noise in images can be recognized as
high-frequency content including JPEG artifacts. Increasing the amplitude of high
frequency might generate unpleasant noisy images.
In addition, the non-stationarity aspects of pictorial styles depend on the image
contents. Landscape images with a sky tend to have large variation of details in
the spatial domain. That is, low average amplitude is present in the sky and higher
84
Scale + Locality + Anisotropy
(e) Intensity Matching (f) Heeger & Bergen (g) Scale + Anisotropy (h) Image Analogies
Figure 7-3: Non-stationarity transfer from Degas' Aux courses en province to Van
Gogh's Cypresses. (c) transfers the depth of field effect of (a). The details in the fore-
ground increase, but the high-frequency content in the background becomes blurred.
85
(a) Model
(b) Original (c) Locality (d)
I
i
I
i
I
I
(b)
Oriainal
(e)
(c) (d)
f) (a) (h)
Figure 7-4: Non-stationarity transfer from Degas' Aux courses en province to Renoir's
Portrait de Romaine Lacaux. (c) and (d) transfer the depth of field effect of (a).
The high-frequency in the foreground remains, but the high-frequency content in the
background becomes blurred. In this portrait, the face becomes focused.
86
(a)
values are generated in the other regions. Portraits have low average amplitude in
the background and high average amplitude in the people's faces. Unfortunately,
the non-stationarity transfer depends not only on pictorial styles but also on image
contents.
7.3 Anisotropy Transfer
In the previous sections, we explored the transfer of the multi-scale and non-stationary
features. Mere sharpening and blurring may lead to increased noise or blurred ori-
ented structures such as lines and edges. It is necessary to distinguish frequency con-
tent relevant to oriented and non-oriented structure. The standard deviation across
orientations distinguishes oriented structures from "noise". Increasing standard devi-
ation performs anisotropic sharpening of edges, while decreasing standard deviation
performs anisotropic blurring of edges.
std(IB,k()) = std(IB' (()) std((IB,k (7.3)
BT, ( JBI ( Bl. 
where s = scale, i - pixel location, and k = orientation
We have the oriented subband Bs,k of each subband Bs in the steerable pyramid
for each k h orientation. At each point xi, we compute std(JBs,k(i)j), the standard
deviation of B,k(i) across four orientations. Then we match the histogram of the
standard deviations over the whole image. We normalize this anisotropy feature by
the average amplitude of B,. According to the new standard deviation, we modify
each coefficient. Note that changing the standard deviation changes the maximum
and the minimum of coefficient, which effects the total energy of the steerable pyramid
subband. After this anisotropy transfer, we apply pixel histogram matching, as Heeger
and Bergen transfer [25] does.
Figure '7-5 compares the anisotropy and multi-scale transfer results. The notion
of sharp lines was transferred in multi-scale and anisotropy transfer. This might
87
On inal
Model
Anisotroov
Scale
AnisotroDv
Scale
Imaae Analooies Imaae Analoaies
Figure 7-5: Transfer results from Levitt's New York to Rembrandt's The Feast of
Belshazzar are in the first column, and those from Manet's Portrait d'Emile Zola
to Rembrandt's The Feast of Belshazzar are in the second column. Anisotropy and
multi-scale transfer results generate similar effects, but the anisotropy transfer gen-
erates less noise. 88
suggest that they are correlated. However, the anisotropy transfer generates more
refined edges and creates less noise. This anisotropy aspect regarding edges is not
transferred by Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies [26] for both model images in figure
7-5. In general, Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies [26] are not suitable to transfer
photographic styles. Figure 7-6 shows another example.
Anisotropy features capture oriented structures separate from non-oriented struc-
tures of pictorial styles. When we combine the multi-scale and anisotropy transfer,
the anisotropy transfer effect is not visible. Figure 7-6 shows such an example. The
multi-scale transfer dominates the visual results. In the previous chapter, the result of
LDA showed that the anisotropy aspects of pictorial styles are important to separate
paintings by two different artists. This suggests that we should increase the weight
for the effect of the transfer of the anisotropy. We will explore this scaling issue in
future work.
7.4 Comparison
In this section, we compare our results with other parametric transfer methods such as
Portilla and Simoncelli's texture analysis and synthesis [50] and Heeger and Bergen's
histogram matching [25] even though they were not developed for style transfer. We
also provide comparison with Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies [26].
Figure 7-7 shows that Portilla and Simoncelli's texture analysis and synthesis [50]
is not adequate for the purpose of style analysis and transfer. It does not separate
the image content from pictorial style and tends to mimic the structure of objects in
the images. It imposes image structures using joint statistics and it does not preserve
image content, when transferring between two images. (See Figure 7-7.)
In contrast, Heeger and Bergen's histogram transfer [25] does not change image
content such as lines, edges, or composition. The histogram matching modifies the
global frequency, whereas our method modifies the distribution of details and the
sharpness of oriented structures. Even though Heeger and Bergen's histogram trans-
fer [25] generates convincing results, it does not consider non-stationarity of image
89
Model
:cale + Anlsotropy
Scale Anisotropy
Figure 7-6: Transfer from Ansel Adams' Clearing Winter Storm to a natural image.
Anisotropy and multi-scale transfer results generate similar effects, but the anisotropy
transfer generates less noise. When we combine the multi-scale and anisotropy trans-
fer, the anisotropy transfer effect is not visible.
90
I.___ __ r__l
Model
Figure 7-7: The result of Portilla and Simoncelli's texture analysis and synthesis. [50].
Model images are Manet's Olympia, Signac's Against the Enamel of a Background
Rhythmic with Beats and Angles, Tones and Colors, Portrait of M. Felix Feneon in
1890, and Monet's Wheatstacks (End of Summer).
91
Result
I1 '
r.~~~~~~%. 
11 .., .
  "'ll "a
T-WFW' -i'
"W
11,LI-, 41, g, WW
statistics and anisotropy of pictorial styles.
Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies [26] capture fine-grain shapes of brush strokes,
but do not transfer large-scale contrast, depth-of-field effect, and anisotropy aspects
regarding edges.
Luminance transfer in Figure 7-1, 7-2, 7-3, 7-4, and 7-8 generates convincing
results, but it does not change frequency aspects of pictorial styles.
Figure 7-8 shows the difference between the four transfer methods. The inten-
sity transfer does not capture the frequency aspects of pictorial styles. Heeger and
Bergen's histogram transfer captures the global frequency aspects of pictorial styles,
but does not change the distribution of details or the anisotropy of lines and edges.
The results of Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies [26] do not capture differences of
pictorial styles. The last row of Figure 7-8 was added as a sanity check and shows
that the transfer methods leave the image the same when the model image is a simi-
lar image from the same artist as the input image. Compared to these, our method
transfers large-scale contrast, depth-of-field effect, and anisotropy aspects regarding
edges.
92
Model Intensity Matching
Our Method
Heeer & Bergen Image Analogies Scale + Locality + Anisotropy
Figure 7-8: Comparison with the intensity matching, Heeger and Bergen's histogram
transfer [251, Hertzmann et al.'s image analogies. [26], and our method.
93
Chapter 8
Discussion
In this thesis, we proposed a new methodology for the quantitative characterization
of coarse grain pictorial style. The heart of our approach is the use of both analysis
and transfer with the same set of image features. We have shown that the statis-
tical features of paintings and photographs in the frequency domain are related to
simple notions of pictorial style. We have validated the relevance of the features to
pictorial styles using machine learning techniques. In addition, we transfer pictorial
styles between two images by matching the statistical features, which is a crucial
complementary validation tool for our features.
Our main contribution is that we analyze and transfer pictorial styles at the
same time. Most research on image analysis has not developed tools to transfer
statistical regularities and differences. In addition, although we do not provide fine-
grain imitation as recent non-parametric transfer methods do, our method allows
statistical analysis and a direct manipulation and interpolation of pictorial style.
We have characterized and transferred three aspects of pictorial styles: multi-scale,
non-stationarity, and anisotropy aspects. Our features do not generate a clear bound-
ary between artists and do not reproduce texture details like image analogies [26].
Instead, our method captures coarse-grain aspects of pictorial styles. We characterize
the large-scale contrast and the distribution of details, which are relevant to pictorial
styles, especially pictorial composition.
Our parametric model has more applications beyond transfer. Our features can be
94
used for direct interpolation, manipulation and enhancement of digital images such as
tone mapping. In addition, we want to extend our analysis and transfer to drawing,
which includes effects such as pure line drawing and hatching.
In our future work, we want to refine our features. Our current feature set does not
separate edges from structures such as textures. This can be improved by studying
joint statistics, which can examine the coherence of steerable pyramid coefficients at
consecutive scales and in the adjacent spatial location. We seek to separate oriented
structures for analysis and transfer.
In addition, manipulation of the steerable pyramid does not preserve edges and
lines, and ;suffers from haloing artifacts due to its band-limited linear basis. We
hope to find different image transforms that characterize and transfer pictorial styles
without artifacts and that is suitable to separate oriented structures such as edges
and lines.
As we refine our feature set, we hope our statistical model can be used for more
precise style classification and retrieval. For this end, we need to explore scaling issues.
The scale between different types of features should be adjusted properly. In addition,
we want to explore different machine learning techniques such as nearest neighbor or
neighborhood components analysis to understand correlations and dependencies of
our features.
95
Bibliography
[1] Mark Harden's Artchive. http://www.artchive.com/.
[2] H. Barlow. The exploitation of regularities in the environment by the brain.
Behavioral and Brain Science (BBS), 24(4):602-607, 2001.
[3] Kobus Barnard and David A. Forsyth. Learning the semantics of words and
pictures. In ICCV, pages 408-415, 2001.
[4] Robert W. Buccigrossi and Eero P. Simoncelli. Image compression via joint
statistical characterization in the wavelet domain. In IEEE Trans. Image Proc.,
volume 8, pages 1688-1701, 1997.
[5] Chad Carson, Megan Thomas, Serge Belongie, Joseph M. Hellerstein, and Jiten-
dra Malik. Blobworld: A system for region-based image indexing and retrieval. In
Third International Conference on Visual Information Systems. Springer, 1999.
[6] F. Cutzu and R. Hammoud. Estimating the photorealism of images: Distin-
guishing paintings from photographs. In Proc. of CVPR, 2003.
[7] J. Daugman. Two-dimensional spectral analysis of cortical receptive field profile.
In Vision Research, volume 20, pages 847-856, 1980.
[8] J. Daugman. Uncertainty relation for resolution in space, spatial frequency and
orientation optimized by two-dimensional visual cortical filters. In J. Opt. Soc.
Am., volume 2, pages 1160-1169, 1985.
96
[9] J. Daugman. Complete discrete 2d gabor transforms by neural networks for
image analysis and compression. In IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing, volume 36, pages 1169-1179, 1997.
[10] Ron O. Dror, Edward H. Adelson, and Alan S. Willsky. Recognition of surface re-
flectance properties from a single image under unknown real-world illumination.
In Proc. IEEE workshop on IOA V in Lighting: Psychophysics and Computation,
December 2001.
[11] Ron C). Dror, Thomas K. Leung, Edward H. Adelson, and Alan S. Willsky.
Statistics of real-world illumination. In Proceedings of CVPR, December 2001.
[12] Iddo Drori, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Hezy Yeshurun. Example-based style synthe-
sis. In Proc. of CVPR, 2003.
[13] Shlomo Dubnov, Naftali Tishby, and Dalia Cohen. Hearing beyond the spectrum.
Journal of New Music Research, 24(4), 1995.
[14] A. A. Efros and T. K. Leung. Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling. In
International Conference on Computer Vision, page 1033?1038, 1999.
[15] Alexei A. Efros and William T. Freeman. Image quilting for texture synthesis
and transfer. In Proc. SIGGRAPH, 2001.
[16] Fairchild. Color Appearance Models. Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[17] Hany FI'arid and Siwei Lyu. Higher-order wavelet statistics and their application
to digital forensics. In IEEE Workshop on Statistical Analysis in Computer
Vision (in conjunction with CVPR), 2003.
[18] G.T. Fechner. Elemente der Psychophysik I u. II. Breitkopf u. Hartel, Leipzig,
1907.
[19] David .J. Field. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the re-
sponse properties of cortical cells. 4(12):2379-2394, December 1987.
97
[20] D.J. Field. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the re-
sponse properties of cortical cells. Journal of the Optical Society of America
A, 4(12):2379-2394, 1987.
[21] Myron Flickner, Harpreet Sawhney, Wayne Niblack, Jonathan Ashley, Qian
Huang, Byron Dom, Monika Gorkani, Jim Hafner, Denis Lee, Dragutin Petkovic,
David Steele, and Peter Yanker. Query by image and video content: The qbic
system. Computer, 28(9):23-32, 1995.
[22] W. Freeman, J. Tenenbaum, and E. Pasztor. An example-based approach to
style translation for line drawings. Technical Report 99-11, MERL, 1999.
[23] William T. Freeman and Edward H. Adelson. The design and use of steerable
filters. IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal. and Machine Intell., 13(9), 1991.
[24] E. Gombrich. The Story of Art. Phaidon Press Ltd, 1950.
[25] David J. Heeger and James R. Bergen. Pyramid-based texture analysis/synthesis.
In Proc. SIGGRAPH, 1995.
[26] Aaron Hertzmann, Charles E. Jacobs, Nuria Oliver, Brian Curless, and David H.
Salesin. Image analogies. In Proc. SIGGRAPH, 2001.
[27] Aaron Hertzmann, Nuria Oliver, Brian Curless, and Steven M. Seitz. Curve
analogies. In EG Workshop on Rendering, 2002.
[28] Jinggang Huang, Ann B. Lee, and David Mumford. Statistics of range images.
In Proc. CVPR, 2000.
[29] Jinggang Huang and David Mumford. Statistics of natural images and models.
In Proc. Conf. CVPR, pages 541-7, 1999.
[30] 0. Icoglu, B. Gunsel, and S. Sariel. Classification and indexing of paintings based
on art movements. In 12th European Signal Processing Conference (Eusipco),
pages 749-752, September 2004.
98
[31] T. Jehan and B. Schoner. An audio-driven perceptually meaningful timbre syn-
thesizer. In Proceedings International Computer Music Conference, 2001.
[32] Robert D. Kalnins, Lee Markosian, Barbara J. Meier, Michael A. Kowalski,
Joseph C. Lee, Philip L. Davidson, Matthew Webb, John F. Hughes, and Adam
Finkelstein. Wysiwyg npr: Drawing strokes directly on 3d models. ACM Trans.
on Graphics, 21(3), 2002.
[33] D. Keren. Recognizing image "style" and activities in video using local features
and naive bayes. Pattern Recognition Letters, 2003. forthcoming.
[34] Daniel Keren. Painter identification using local features and naive bayes. In
ICPR (2), pages 474-477, 2002.
[35] Daniel Keren. Recognizing image "style" and activities in video using local
features and naive bayes. Pattern Recognition Letters, 24(16):2913-2922, 2003.
[36] John-Peter Lewis. Texture synthesis for digital painting. In Computer Graphics
(Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 84), volume 18, pages 245-252, July 1984.
[37] A. Leykin and F. Cutzu. Distinguishing paintings from photographs. Journal of
Vision. 2(7), 2002.
[38] A. Leykin and F. Cutzu. Differences of edge properties in photographs and
paintings. In IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, 2003.
[39] Jia Li, Robert M. Gray, and Richard A. Olshen. Multiresolution image classi-
fication by hierarchical modeling with two-dimensional hidden markov models.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 46(5):1826-1841, 2000.
[40] Jia Li and James Z. Wang. Automatic linguistic indexing of pictures by a statis-
tical modeling approach. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 25(9):1075-
1088, 2003.
99
[41] Jia Li and James Z. Wang. Studying digital imagery of ancient paintings by
mixtures of stochastic models. IEEE Trans. Image Processing, 12, 2004. accepted
for publication.
[42] Jia Li, James Ze Wang, and Gio Wiederhold. IRM: integrated region matching
for image retrieval. In ACM Multimedia, pages 147-156, 2000.
[43] B. Logan and A. Salomon. A music similarity function based on signal analysis.
In ICME 2001., 2001.
[44] Thomas Lombardi, Sung-Hyuk Cha, and Charles Tappert. A graphical user
interface for a fine-art painting image retrieval system. In MIR '04: Proceed-
ings of the 6th A CM SIGMM international workshop on Multimedia information
retrieval, pages 107-112. ACM Press, 2004.
[45] T. Melzer, P. Kammerer, and E. Zolda. Stroke detection of brush strokes in por-
trait miniatures using asemi-parametric and a model based approach. In ICPR
'98: Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Pattern Recognition-
Volume 1, pages 474-476. IEEE Computer Society, 1998.
[46] Sumanta N. Pattanaik, James A. Ferwerda, Mark D. Fairchild, and Donald P.
Greenberg. A multiscale model of adaptation and spatial vision for realistic image
display. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 98, Computer Graphics Proceedings,
Annual Conference Series, pages 287-298, Orlando, Florida, July 1998. ACM
SIGGRAPH / Addison Wesley.
[47] A. Pentland, R. W. Picard, and S. Sclaroff. Photobook: content-based manipu-
lation of image databases. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 18(3):233-254, 1996.
[48] S. Polyak. The Vertebrate Visual System. Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, 1957.
[49] Javier Portilla and Eero P. Simoncelli. Image denoising via adjustment of wavelet
coefficient magnitude correlation. In Proc. of the 7th Int'l Conf. on Image Proc.,
September 200.
100
[50] Javier Portilla and Eero P. Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on
joint statistics of complex wavelet coefficients. IJCV, 40(1), October 2000.
[51] Javier Portilla, V. Strela, M.J. Wainwright, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image denoising
using scale mixtures of gaussians in the wavelet domain. In IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, volume 12, pages 1338- 1351, November 2003.
[52] Erik Reinhard, Peter Shirley, Michael Ashikhmin, and Tom Troscianko. Second
order image statistics in computer graphics. In APGV '04: Proceedings of the
1st Symposium on Applied perception in graphics and visualization, pages 99-106,
New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM Press.
[53] Erik Reinhard, Peter Shirley, and Tom Troscianko. Natural image statistics for
computer graphics. Technical Report UUCS-01-002, University of Utah, March
2001.
[54] Daniel L. Ruderman. The statistics of natural images. Network: Comput. Neural
Syst., 5:517-548, 1994.
[55] Daniel L. Ruderman and W. Bialek. The statistics of natural images: Scaling
in the woods. Physics Review Letter, 73(6):814-817, 1994.
[56] Y. Rui, T. Huang, and S. Chang. Image retrieval: current techniques, promising
directions and open issues, April 1999.
[57] Robert Sablatnig, Paul Kammerer, and Ernestine Zolda. Hierarchical classifica-
tion of paintings using face- and brush stroke models. In ICPR '98: Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference on Pattern Recognition- Volume 1, page 172.
IEEE Computer Society, 1998.
[58] E P Simoncelli and B A Olshausen. Natural image statistics and neural repre-
sentation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24:1193-1216, May 2001.
[59] Eero P. Simoncelli. Statistical models for images: Compression, restoration and
synthesis. In 31st Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems and Computes, pages
673-678, November 1997.
101
[60] Eero P. Simoncelli. Modeling the joint statistics of images in the wavelet domain.
In Proc. SPIE, volume 3813, 1999.
[61] Eero P. Simoncelli and Willian T. Freeman. The steerable pyramid: A flexible
architecture for multi-scale derivative computation. In Second Int'l Conf. on
Image Proc., volume 3, pages 444-447, October 1995.
[62] Eero P. Simoncelli, Willian T. Freeman, Edward H. Adelson, and David J.
Heeger. Shiftable multi-scale transforms. 38(2):587-607, March 1992.
[63] Arnold W. M. Smeulders, Marcel Worring, Simone Santini, Amarnath Gupta,
and Ramesh Jain. Content-based image retrieval at the end of the early years.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 22(12):1349-1380, 2000.
[64] Antonio Torralba and Aude Oliva. Statistics of natural image categories. Net-
work: Comput. Neural Syst., 14:391-412, January 2003.
[65] George Tzanetakis and Perry Cook. Musical genre classification of audio signals.
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, 10(5), 2002.
[66] Brian A. Wandell. Foundations of Vision. Sinauer Associates, Inc., 1995.
[67] James Z. Wang, Jia Li, and Ching chih Chen. Interdisciplinary research to
advance digital imagery indexing and retrieval technologies for asian art and cul-
tural heritages. In Proc. 4th International Workshop on Multimedia Information
Retrieval, in conjunction with ACM Multimedia, 2002.
[68] James Ze Wang, Jia Li, and Gio Wiederhold. SIMPLIcity: Semantics-sensitive
integrated matching for picture LIbraries. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence, 23(9):947-963, 2001.
[69] E.H. Weber. De pulsu, resorptione, audita et tactu. -Annotationes anatomicae
et physiologicae-. Trs. by H.E. Ross, Academic Press, New York, 1978, 1834.
102
[70] M. Welsh, N. Borisov, J. Hill, R. von Behren, and A. Woo. Querying large
collections of music for similarity. Technical Report UCB/CSDOO -1096, UC
Berkeley CS Div., 1999.
[71] D. Wessel. Timbre space as a musical control structure. Computer Music Journal,
3(2), 1979.
[72] Gerhard Widmer, Simon Dixon, Werner Goebl, Efstathios Stamatatos, and As-
mir Tobudic. Empirical music performance research: OFAI's position. Panel
Discussion Paper, MOSART Workshop on Current Research Directions in Com-
puter Music, 2001.
[73] M. Wright, A. Chaudhary, A. Freed, S. Khoury, and D. Wessel. Audio applica-
tions of the sound description interchange format standard, 1999.
[74] James Z. Wang Yixin Chen and Robert Krovetz. Clue: Cluster-based retrieval
of images by unsupervised learning. In IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
volume 13, 2004.
103
MITLibraries
Document Services
Room 14-0551
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
Ph: 617.253.5668 Fax: 617.253.1690
Email: docs@mit.edu
http://llibraries. mit. edu/docs
DISCLAIMER OF QUALITY
Due to the condition of the original material, there are unavoidable
flaws in this reproduction. We have made every effort possible to
provide you with the best copy available. If you are dissatisfied with
this product and find it unusable, please contact Document Services as
soon as possible.
Thank you.
Some pages in the original document contain color
pictures or graphics that will not scan or reproduce well.
