Comparing Sentence-Level Features for
Authorship Analysis in Portuguese
Rui Sousa-Silva1,3, Lúıs Sarmento2, Tim Grant1,
Eugénio Oliveira2, and Belinda Maia3
1 Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston University
2 Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto - DEI - LIACC
3 CLUP - Centro de Lingúıstica da Universidade do Porto
Abstract. In this paper we compare the robustness of several types
of stylistic markers to help discriminate authorship at sentence level.
We train a SVM-based classifier using each set of features separately
and perform sentence-level authorship analysis over corpus of editorials
published in a Portuguese quality newspaper. Results show that features
based on POS information, punctuation and word / sentence length con-
tribute to a more robust sentence-level authorship analysis.
1 Introduction
Authorship analysis consists in identifying an author from a limited number
of candidates (see [2]), and is increasingly relevant in cases of plagiarism de-
tection and information filtering. Previous research on forensic linguistics has
shown that there are several stylistic markers that help determine the author-
ship of a text independently of the topic of those texts. For example, Eagleson
[1] claims that context-independent features are related to grammatical and lex-
ical choices, including syntactic structure, morphological inflections, vocabulary,
spelling and punctuation. Grant [2] uses a sophisticated Discriminant Function
Analysis (DFA) to determine which variables help discriminate between the texts
of three different authors, i.e. which variables are the best predictors to attribute
texts to authors. He concluded that DFA is able to tell which of three authors is
most likely to have written a queried text, and obtain an indication of the weight
of evidence for each attribution, using a further analysis of the probabilities. He
further concluded that the system proposed, both strong and conservative, is a
trade-off between a robust method against mis-attribution and the conservatism
in terms of the number of texts not firmly attributed. Hirst and Feiguina [3]
perform authorship discrimination based on syntactic analysis, in particular on
the frequency of bigrams of syntactic labels, obtained from partial parsing of the
text, that they treat as pseudo-words, and consider their relative frequencies.
They concluded that bigrams of syntactic labels are more discriminating that
other features such as frequencies of rewrite rules, even with fragments of little
more than 200 words (in which case the accuracy was boosted by using features
such as unigram POS frequencies). All these however require strings of text of
considerable length.
T.A.S. Pardo et al. (Eds.): PROPOR 2010, LNAI 6001, pp. 51–54, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
52 R. Sousa-Silva et al.
In this exploratory study, we investigate authorship analysis in Portuguese
texts at sentence level. Performing authorship analysis at this level raises the
additional problem that style markers should be able to work with short text
strings and intra-sentence information only (i.e. very low frequency counts). We
compare the robustness of several types of stylistic markers extracted at sentence-
level to help discriminate the authorship of sentences using an SVM (Support
Vector Machine)-based classifier over a corpus of editorials published in a Por-
tuguese quality newspaper.
2 Stylistic Features for Authorship Analysis
We focus on the following potential and observable markers of authorship, which
are to be extracted at sentence level with minimum linguistic processing:
– POS-based features : Computation of the frequency of each POS label found
in the sentence, including function words and tense information in the case
of verbs. Words found “POS-ambiguous” and “unknown” (e.g. neologisms)
are also included in the POS-based features since their discriminatory power
is potentially relevant.
– Punctuation: Frequency information about the usage of commas, “strong”
punctuation marks, quotes and brackets.
– Length: Quantitative features such as the number of characters per word,
the number of words per sentence, the number of 1 to 20-letter words and
the number of words of 20+ letters.
– Suffixation - superlatives and diminutives: Suffixes are found to vary greatly
among authors (i.e., they are largely idiolectal) in that they act as optional
modifiers. We consider two particular forms of affixation: superlatives and
diminutive forms.
– Pronouns : Information about explicit usage of relative and personal pro-
nouns, whose use is dependent on the individual choices of the authors.
– Conjunctions : Information about the use of seven types of conjunctions, as
the use of dependent and independent clauses is also highly idiolectal.
It is important to emphasise that all feature sets listed are content agnostic,
which is intended to isolate our experiments from the potentially significant
impact that content could have on authorship attribution, especially if colum-
nists tend to focus their posts on certain preferential topics (e.g. economics vs.
politics).
3 Experimental Set-Up
We built a corpus of editorials and opinion articles posted by columnists of a
Portuguese quality daily newspaper1. The corpus comprises 915 posts by 23
1 Jornal de Not́ıcias – http://www.jn.pt
Comparing Sentence-Level Features for Authorship Analysis in Portuguese 53
commentators from November 2008 to September 2009. From these we selected
the top three most productive columnists - denoted by C1, C2, C3 - who write
editorials more than once a week covering a wide variety of issues, and not
specialised in any specific topic domain. Commentator C1 writes many short
editorials (176 posts with 5.1 sentences / post), while commentators C2 and C3
write less frequently (74 and 51 posts each), but often longer editorials (17.9 and
17.7 sentences / post respectively).
We then randomly selected a set of 750 sentences for each of these commen-
tators and trained a binary classifier to discriminate sentences written by each
commentator. The authorship of a given test sentence is thus determined by the
binary classifier that produces the highest classification score. Since the scores
produced by all the three binary classifiers may be quite low – which can re-
flect the fact that the classifier has a very low confidence level in its result or
the sentence is somehow difficult to differentiate – we introduced a threshold
on the minimum value of classification score to be considered valid, cmin. Only
classification scores higher than cmin were considered, which means that if none
of the three classifiers reaches that threshold the test sentence at stake remains
unclassified, i.e. no authorship is attributed to it.
We opted for using SVM as the classification algorithm for their well-known
robustness in several text classification settings. We used the SVM-light [4] im-
plementation. In all our experiments we used the default SVM-light parameters
(including the choice for a linear kernel). In order to obtain Precision vs. Recall
curves, we attempted authorship attribution with different values on the thresh-
old cmin. We performed 5-fold cross-validation in all our experiments, and we
micro-averaged partial Precision and Recall results.
4 Results and Analysis
We ran the training and classification procedure using only one of the six sub-
group of markers described in Section 2 at a time. Figure 1 presents the pre-
cision vs. recall curves for all the six runs plus an additional curve for the run
made using all stylistic markers. As expected, the performance obtained using
any of the subgroup of markers alone is lower than the performance obtained
using all the stylistic features. Among all groups of markers, POS-based ones
seem to carry more information, performing almost as well as all subgroups of
markers together. Two other groups perform reasonably well alone: Punctuation
and Length. Interestingly, these subgroups use practically no lexical information,
but instead rather simple statistics related to punctuation and word / sentence
length. The other groups of stylistic markers are not so robust (i.e., their per-
formance drops sharply) since they tend to occur in only a limited number of
sentences. However, it is important to emphasize that all groups of features
seem to carry some relevant information for authorship analysis, as the results
obtained using all groups of markers shows.
54 R. Sousa-Silva et al.
Fig. 1. Precision vs. Recall curves for each subgroup of stylistic markers
5 Conclusions and Future Work
This experiment confirms our initial assumptions that content-agnostic features
can effectively be used for authorship analysis at sentence level. Among all the
stylistic features, the excellent performance rate of punctuation stands out, which
demonstrates that punctuation is one of the most robust stylistic features anal-
ysed. Affixes (superlatives and diminutives) and pronouns do not demonstrate
enough robustness to perform sentence-level authorship attribution. Unsurpris-
ingly, simple quantitative data (i.e. word and sentence length) perform well over-
all, with results that are similar to those obtained by punctuation.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by grant SFRH/BD/23590/2005 FCT-
Portugal, co-financed by POSI, and by grant SFRH/BD/47890/2008 FCT-
Portugal, co-financed by POPH/FSE.
References
1. Eagleson, R.: Forensic analysis of personal written texts: a case study. In:
Gibbons, J. (ed.) Forensic Linguistics: An Introduction to Language in the Justice
System, pp. 362–373. Longman, Harlow (1994)
2. Grant, T.: Quantifying evidence in forensic authorship analysis. The International
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 14(1), 1–25 (2007)
3. Hirst, G., Feiguina, O.: Bigrams of syntactic labels for authorship discrimination of
short texts. Lit Linguist Computing 22(4), 405–417 (2007)
4. Joachims, T.: Text categorization with support vector machines: learning with many
relevant features. In: Nédellec, C., Rouveirol, C. (eds.) ECML 1998. LNCS, vol. 1398,
pp. 137–142. Springer, Heidelberg (1998)
