
Abstract—Machine learning approaches are employed in the 
variety of feature extraction and classification tasks because of their 
efficiency in dealing with huge amount of data. The paper addresses 
the application of Artificial Neural Networks as the processing 
engine for textual analysis of literature oriented at authorship 
attribution, which falls within the scope of data mining techniques. 
Author identification is a problem of significant importance not only 
from academic or historic point of view as in cases of disputed 
authorship of some literary works but in more current and sinister 
affairs of forensic nature as well. To solve the problem various 
methodologies have been employed or invented, belonging either to 
statistic-dedicated computations or machine learning algorithms, the 
example of the latter category presented in the paper. 
Keywords—Machine learning, stylometry, artificial neural 
networks, author identification
I. INTRODUCTION
TYLOMETRY denotes quantitative analysis of some 
written text that yields information about the style it is 
composed with and through that about the author of this text. 
Thus as the main stylometric tasks, belonging within 
information retrieval domain [1], there are considered author 
characterisation, similarity detection, and finally, considered 
as the most important, author identification. 
Author characterisation brings conclusions about the 
author, such as gender, education, social background etc. 
Similarity detection involves comparing texts of several 
authors in order to find, if they exist, some properties in 
common. Author identification (or attribution) means 
attributing an unknown text to a writer basing on some feature 
characteristic or measure. It can be used when several people 
claim to have written some text or when no one is able or 
willing to identify the real author of this text. 
Stylometry is most often used for detection of plagiarism, 
finding authors of anonymously published texts, for disputed 
authorship of literature or in criminal investigations within 
forensic linguistic domain. 
Two critical issues of the stylometric analysis are: selection 
Manuscript received September 30, 2007; Revised Received Dec.1, 2007.  
K. A. Cyran is with the Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, 44-100 Poland, phone: +48-32-237-2500; fax: +48-32- -
237-2733; e-mail: krzysztof.cyran@ polsl.pl.  
U. Staczyk is with the Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, 44-100 Poland, phone: +48-32-237-2969; fax: +48-32- -
237-2733; e-mail: urszula.stanczyk@ polsl.pl. 
of descriptors that characterise texts and authors, and 
analytical techniques applied to the task. 
The typical textual analysis procedure (invariant of 
particular methodology employed) starts with training during 
which there are used texts of known authors for whom there 
are computed characteristics of selected features, then follows 
the stage of verification when for unattributed texts there are 
obtained the same descriptors to be compared with previously 
calculated results. Then from the available set of possible 
authors there is chosen the one that matches most closely. 
Features selected [2] in stylometric methods must constitute 
the writer invariant (called also authorial or author’s 
invariant), a property of a text which is invariant of its author, 
that is it is similar in all texts of this author and different in 
texts of different authors. It is generally agreed that writer 
invariants exist yet establishing what properties of a text 
should be used is the question that stands open [3]. 
Usually analytical techniques applied to stylometric tasks 
employ either statistic or machine learning approaches. 
Statistical computations are used in Markovian Models (MM), 
Principal Component and Linear Discriminant Analysis (PCA 
and LDA), cluster analysis, Cumulative Sum (CUSUM or 
QSUM), while machine learning involves application of 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Genetic Algorithms (GA), 
Support Vector Machines (SVM), Rough Set Theory (RST), 
decision trees, and other methods [4]. 
In this paper there is presented application of Artificial 
Neural Networks to authorship attribution considered as a 
classification task [5]. Texts studied are literary works of two 
Polish writers, B. Prus and H. Sienkiewicz, who lived and 
wrote around the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th 
Century. Feature selected to describe texts are lexical and 
syntactical components that show promising results when used 
as writer invariants because they are used rather 
subconsciously and reflect the individual writing style which 
is difficult to be copied. 
The preference of Artificial Neural Networks to other 
methods is explained by the simplicity of implementation 
made by commercially available software packages such as 
BrainMaker, and large set of input data for computations to be 
performed [6]. Properly trained neural networks possess 
generalisation properties that allow for high accuracy of 
classification that is required [7]. 
Machine learning approach to authorship 
attribution of literary texts 
Urszula Staczyk, Krzysztof A. Cyran 
S
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 151
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
II. OBJECTIVES OF STYLOMETRY
The primary aim of stylometry is to remove uncertainty 
about the author of some text, which can be used in literary 
tasks of textual analysis for works edited, translated, with 
disputed authorship or anonymous, but also with forensic 
aspect in view to detect plagiarism, forgery of the whole 
document or its constituent parts, verify ransom notes, etc. 
Stylometric analysts claim that each writer possesses some 
unique characteristic, called the authorial or writer invariant, 
that keeps constant for all texts written by this author and 
perceivably different for texts of other authors. To find writer 
invariants there are used style markers which are based on 
textual properties belonging to either of four categories: 
lexical, syntactic, structural, and content-specific. 
Lexical descriptors provide statistics of total number of 
words or characters, average number of words per sentence, 
characters per sentence or characters per word, frequency of 
usage for individual letters or distribution of word length. 
Syntactic features reflect the structure of sentences, which 
can be simple or complex, or conditional, built with 
punctuation marks. Structural attributes express the 
organisation of text into paragraphs, headings, signatures, 
embedded drawings or pictures, and also special font types or 
its formatting that go with layout. 
Content-specific properties recognise some keywords: 
words of special meaning or significant importance for the 
given context. 
Unfortunately, the convenience of using contemporary 
word editors and processors works against preserving 
individual author styles due to its available options of "copy 
and paste". It makes imitation of somebody else’s style much 
easier and that is why modern stylometric techniques aim at 
exploiting the computational powers of computers to analyse 
patterns within subconsciously used common parts of speech, 
as opposed to historical approaches that emphasised some rare 
standing out elements of a text which could be noticed by 
virtually anybody and thus likely to be faked. 
A. Historical View 
Stylometry evolved mainly from historical textual analysis 
methods dedicated to proving or disproving authenticity of 
documents or settling questions of authorial identity for 
anonymous or disputed texts.  
As early as in 1439 Lorenzo Valla proved the forgery of the 
Donation of Constantine by comparing the Latin used in other 
documents dated to 4th Century that were unquestionably 
original. 
Yet these early attempts could hardly rely on anything else 
but striking elements of texts such as distinct vocabulary or 
specific language structures. 
The new era for stylometry downed in 1887 when 
Mendenhall proposed to use not qualitative but quantitative 
measures such as word length, its average and distribution. 
This was followed by Yule and Morton, in 1938 and 1965, 
who selected sentence length as descriptive feature for 
authorship identification [8]. 
Numerical measurements of texts were not fully exploited at 
first but the development of computers with their high and 
permanently increasing computational powers made possible 
the application of statistical-oriented analysis to constantly 
growing corpus of texts in the cyberspace of Internet, enabling 
also to employ algorithms from machine learning domain to 
stylometric tasks. 
B. Methodologies employed 
Contemporary stylometric procedures are typically 
representatives of either computer-aided statistic based 
analysis, or artificial intelligence techniques. 
In statistical analysis there are used computations of 
probabilities and distributions of occurrences for single letters 
or other characters such as punctuation marks, words, patterns 
of words or sentences [9]. 
One such method, called QSUM or CUSUM, was 
developed by Jill M. Farringdon [10]. The name of this 
method comes from the step of calculating the cumulative sum 
for two textual features. The first of these is the sentence 
length whose deviations from the average are plotted as the 
graph for the whole text sample of some known author. As the 
second descriptor typically there is chosen either the usage of 
the 2 and 3 letter words, using words starting with a vowel, or 
the combination of these two together. The two descriptors 
reflect the writing habits and are the key to detecting the 
author. If the two graphs match, the writer is identified. 
Markovian Models consider a text as a sequence of 
characters (letter, punctuation marks, spaces, etc.) that 
corresponds to a Markov chain [11]. In probabilistic model of 
natural language letters appear with some probability, 
depending on which characters precede them. In the simplest 
model there is considered only the immediate predecessor 
which gives rise to the 1st order Markov chain. Thus for all 
pairs of letters in the alphabet there are obtained matrices of 
transition frequencies of one letter into another. These 
statistics are calculated for all texts by known authors and for 
some unattributed text as the true author there is selected the 
one with the highest probability [12]. 
Methods such as Linear Discriminant Analysis, Principal 
Component Analysis or cluster analysis aim to reduce the 
dimensionality for input data and if procedures applied to 
texts of both known and unknown authors give the same 
result, the question of authorship identification is settled. 
Genetic Algorithms provide an example of artificial 
intelligence technique [13] applied in stylometric analysis. 
The whole procedure starts with definition of a set of rules 
describing textual properties. Next these rules are checked 
against the text of known authorship and each rule if 
evaluated for fitness, basing on which score some rules (with 
the lowest score) are discarded leaving only these with fitness 
satisfying some criterion (selection process). The selected 
rules are slightly modified (mutation) and some new added, 
after which they are tested again. The process continues till 
there is obtained some number of rules that best describe 
features of the known text. At this point the evolved rules can 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 152
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
be tested on a text of unknown author and if their fitness 
remains the same, the author is found. 
Artificial Neural Networks are well suited to classification 
tasks by their ability to deal efficiently with large amount of 
data, especially in continuous domain since they do not 
require discretisation as for example classical rough sets. As 
the processing engine applied to research this paper presents, 
ANN with their topologies and training methods are described 
in the next section with more detail. 
III. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS
Nervous systems existing in biological organism for years 
have been the subject of studies for mathematicians who tried 
to develop some models describing such systems and all their 
complexities. Artificial Neural Networks emerged as 
generalisations of these concepts with mathematical model of 
artificial neuron due to McCuloch and Pitts described in 1943, 
definition of unsupervised learning rule by Hebb in 1949, and 
the first ever implementation of Rosenblatt’s perceptron in 
1958.
The efficiency and applicability of ANN to computational 
tasks have been questioned many times, especially at the very 
beginning of their history the book "Perceptrons" by Minsky 
and Papert, published in 1969, caused dissipation of initial 
interest and enthusiasm in applications of neural networks. It 
was not until 1970s and 80s, when the backpropagation 
algorithm for supervised learning was documented that ANN 
regained their status and proved beyond doubt to be 
sufficiently good approach to many problems. 
Artificial Neural Network can be looked upon as a parallel 
computing system comprised of some number of rather simple 
processing units (neurons) and their interconnections. They 
follow inherent organizational principles such as the ability to 
learn and adapt, generalisation, distributed knowledge 
representation, and fault tolerance. 
Neural network specification comprises definitions of the 
set of neurons (not only their number but also their 
organisation), activation states for all neurons expressed by 
their activation functions and offsets specifying when they 
fire, connections between neurons which by their weights 
determine the effect the output signal of a neuron has on other 
neurons it is connected with, and a method for gathering 
information by the network that is its learning (or training) 
rule [14]. 
A. Topology 
From topology point of view neural networks can be 
divided into two categories: feed-forward and recurrent 
networks. In feed-forward networks the flow of data is strictly 
from input to output cells that can be grouped into layers but 
no feedback interconnections can exist. On the other hand, 
recurrent networks contain feedback loops and their 
dynamical properties are very important. 
The most popularly used type of neural networks employed 
in pattern classification tasks is the feedforward network 
which is constructed from layers and possesses unidirectional 
weighted connections between neurons. The common 
examples of this category are Multilayer Perceptron or Radial 
Basis Function networks, out of which the former will be 
addressed in more detail. 
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) type is more closely defined 
by establishing the number of neurons from which it is built, 
and this process can be divided into three parts, the two of 
which, finding the number of input and output units, are quite 
simple, whereas the third, specification of the number of 
hidden neurons can become crucial to accuracy of obtained 
classification results. 
The number of input and output neurons can be actually 
seen as external specification of the network and these 
parameters are rather found in a task specification. For 
classification purposes as many distinct features are defined 
for objects which are analysed that many input nodes are 
required. The only way to better adapt the network to the 
problem is in consideration of chosen data types for each of 
selected features. For example instead of using the absolute 
value of some feature for each sample it can be more 
advantageous to calculate its change as this relative value 
should be smaller than the whole range of possible values and 
thus variations could be more easily picked up by Artificial 
Neural Network. The number of network outputs typically 
reflects the number of classification classes. 
The third factor in specification of the Multilayer 
Perceptron is the number of hidden neurons and layers and it 
is essential to classification ability and accuracy. With no 
hidden layer the network is able to properly solve only 
linearly separable problems with the output neuron dividing 
the input space by a hyperplane. Since not many problems to 
be solved are within this category, usually some hidden layer 
is necessary. 
With a single hidden layer the network can classify objects 
in the input space that are sometimes and not quite formally 
referred to as simplexes (single convex objects that can be 
created by partitioning out from the space by some number of 
hyperplanes) whereas with two hidden layers the network can 
classify any objects since they can always be represented as a 
sum or difference of some such simplexes classified by the 
second hidden layer. 
Apart from the number of layers there is another issue of 
the number of neurons in these layers. When the number of 
neurons is unnecessarily high the network easily learns but 
poorly generalises on new data. This situation reminds auto-
associative property: too many neurons keep too much 
information about training set rather "remembering" than 
"learning" its characteristics. This is not enough to ensure 
good generalization that is needed. 
On the other hand, when there are too few hidden neurons 
the network may never learn the relationships amongst the 
input data. Since there is no precise indicator how many 
neurons should be used in the construction of a network, it is a 
common proctice to built a network with some initial number 
of units and when it trains poorly this number is either 
increased or decreased as required. Obtained solutions are 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 153
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
usually task-dependant. 
B. Activation Functions 
Activation or transfer function of a neuron is a rule that 
defines how it reacts to data accumulated through its inputs 
that all have certain weights. 
Typically there is used linear or semi-linear function, a hard 
limiting threshold function or a smoothly limiting threshold 
such as a sigmoid or a hyperbolic tangent. Due to their 
inherent properties (out of which the most important are 
whether they are linear, continuous or differentiable) different 
activation functions perform with different efficiency in task-
specific solutions. 
For classification tasks sigmoid is the most popularly used 
activation function (non-linear, continuous, differentiable) 
defined as 
  neny  1
1                                     (1) 
where n (net) is a scalar product 
	



J
j
jj
T xwn
0
XWXW                        (2) 
of the weight W and input vectors X, with j = 0 reserved for 
offset t, by setting x0 = 1and w0 = – t 
C. Learning Rules 
In order to produce the desired set of output states 
whenever a set of inputs is presented to a neural network it 
has to be configured by setting the strengths of the 
interconnections and this step corresponds to the network 
learning procedure. Learning rules are roughly divided into 
three categories of supervised, unsupervised and 
reinforcement learning methods. 
The term supervised indicates an external teacher who 
provides information about the desired answer for each input 
sample. Thus in case of supervised learning the training data 
is specified in forms of pairs of input values and expected 
outputs. By comparing the expected outcomes with the ones 
actually obtained from the network the error function is 
calculated and its minimisation leads to modification of 
connection weights in such a way as to obtain the output 
values closest to expected for each training sample and to the 
whole training set. 
In unsupervised learning no answer is specified as expected 
of the neural network and it is left somewhat to itself to 
discover such self-organisation which yields the same values 
at an output neuron for new samples as there are for the 
nearest sample of the training set. 
Reinforcement learning [15] relies on constant interaction 
between the network and its environment. The network has 
no indication what is expected of it but it can induce it by 
discovering which actions bring the highest reward even if 
this reward is not immediate but delayed. Basing on these 
rewards it performs such re-organisation that is most 
advantageous in the long run. 
In commonly used Mulilayer Perceptron networks typically 
there are applied some variants of supervised backpropagation 
method. The classical backpropagation algorithm modifies the 
vector of all weights W accordingly to the descent direction of 
the gradient 
 WW e                                   (3) 
(with  being the learning rate) of the error occurring on the 
output of the network 
    		
 

M
m
I
i
m
i
m
i yde
1 1
2
2
1 WW                    (4) 
that is a sum of errors for all M training facts on all output 
neurons, each defined by the difference between the expected 
outcome dim and the one generated by the network yim(W).
The modification of weights associated with network 
interconnections can be performed either after each of the 
training samples or after finished iteration of the whole 
training set. 
The important factor in this algorithm is the learning rate 
whose value when too high can cause oscillations around the 
local minima of the error function and when too low results in 
slow convergence. This locality is considered the drawback of 
the backpropagation method but its universality is the 
advantage. 
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Stylometric analysis that was performed within research 
presented in this paper can be seen as the multistage process, 
as follows 
 the first step was selection of the training and 
testing examples - texts to be studied, 
 next stage was taken by the choice of textual 
descriptors to be analysed - the writerprints of the 
authors of previously selected texts, 
 then followed the third phase of calculating 
characteristics for all descriptors that were later 
used for training of the neural network, 
 specification of the network with its topology and 
learning method can be seen as the fourth step of 
the whole procedure, 
 the fifth consisted of the actual training of the 
network, 
 the sixth stage was dedicated to testing, 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 154
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
 and the final one corresponded to analysis of 
obtained results and coming up with some 
conclusions and possible indicators for 
improvement. 
Described process was applied several times to different 
input data, with various topologies of neural networks giving 
total classification results with accuracy that varied from just 
few to 100%. As it is not possible to include all detailed 
results, only some sumarising selection is provided, with 
calculated averages of outcomes for individual testing samples 
and works. 
A. Texts Used 
In research there were used texts of two famous Polish 
writers, Henryk Sienkiewicz and Bolesaw Prus. Their novels 
and short works provide the corpora which is wide enough to 
make sure that characteristic features found basing on the 
training data can be treated as representative of other texts and 
this generalized knowledge can be used to confirm or discount 
the possibility of either of considered writers being recognised 
as the author of a text of unknown origin. 
Obviously literary texts can greatly vary in length, what is 
more, all stylistic features can be influenced not only by 
different timelines within which the text is written but also by 
its genre. The first of these issues is easily dealt with by 
dividing long texts, such as novels, into some number of 
smaller parts of approximately the same size. 
Described approach gives additional advantage in 
classification tasks as even in case of some incorrect 
classification results of these parts the whole text can still be 
properly attributed to some author by basing the final decision 
on the majority of outcomes instead of all individual decisions 
for all samples. 
Whether the genre of a novel is reflected in lexical and 
syntactic characteristics of it is the question yet to be 
answered. If the influence is significant, then lexical and 
syntactic features cannot be used as the writer invariant as 
unreliable. On the other hand, this can be rectified by 
including within the training data set fragments of texts being 
representatives of not only one but several genres. In fact the 
more the better. For intended implementation of the classifier 
with Artificial Neural Networks, which efficiently deal with 
large amount of data, adding samples to the training set simply 
means better coverage of the input space that is important in 
continuous case. 
Hence in the training set there were included samples 
coming from two volumes of "Faraon" and the first volume of 
"Lalka" by Prus, and two volumes of "Potop" and the first 
volume of "Krzyacy" by Sienkiewicz, 70 for the former case 
and 98 for the latter, giving the total of 168. The testing set 
comprised all other available works by the two writers, but 
detailed classification results are provided only for the third 
volume of "Faraon", the second volume of "Lalka", 
"Emancypantki" and "Placówka" by Prus, and the third 
volume of "Potop", the second volume of "Krzyacy", "Quo 
vadis" and "Rodzina Poanieckich" by Sinkiewicz, while for 
all other works that include both other novels and some 
number of short stories there are given just counted averages. 
B. Feature Selection 
Establishing features that work as effective discriminators 
of texts under study is one of critical issues in research on 
authorship analysis. 
In the research there where three groups of textual 
descriptors used, lexical and syntactic, the first of which was 
the usage of function words, the second application of 
punctuation marks, and the third the combination of the other 
two as follows 
 Set 1 of descriptors contained nine function words: 
"ale", "i", "nie", "to", "w", "z", "e", "za", "na", 
 Set 2 of descriptors comprised eight punctuation 
marks: a comma, a full stop, a semi-colon, a 
bracket, an exclamation mark, a quotation mark, a 
colon, and a question mark (Set 2),  
 Set 3 of descriptors consisted of both function 
words and punctuation marks including: "i", "nie", 
"to", "bo", "po", a comma, a full stop and an 
exclamation mark. 
C. Architecture of ANN 
As the base topology of Artificial Neural Network there 
was applied the feed-forward Multilayer Perceptron with 
sigmoid activation function trained by backpropagation 
algorithm. The number of inputs equaled the number of 
textual descriptors used, thus it was either nine of eight. 
There was either one or two hidden layers with as few 
neurons within them as possible for preserving generalisation 
properties but achieving convergence during training with 
tolerance at most 0.4 for all training samples recognised 
properly. 
For all structures of ANN there were used two outputs. 
Actually, it was possible to use a single output and by 
interpretation of its active state as one class and inactive 
output state the second class the task would have been solved 
as well, but with such approach a text would always be 
attributed to either one or another author and classification 
binary with undecided verdict impossible. Two outputs allow 
to recognise the situation that the network could not easily 
recognise the writing style of any of previously trained 
authors and is unable to properly classify some sample of text. 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
As stated previously, for validation purposes there were 
used samples from all other works of both writers that were 
available, consisting of other parts of the same novels used 
previously during training and from different novels and short 
works. Due to their volume texts were divided in such a way 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 155
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
that usually a chapter constituted a sample but maintaining 
approximately the same lengths for samples. For succinct 
presentation the results given are as averages for whole 
volumes or novels and other works instead of details for all 
individual samples. 
Set 1 of lexical descriptors defined by function words was 
tested on the neural network having the architecture composed 
of one hidden layer which contained 13 neurons. The results 
of classification performed by this network are given in the 
Table 1. 
Table 1 Classification results for lexical descriptors, ANN with 
one hidden layer. 
Author Text Classification 1
“Faraon” vol. 3 94.4% 
“Lalka” vol. 2 63.2%
Prus “Emancypantki” 89.9% 
 “Placówka” 9% 
 other works 55.5% 
 total 75% 
“Potop” vol. 3 80%
 “Krzyacy” vol. 2 80% 
Sienkiewicz “Quo vadis” 52.6% 
 “Rodzina Poanieckich” 90.5% 
 other works 69.2% 
 total 70.5% 
Then the same set of descriptors was tested on the network 
with two hidden layers, with twelve and seven neurons in 
them respectively. The results of classification performed by 
this ANN are provided in the Table 2. 
Table 2 Classification results for lexical descriptors, ANN with 
two hidden layers. 
Author Text Classification 2
“Faraon” vol. 3 94.4% 
“Lalka” vol. 2 68.4%
Prus “Emancypantki” 90.9% 
 “Placówka” 18.2% 
 other works 60% 
 total 77.6% 
“Potop” vol. 3 66.6%
 “Krzyacy” vol. 2 88% 
Sienkiewicz “Quo vadis” 58.6% 
 “Rodzina Poanieckich” 95.2% 
 other works 71.1% 
 total 73% 
Clearly total results specified both tables do not vary in 
significant degree, as one network classifies better one novel 
while another network obtains higher accuracy for another 
novel. Yet the second network gives slightly better overall 
classification accuracy. 
Set 2 of syntactic descriptors comprising punctuation marks 
was first tested on the network with one hidden layer 
comprising 20 neurons as specified by the Table 3. 
Table 3 Classification results for syntactic descriptors, ANN with 
one hidden layer and 20 neurons. 
Author Text Classification 3
“Faraon” vol. 3 100% 
“Lalka” vol. 2 100%
Prus “Emancypantki” 99% 
 “Placówka” 81.8% 
 other works 57.7% 
 total 88.5% 
“Potop” vol. 3 100%
 “Krzyacy” vol. 2 100% 
Sienkiewicz “Quo vadis” 97.1% 
 “Rodzina Poanieckich” 100% 
 other works 93.5% 
 total 95.8% 
Next Set 2 was tested on the network still with just one 
hidden layer but with only 5 neurons (results presented by the 
Table 4). 
Accuracy of classification 3 and 4 given by the Tables 3 
and 4 confirms the fact which was indicated previously with 
discussion of neural network properties, that fewer hidden 
neurons can result in better generalization ability than their 
high number.- 
Furthermore, for this set of syntactic descriptors the 
classification accuracy is significantly higher than in the 
previous case of lexical features. 
Table 4 Classification results for syntactic descriptors, ANN with 
one hidden layer and 5 neurons. 
Author Text Classification 4
“Faraon” vol. 3 100% 
“Lalka” vol. 2 100%
Prus “Emancypantki” 100% 
 “Placówka” 81.8% 
 other works 60% 
 total 89.6% 
“Potop” vol. 3 100%
 “Krzyacy” vol. 2 98% 
Sienkiewicz “Quo vadis” 91.4% 
 “Rodzina Poanieckich” 95.2% 
 other works 93.1% 
 total 94% 
After checking the performance of lexical and syntactic 
descriptors separately, the Set 3 of mixed lexical and syntactic 
descriptors was tested on the neural network with one hidden 
layer composed of 4 neurons and the results are provided by 
the Table 5. 
Table 5 Classification results for neural networks using mixed 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 156
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
descriptors.
Author Text Classification 5
“Faraon” vol. 3 100% 
“Lalka” vol. 2 89.5%
Prus “Emancypantki” 100% 
 “Placówka” 27.3% 
 other works 64.4% 
 total 86.5% 
“Potop” vol. 3 100%
 “Krzyacy” vol. 2 100% 
Sienkiewicz “Quo vadis” 97.1% 
 “Rodzina Poanieckich” 100% 
 other works 93.5% 
 total 95.8% 
By comparing the last table to the previous four it is quite 
obvious that the highest classification ratio is granted by the 
exploitation of syntactic textual features, while mixed ones are 
nearly as good, and purely lexical the worst. 
When results for specified novels are studied it is clear that 
in cases when the last volume was used for tests while the 
previous one or ones worked as training, the classification 
ratio is higher which comes as no surprise. In the same novel 
the writing style is best maintained throughout volumes thus 
once learned by the network it is more easily recognised than 
in other samples. 
On the other hand, there are some works which are not 
properly recognised, no matter which set of textual descriptors 
and which structure of a neural network is used and their 
classification results lower the overall ratio. Just from 
stylometry point of view the question why it happens and how 
to enhance results is not easily answered, at least in the latter 
part. 
Some works are not correctly classified because textual 
features describing them are not precise enough for the task. 
The writing style can be so specific and distinctive that 
requires to use less typical descriptors, for example different 
function words. 
Increasing the classification ratio is best addressed from the 
point of technique that was employed to the task - neural 
networks in the presented research. Thus the question can be 
posed as how to enhance generalisation property of ANN. 
Actually, it may happen that some data is not easily learned by 
neural network and when changing the structure does not 
help, the next approach to be checked is using for training of 
the network these samples that were the worst in recognition. 
Then the network learns "difficult" data and is tested on less 
difficult which results in higher classification accuracy. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The research described in this paper concerning stylometric 
analysis shows beyond doubt how efficient a tool Artificial 
Neural Networks can be when applied in classification tasks. 
Yet conclusions as to the choice of textual descriptors used as 
features for recognition process, based only on results 
presented in the previous section and leading to some arbitrary 
statement that syntactic attributes are more effective in 
authorship attribution, would be much too hasty and 
premature. Undeniably true in the studied example, it would 
have to be verified against much wider corpora as for other 
writers other features could give better results. 
Thus a series of future experiments should include 
application of the presented here ANN-based methodology to 
wider range of authors, definition of new sets of textual 
descriptors, and test for other types and structures of neural 
networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The experiments, the results of which are presented in this 
article, were performed in Silesian University of Technology, 
Gliwice, Poland, under supervision of K.A. Cyran by S. 
Cicho in fulfillment of requirements for MSc degree [16]. 
REFERENCES
[1] G. Bonanno, F. Moschella, S. Rinaudo, P. Pantano, and V. Talarico, 
“Manual and evolutionary equalization in text mining”, Proceedings of the 7th 
WSEAS International Conference on Simulation, Modelling and Optimization,
pp. 262–267, 2007. 
[2] S. Doan, S. Horiguchi, “An efficient feature selection using multi-
criteria in text categorization for naive Bayes classifier”, WSEAS Transactions 
on Information Science & Applications, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 98–103, 2005 
[3] S. Argamon, J. Karlgren, and J.G. Shanahan, eds., “Stylistic analysis of 
text for information access”, Proceedings of the 28th International ACM 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Brasil,
2005. 
[4] P. Makvandi, J. Jassbi, and S. Khanmohammadi, “Application of 
genetic algorithm and neural network in forecasting with good data”, WSEAS 
Transactions on Systems, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 337–342, 2005. 
[5] W. Kreesuradej, W. Kruakli, and N. Chantasut, “Clustering text data 
using text art neural network”, WSEAS Transactions on Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, 
pp. 200–205, 2004. 
[6] W.W. Aprasit, N. Laosen, and S. Chevakidagarn, “Data filtering 
technique for Neural Networks forecasting”, Proceedings of the 7th WSEAS 
International Conference on Simulation, Modelling and Optimization, pp. 
225–230, 2007. 
[7] R.A.J. Matthews and T.V.N. “Merriam, Distinguishing literary styles 
using neural networks”, in E. Fiesler and R. Beale, eds., Handbook of neural 
computation, OUP, pp. G8.1.1–6, 1997. 
[8] R.D. Peng and H. Hengartner, “Quantitative analysis of literary styles, 
The American Statistician”, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 15–38. 2007. 
[9] R. Peng, “Statistical Aspects of Literary Style”, Bachelor’s Thesis, Yale 
University, 1999. 
[10] W. Buckland, “Forensic semiotics”, The Semiotic Review of Books,
vol. 10, no. 3, 1999. 
[11] D.V. Khmelev and F.J. Tweedie, “Using Markov chains for 
identification of writers”, Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 16, no. 4, 
pp. 299–307, 2001. 
[12] D.T. Tran and T.D. Pham, “Markov and fuzzy models for written 
language verification”, WSEAS Transactions on Systems, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 
268–272, 2005. 
[13] J. Stastny and V. Skorpil, “Genetic algorithm and neural network”, 
Proceedings of the 7th WSEAS International Conference on Applied 
Informatics and Communications, pp. 345–350, 2007. 
[14] S. Ossowski, „Sieci neuronowe do przetwarzania informacji”, 
Wydawnictwa Naukowo–Techniczne, Warsaw, Poland, 2000. 
[15] M. Preda, “Adaptive building of decision trees by einforcement 
learning”, Proceedings of the 7th WSEAS International Conference on Applied 
Informatics and Communications, pp. 34–39, 2007. 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 157
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
[16] S. Cicho, „Sieci neuronowe w zagadnieniach stylometrycznego 
ustalania autorstwa tekstów literackich”, MSc Thesis, Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, Poland, 2003. 
Stanczyk Urszula received her MSc and PhD degrees in computer science 
from the Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland in 1993 and 
2003 respectively.  
From 1993 till 2000 she was a teaching assistant, from 2000 till 2003 a 
lecturer, and from 2004 till present an assistant professor at the Institute of 
Informatics, SUT. From 2004 she has been the Editor-in- Chief of the Activity 
Report for the Institute of Informatics. Her scientific research interest include 
digital image processing and recognition, with special emphasis on 
mathematical morphology methods, computational intelligence and especially 
rough set theory and artificial neural networks, stylometry and its tasks, 
elements of theory of logic circuits, their design procedures and optimisation 
of implementations, as well as arithmetic of digital systems. 
Krzysztof A. Cyran was born in Cracow, Poland, in 1968. He received 
MSc degree in computer science (1992) and PhD degree (with honours) in 
technical sciences with specialty in computer science (2000) from the Silesian 
University of Technology SUT, Gliwice, Poland. His PhD dissertation 
addresses the problem of image recognition with the use of computer 
generated holograms applied as ring-wedge detectors. 
He has been an author and co-author of more than 60 technical papers in 
journals (several of them indexed by Thomson Scientific) and conference 
proceedings. Dr. Cyran (in 2003-2004) was a Visiting Scholar in Department 
of Statistics at Rice University in Houston, US. He is currently the Assistant 
Professor and the Vice-Head of the Institute of Informatics at Silesian 
University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland. He is also a member of the 
Editorial Board of Journal of Biological Systems and a member of the 
Scientific Program Committees of many international conferences. His current 
research interests are in image recognition and processing, artificial 
intelligence, digital circuits, decision support systems, rough sets, 
computational population genetics and bioinformatics. 
Issue 4, Volume 1, 2007 158
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
