Tochtermann, Maurer (Eds.): Proceedings of the I-KNOW ’06, Graz
6th International Conference on Knowledge Management
Journal of Universal Computer Science, pp. 449-456, ISSN 0948-695x
Distinguishing Topic from Genre
Benno Stein and Sven Meyer zu Eissen
(Faculty of Media / Media Systems
Bauhaus University Weimar, Germany
benno.stein@medien.uni-weimar.de)
Abstract: This paper contributes to a facet from the area of Web Information Retrieval that has
recently received much attention: The satisfaction of a user’s personal information need with
respect to text type, presentation type, or information quality. We imply that such properties can
be quantified for all kinds of Web documents, and we subsume them under the term “Web genre”
or “genre”.
Recent surveys show that there is, to a certain degree, a common understanding of Web genre.
However, the strictness by which genre and non-genre aspects of a document are experienced is
an individual matter. To get a better understanding of the challenges of Web genre identification
and its possible limits we investigate in this paper a very interesting question, which has not been
posed by now:
Given a categorization C of documents (or bookmarks, links, document identifiers), can we
provide a reliable assessment whether C is governed by topic or by genre considerations?
We present instruments to answer this question as well as to make a distinct statement about the
homogeneity of a categorization.
Key Words: Genre analysis, Personal IR, Knowledge discovery, Unsupervised learning
Category: H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval, Retrieval models, Information filtering
1 Introduction and Background
Nearly all retrieval processes are topic-centered: We type in a keyword, provide a sam-
ple document, or browse a directory tree to get the desired piece of information. How-
ever, with the number of indexed documents develops the urgent need for information
quality: Users are interested in certain kinds of information, or, as it is called here, in
particular genres. The focus of this paper is on text documents, and, in this connection
genre describes the set of conventions in the way in which information is presented,
such as the style of writing, the presentation style, or the functional trait. An in-depth
discussion of the term genre is beyond the scope of this paper [see 1], but, for the time
being it is sufficient to remember the following characterization: Genre and topic are
orthogonal—or, with Dewdney [Dewdney et al. 2001]: “The form is the substance.”
Consequently, genre identification shall discover groups of texts that share a com-
mon form of transmission, purpose, or discourse properties [Santini 2004; Swales
1990]. If we imagine the “ideal retrieval process”, an information seeker shall be able
to circumscribe both the topic he or she is interested in and the preferred genre, such as
research papers, personal experience reports, or commercial product information. And,
[1] Santini has compiled an up-to-date discussion of this term [Santini 2004].
To
pic
 1
To
pic
 n
To
pic
 2
To
pic
 3 ...
Genre 1
Genre m
Genre 2
Genre 3
...
Figure 1: The ideal retrieval process? Text snippets from result lists are organized and presented
in two dimensions, topic and genre.
instead of compiling a list with search results, documents may be organized within a
topic dimension and a genre dimension (see Figure 1). Other retrieval scenarios that
could benefit from an automatic genre identification are: The search in a company’s
intranet where documents fall into genre categories like “invoice”, “dunning letter”, or
“customer presentation”, while topics may cover product information, market surveys,
and others. Likewise, educational material may be retrieved either with respect to its
type (genre) such as “exercise”, “reading’, or “tutorial”, but also with respect to the
treated topic. Finally, note that meta-knowledge about the classification type can be
exploited to construct a better classifier for a given document collection.
The remainder of this section gives an overview over related work and outlines
the typical concepts of retrieval models for genre classification. The main contribution
of this paper is Section 2, where we develop the necessary instruments to provide an
answer to the question posed at the outset.
1.1 Related Work on Web Genre
There is little work on automatic Web genre identification, and, the question of feasibil-
ity is—if at all—answered indirectly only, following a simplistic three step approach:
1. definition of particular genre classes,
2. compilation of a respective genre corpus,
3. quantification of the learnability by constructing a classifier.
In the following we organize the research in an ascending chronological order. Bre-
tan et al. propose a richer representation of retrieval results in Web search interfaces.
Their approach combines content-based clustering and genre-based classification that
employs simple part-of-speech information along with substantial text statistics. The
features are processed with the C4.5 algorithm; the authors give no information about
the achieved classification performance [Bretan et al. 1999]. Based on an explorative
user study Roussinov et al. develop a genre scheme that comprises five genre classes:
Topic, Publication, Product, Education, FAQ. Their work describes an ongoing study,
and no discovery approach has been implemented [Roussinov et al. 2001]. Dimitrova
et al. argue that shallow text classification techniques can be used to sort documents
according to genre. The paper describes an ongoing study but experience related to
classification performance is not reported [Dimitrova et al. 2002]. Lee and Myaeng de-
fine seven genre types. Aside from Web-specific genres like Q&A or Homepage, the
authors use also the newspaper-specific genres Reportage and Editorial. The feature set
is a list of about hundred document terms tailored to the different genre classes [Lee and
Myaeng 2002]. Meyer zu Eissen and Stein report on a user study on Web genre useful-
ness from which they derive eight genre classes, which in turn form the building blocks
of three genre profiles: Education, Geek, and Private. Within their comprehensive ex-
periments classification performances between 60% and 80% were achieved [Meyer
zu Eißen and Stein 2004]. Boese investigates the effects of Web document evolution
on genre classification and poses the question: “How much do Web pages change over
time within each genre?” The author answers this and related questions for two publicly
available genre corpora [Boese and Howe 2005].
1.2 Retrieval Models for Genre Classification
With respect to the investigated features the existing approaches to genre identification
fall into three groups: Classifiers that rely on a subset of a document’s terms [Stamatatos
et al. 2000; Lee and Myaeng 2002], classifiers that employ linguistic features along
with additional features related to text statistics and computational linguistics [Kessler
et al. 1997], or both [Finn and Kushmerick 2003; Meyer zu Eißen and Stein 2004]. The
following list gives an overview over the different feature types:
– customariness and style features
– part-of-speech and syntactic group analysis
– closed-class word sets and presentation-related features
Based on these features a powerful document retrieval model for genre identification
can be built. By contrast, to capture the gist of a document with respect to its topic,
the vector space model is the most successful document retrieval model. It encodes a
document d as a simple vector, which comprises weighted frequency values of the terms
occurring in d. In the following we use RT and RG to denote the underlying retrieval
models for topic and genre respectively.
2 Identifying Categorization Types
Let D be a set of documents. An exclusive categorization C = {C1, . . . , Ck}, Ci ⊆ D,
is a division of D into sets for which the following conditions hold:
–
⋃
Ci∈C
Ci = D, and
– ∀Ci, Cj ∈ C : Ci ∩ Cj 6=i = ∅
The categorization C may be governed by topic considerations, by genre considera-
tions, or by both. Rendered precisely: For a categorization C let τ(C), C ∈ C, designate
the type (either topic or genre) of the document set C. Then, C is called a homoge-
neous or a “pure” (topic or genre) categorization, if ∀Ci, Cj ∈ C : τ(Ci) = τ(Cj ).
If τ(Ci) 6= τ(Cj ) for some Ci, Cj ∈ C, a categorization is called inhomogeneous or
“impure”. Note that the type identification for a categorization C must take into ac-
count whether C is homogeneous or not. The next two subsections address the related
situations, while Subsection 2.3 reports on interesting experiments.
2.1 Analyzing Homogeneous Categorizations
We identify a categorization’s type by comparing the solutions of model fitting prob-
lems, Π(R,D, θ), under different retrieval models R. D is the set of data points defined
by C, say, D = {(di, j) | di ∈ (D ∩ Cj), Cj ∈ {C1, . . . , Ck}}, and θ denotes a set of
parameters to be fitted. The solution θ̂ of Π defines a predictor γ
R,θ̂
: D → {1, . . . , k}.
Depending on the kind of fitting problem, θ̂ represents the parameters of a regression
function, of a discriminant analysis, or of a neural network. The quality of the fit can be
quantified with the F -measure; in particular, a perfect fit of the data points D means that
the documents in D are classified without error and that the categorization C is exactly
resembled. Π(R,D, θ) is solved for both retrieval models, R = RT and R = RG, and
the categorization type “topic” is assumed for C if under RT a higher F -measure value
can be achieved than under RG. Otherwise, the categorization type “genre” is assumed.
In our experiments a cluster analysis in the form of k-means is applied to solve the
model fitting problems Π(RT ,D, θ) and Π(RG,D, θ). I. e., a solution θ̂ of Π defines
k centroid vectors each of which characterizes a category C ∈ C. The rationale is that
an unsupervised analysis approach is superior to an supervised approach here, because,
firstly, it takes advantage of the entire set D, and, secondly, it copes better with small
or unequally distributed categories [see 2]. The entire analysis comprises the following
steps:
1. Construct for each d ∈ D two document models, one under the topic document
retrieval model, RT , and one under the genre document retrieval model, RG.
2. Based on a similarity measure, Euclidean similarity or cos-similarity, construct two
similarity graphs GT and GG. The edge weights in these graphs result from the
similarity computations under RT and RG respectively.
3. Model fitting. Apply the k-means clustering algorithm to the graphs GT and GG.
The resulting clusterings are designated as CT and CG.
4. Compute the F -measure to quantify the quality of the fit between C and CT as well
as between C and CG [see 3]. The resulting values are designated as FCT and FCG .
[2] At heart we don’t know anything about the nature of the distribution and prepare for the worst.
[3] Note that also another external reference measure can be applied.
5. Analyze |FCT − FCG |, the difference in the fitting quality. If |FCT − FCG | is sig-
nificant, C is organized under topic considerations if FCT > FCG , and under genre
considerations otherwise.
The F -measure quantifies the degree of congruence between a (human) reference
categorization C = {C1, . . . , Ck} and a clustering C ′ = {C ′1, . . . , C
′
l}. It combines the
recall and precision statistics, where the recall of cluster j with respect to category i,
rec(i, j), is defined as |C ′j∩Ci|/|Ci|. The precision of cluster j with respect to category
i, prec(i, j), is defined as |C ′j ∩ Ci|/|C
′
j |. The F -measure of a clustering C
′, FC′ , is:
FC′ =
k
∑
i=1
|Ci|
|D|
· max
j=1,...,l
{Fi,j}, with Fi,j =
2 · prec(i, j) · rec(i, j)
prec(i, j) + rec(i, j)
A perfect clustering matches the given categories exactly and yields an F -measure value
of 1; an F -measure value close to zero indicates a high model fitting error and very little
congruence.
2.2 Analyzing Impure Categorizations
The previously introduced analysis approach will come to its limits if a larger part of
a categorization C is from a different type than the rest; Subsection 2.3 reports on an
experiment to illustrate this effect.
We now introduce an instrument for both to decide whether two categories Ci, Cj in
a categorization C are of the same type and to quantify the overall degree of C’s homo-
geneity. Basic idea is the construction of a similarity graph for the document collection
D, measuring its average similarity under some retrieval model R, and analyzing the
increase or decline of the similarity for single categories C ∈ C under this retrieval
model. The idea can be operationalized using a measure of relative density, ρ, which is
introduced next.
A graph G = 〈V, E, w〉 is called sparse if |E| = O(|V |); it is called dense if
|E| = O(|V |2). Put another way, we can compute the density exponent α for a graph
from the equation |E| = |V |α. With w(G) := |V | +
∑
e∈E w(e), this relation extends
naturally to weighted graphs [see 4]:
w(G) = |V |α ⇔ α =
ln
(
w(G)
)
ln
(
|V |
)
Obviously, α can be used to compare the density of an induced subgraph Gi =
〈Vi, Ei, wi〉 of G to the density of G, leading to the relative density, ρ(Gi) :
ρ(Gi) =
w(Gi)
|Vi|α
[4] w(G) denotes the total edge weight of G plus the number of nodes, |V |, which serves as
adjustment term for graphs with edge weights from the interval [0, 1].
Gi is sparse compared to G if ρ(Gi) < 1; Gi is dense compared to G if ρ(Gi) > 1.
This connection can be used to quantify a retrieval model’s ability to capture the intrin-
sic similarity relations of the categories in C.
Let C be a—possibly impure—categorization of a document set D, and let GT and
GG denote the similarity graphs under the retrieval models RT and RG. For a category
Ci ∈ C its relative density under both retrieval models computes as follows:
ρT (Ci) =
w(GTi )
|Vi|αT
, |V |αT = w(GT ), ρG(Ci) =
w(GGi )
|Vi|αG
, |V |αG = w(GG)
Note that ρ(Ci) quantifies the retrieval-model-specific similarity increase in cate-
gory Ci, and hence |ρT (Ci)− ρG(Ci)| quantifies the superiority of one retrieval model
over the other. If |ρT (Ci)−ρG(Ci)| is significant, Ci is assumed to comprise documents
of a single topic if ρT (Ci) > ρG(Ci), and of a single genre class otherwise.
Based on ρ the overall degree of the homogeneity of C = {C1, . . . , Ck}, here des-
ignated as homogeneity coefficient τ̄ (C), can be defined as follows:
τ̄(C) =
∣
∣
∑k
i=1
(
ρT (Ci) − ρG(Ci)
)∣
∣
∑k
i=1 |ρT (Ci) − ρG(Ci)|
A value of τ̄(C) close to 1 indicates a homogeneous categorization; a value of τ̄ (C)
close to zero gives evidence to a highly impure categorization.
2.3 Experiment Setups and Results
As retrieval model for topic, RT , the standard vector space model with the tf ·idf -
weighting scheme is employed. The genre retrieval model, RG, for a document d is a
vector d comprising high-level features for style, part-of-speech, and various closed-
class word sets. Discriminant analysis was used to select the most informative features
(about 40) along with appropriate weighting schemes [see 5]. The similarity measure
ϕG of RG is defined as ϕG(di,dj) = e−||di−dj || [see 6].
Our experiments rely on two corpora, RCV1 and a special genre corpus of [Meyer
zu Eißen and Stein 2004], where eight Web genre classes are distinguished: Help, Ar-
ticle, Discussion, Shop, Portrayal (priv and non-priv), Link Collection, and Download.
The orthogonal topic categorization distinguishes the following eight topics: Sports,
Annual results, International relations, Religion, Crime, Management moves, Money
supply, Legal/judicial. The following experiments were set up:
– Type identification of homogeneous categorizations dependent on |D|, the size of
the document set. Based on the corpora, 40 categorizations of different sizes and
under both topic and genre considerations were compiled and analyzed. It turned
out that for each of these categorizations its type could be unambiguously identified
[5] Our RG is comparable to the model in [Bretan et al. 1999], but introduces also new concepts.
[6] The cos-similarity cannot be applied since the angle between the vectors is from [0; 2π].
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800
Documents
8 topic classes in C genre assumption
topic assumption
F-
m
ea
su
re
FCG − FCT
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800
Documents
8 genre classes in C genre assumption
topic assumption
F-
m
ea
su
re
FCT − FCG
Figure 2: Type identification of homogeneous categorizations. The plots quantify the adequacy of
the document models RT and RG. They unveil whether a categorization C is organized by topic
(left) or by genre (right).
by computing |FCT − FCG |. Figure 2 shows the developing of the respective F -
measure values FCT and FCG . Given the similarity graphs, the runtime complexity
is dominated by the cluster analysis, and, using k-means, linear in D.
– Type identification of homogeneous categorizations dependent on |C|, the number
of categories. As one may not have expected, the experiments show that the type
identification are rather unaffected by the category number.
– Analysis of impure categorizations. The plot on the left-hand side in Figure 3 illus-
trates the connection between |FCT −FCG | and the degree of impurity: As expected,
the reliability of |FCT − FCG | can only be guaranteed for categorizations C that are
dominated by a single type, which meant more than 80% here. The plot on the
right-hand side certifies the robustness of our technology: τ̄ turns out to be an ideal
predictor of a categorization’s degree of homogeneity.
3 Summary and Discussion
With “Can topic be distinguished from genre?” we have identified a new question,
and we have introduced instruments to answer it. The experiments addressed both ho-
mogeneous and impure categorizations, and we could learn about the feasibility and
robustness of our solutions. In this connection we used, among others, a measure of
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
Fraction of topic classes
8 genre classes in C
1-8 topic classes in C
genre assumption
topic assumption
F-
m
ea
su
re
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Fraction of topic classes
8 genre classes in C
1-8 topic classes in C
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
1
τ
Figure 3: Analysis of impure categorizations. The left plot shows what happens to |FCT − FCG |
if a categorization becomes more and more impure. Note that the degree of impurity (or homo-
geneity) can be directly read off from the function τ̄ , illustrated in the right plot.
relative density, which makes similarity graphs comparable with respect to their cohe-
siveness. This measure forms the basis of the homogeneity coefficient τ̄ : C → [0; 1],
which predicts for a categorization C ∈ C its degree of homogeneity.
Note that only non-hierarchical categorizations were treated in this paper. However,
if a complex hierarchy with several levels is given, type information can be analyzed
and propagated bottom up, whereas all leafs of the same parent node are treated as one
categorization C.
Our current research continues the work of this paper and focuses on complexity
issues: Compared to RT the computation of RG is much more expensive, and we are
working on heuristic approaches to estimate reliable genre features.
References
Elisabeth Sugar Boese and Adele E. Howe. Effects of Web Document Evolution on Genre
Classification. In Proceedings of the CIKM’05. ACM Press, November 2005.
Ivan Bretan, Johan Dewe, Anders Hallberg, and Niklas Wolkert. Web-specific genre
visualization, 1999.
Nigel Dewdney, Carol VanEss-Dykema, and Richard MacMillan. The form is the substance:
Classification of genres in text. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop on HumanLanguage
Technology and Knowledge Management, 2001.
M. Dimitrova, A. Finn, N. Kushmerick, and B. Smyth. Web genre visualization. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2002.
Aidan Finn and Nicholas Kushmerick. Learning to Classify Documents According to Genre. In
IJCAI-03 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis, 2003.
Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Nunberg, and Hinrich Schütze. Automatic detection of text genre. In
Philip R. Cohen and Wolfgang Wahlster, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 32–38, Somerset,
New Jersey, 1997. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yong-Bae Lee and Sung Hyon Myaeng. Text genre classification with genre-revealing and
subject-revealing features. In Proc. 25th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval, pages 145–150. ACM Press, 2002. ISBN
1-58113-561-0.
Sven Meyer zu Eißen and Benno Stein. Genre Classification of Web Pages: User Study and
Feasibility Analysis. In Susanne Biundo, Thom Frühwirth, and Günther Palm, editors, KI
2004: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, volume 3228 LNAI of Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 256–269, Berlin Heidelberg New York, September 2004. Springer. ISBN
0302-9743.
Dmitri Roussinov, Kevin Crowston, Mike Nilan, Barbara Kwasnik, Jin Cai, and Xiaoyong Liu.
Genre based navigation on the web. In Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 2001.
Marina Santini. State-of-the-Art on Automatic Genre Identification. Technical report, ITRI,
University of Brighton, UK, 2004.
E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis. Text genre detection using common word
frequencies. In Proceedings of the 18th Int. Conference on Computational Linguistics,
Saarbrücken, Germany, 2000.
J. Swales. Genre Analysis. English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
