BRIEF COMMUNICATION
Computational Authorship Verification Method Attributes
a New Work to a Major 2nd Century African Author
Justin Anthony Stover
All Souls College, University of Oxford, High Street, Oxford OX1 4AL, United Kingdom. E-mail:
justin.stover@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
Yaron Winter
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel. E-mail:
yaron.winter@gmail.com
Moshe Koppel
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel. E-mail: koppel@cs.biu.ac.il
Mike Kestemont
CLiPS Computational Linguistics Group & Institute for the Study of Literature in the Low Countries, University
of Antwerp, Prinsstraat 13, Antwerp 2000, Belgium. E-mail: mike.kestemont@uantwerp.be
We discuss a real-world application of a recently pro-
posed machine learning method for authorship verifica-
tion. Authorship verification is considered an extremely
difficult task in computational text classification,
because it does not assume that the correct author of an
anonymous text is included in the candidate authors
available. To determine whether 2 documents have been
written by the same author, the verification method dis-
cussed uses repeated feature subsampling and a pool of
impostor authors. We use this technique to attribute a
newly discovered Latin text from antiquity (the Compen-
diosa expositio) to Apuleius. This North African writer
was one of the most important authors of the Roman
Empire in the 2nd century and authored one of the
world’s first novels. This attribution has profound and
wide-reaching cultural value, because it has been over a
century since a new text by a major author from antiquity
was discovered. This research therefore illustrates the
rapidly growing potential of computational methods for
studying the global textual heritage.
Introduction
In computer science, authorship studies are nowadays a
prominent field of study, in which algorithms are optimized
to automatically identify the authors of texts using linguistic
features related to writing style (Juola, 2008; Koppel,
Schler, & Argamon, 2008; Stamatatos, 2009; Van Halteren,
Baayen, Tweedie, Haverkort, & Neijt, 2005). In the field a
distinction is commonly made between the attribution and
verification setup (Kestemont, Luyckx, Daelemans, &
Crombez, 2012; Koppel, Schler, & Bonchek-Dokow, 2007).
In the attribution scenario, resembling a police line-up, an
algorithm selects the author of an anonymous text from a list
of potential candidate authors, which is known beforehand
to include the target author. The verification setup is more
demanding: given any two texts, the task is to determine
whether or not they should be attributed to the same author.
Authorship verification therefore is a much more compli-
cated task than authorship attribution, because this setup
does not presuppose that the true author of the text is actu-
ally included in the set of candidate authors available.
Koppel and Winter (2014) recently introduced an inno-
vative method for authorship verification which substan-
tially outperformed more naïve approaches on a large
benchmark data set. Here we apply this technique to a newly
discovered text from Roman antiquity and attribute it to the
Supplementary materials of this study are available from https://github
.com/mikekestemont/Apuleius. This repository additionally contains more
details on our methods, code, data, and the exact composition of our corpus.
Received August 29, 2014; revised October 27, 2014; accepted October 27,
2014
© 2015 ASIS&T • Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.23460
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ••(••):••–••, 2015
North-African writer Apuleius (2nd century AD). The textual
heritage of Greek and Roman antiquity has decisively
shaped the development of global, intellectual culture. This
heritage has been transmitted to us through copies handwrit-
ten during the Middle Ages. From the Renaissance through
the 19th century, there has been a concerted international
effort to recover, identify, and publish the works contained
in these manuscripts. For a long time now that project has
been considered complete. It has been over a century since
the last discovery of a new text by a major classical Latin
author and specialists have long believed that there were no
more texts to be uncovered (Dolbeau, 1998–1999; Reeve,
2000).
A New Text from Antiquity
Here we analyze a newly discovered text, surviving from
a single medieval manuscript in the Vatican Library in Rome
(Reg. lat. 1572). This manuscript has long been ignored by
scholars and contains a previously unstudied Latin text dis-
cussing Plato’s works, entitled the Compendiosa expositio
(“Brief Presentation”). Preliminary philological analysis
yielded solid indications that this Expositio in all likelihood
is a newly found text from antiquity, that somehow slipped
undetected past 4 centuries of scholars looking for ancient
texts. Traditional stylistic and metrical analyses moreover
suggested that this new text might well be a hitherto
unknown work by Apuleius of Madauros. Apuleius was one
of the most important authors of the Roman Empire (ca.
125–180 AD) and left behind an astonishingly varied liter-
ary corpus, including one of the world’s first novels
(Harrison, 2000). Especially interesting in this respect is
Apuleius’s work De Platone (“On Plato”). Codicological
evidence from other manuscript copies of Apuleius’s works
indicates that De Platone might originally have contained a
third book. Our traditional philological research suggests
that the newly found Expositio could well be the lost third
book of the De Platone.
Here, we will report on a computational analysis in which
we attempted to verify this attribution. For this study we
collected a representative development corpus of 22 works
by authors such as Pliny the Younger and Suetonius, who
have stylistic, chronological, generic, or thematic similarity
with Apuleius. Before moving to the verification method, we
briefly inspect the Expositio’s position in the development
corpus. We visualize the texts’ lexical term-frequency
vectors via a Bootstrap Consensus Tree (Figure 1), a well-
known technique from phylogenetics (Paradis, 2012;
Paradis, Claude, & Strimmer, 2004), which has also been
ported to computational stylistics (Eder, 2013; Eder,
Kestemont, & Rybicki, 2013) using Burrows’s Delta as dis-
tance metric (Argamon, 2007; Burrows, 2002). (More
details on our corpus, methods, and preprocessing are given
in the online appendix.)
Apuleius’s oeuvre appears to be relatively heterogenous,
with sub-branches for his philosophical, rhetorical, and fic-
tional works. This visualization nevertheless confirms the
similarities between the newly discovered Expositio and
Apuleius’s works (in red). Figure 1 is not free of issues,
however. Cicero’s Timaeus clusters with the Expositio’s
clade, probably on the basis of content rather than style: the
Timaeus, just like the Expositio, is an adaptation of Platonic
materials. Seneca’s De Constantia moreover mingles with
Cicero’s texts. (The same basic pattern emerges across a
variety of experimental settings for the BCT.) The author-
ship verification method which will be discussed allows us
to verify whether Apuleius is indeed a likely authorial can-
didate for the Expositio. We emphasize that using verifica-
tion instead of attribution is vital with respect to the
Expositio, since we cannot presuppose that the true author of
the text is actually included in the set of candidate authors
available.
Verifying the Apuleian Authorship of
the Expositio
We limit ourselves to a concise discussion of the verifi-
cation method and we refer to the original paper for more
details on the method’s performance on benchmark data sets
(Koppel & Winter, 2014). For the verification method we
proceed as follows. Given two texts, X and Y, as well as a
pool of similar background texts, we use different trials to
assess whether X and Y are written by the same author. In
each trial, we select as a feature set at random a subset of
125,000 word unigrams and bigrams from among a total
pool of approximately 250,000 such features.
FIG. 1. Visualisation of texts in the development corpus (4,500 word
slices). Bootstrap Consensus Tree (majority vote) for 50-word frequency
bands up to 3,000 words. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue,
which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
2 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
By this repeated subsampling, we can sample from both
higher-frequency and lower-frequency bands, while keeping
the method less sensitive to content-specific features,
because each time different feature combinations are
selected. We can now determine whether X is more similar to
Y than it is to any of the background texts, according to the
min-max distance measure. We run multiple trials, each time
using a different randomly generated set of features. If the
proportion of trials in which X is more similar to Y than to
any of the background texts is greater than some threshold
σ*, we conclude that the author of Y is identical to the author
of X.
We apply the verification method to each pair of texts in
the development corpus. For any given pair of texts, X and
Y, we use 50 texts (not by the same author[s] as X or Y)
randomly chosen from among a pool of 180 background
texts by 36 authors writing in similar genres and/or periods
as the texts in our corpus. For each pair, we run 100 trials.
The pool of background texts thus serves as a set of
impostors in each trial, which is a well-established
practice in, for example, speaker identification, and which
has recently been introduced in authorship studies (Koppel
& Winter, 2014).
We assign a text pair to the class same-author if its score
(i.e., the proportion of trials for which the pair are more
similar to each other than to any text in the background
set) exceeds a threshold σ*. We vary the σ* threshold to
obtain a recall-precision curve for the class same-author as
shown in Figure 2. Of 199 different-author pairs, only three
obtain a score above .20 and only one above .50: the pair of
Cyprian’s Epistles and Tertullian’s De corona, which
obtains a score of .71. In contrast, of 32 same-author pairs,
15 obtain a score above .50. These results proved stable
across a large variety of other parameter settings (e.g.,
number of impostors) and feature types (e.g., character
n-grams) with which we experimented on the development
corpus.
With respect to Apuleius’s works, each pair among the
De deo Socratis, Florida, and Apologia obtains a score of
.85 and above, as do the pair De mundo and De Platone. The
Metamorphoses obtains a score above .50 with the Florida,
but with no other text by Apuleius. (Note that the verification
method does not guarantee transitivity.) No pair involving a
text by Apuleius and a text by another author obtains a score
above .35. Even different-author pairs such as Cicero’s
Timaeus and Apuleius’s De Platone, which are very similar
in genre and subject matter, never surpass the .35 threshold.
The verification method is therefore characterized by a high
precision and a relatively low recall for same-author pairs.
This shows that the method is a “non-greedy” attributor,
which is typically a desirable quality in real-world forensic
application (e.g., to avoid false accusations in a legal
context). If a new text is paired with a work by Apuleius and
obtains a σ* score above .20, it would be extremely likely
that Apuleius authored the new text.
We now check the newly discovered Expositio against the
22 texts in our development corpus. We find that no such pair
yields a score above .04 with the single exception of the pair
Expositio and De Platone, which obtains an exceptionally
high score of .73. Of the 16 pairs in our development set that
obtained a score of .50 or above, 15 (93.8%) are same-author
pairs. No different-author pair obtains a score of .73 or more.
(Again, the same pattern emerges with different experimen-
tal settings and feature types.) These results lend particularly
strong support to the hypothesis that the Expositio has been
written by the same author as De Platone, that is, Apuleius.
This solid result is especially valuable because of our initial
hypothesis that the Expositio might be the forgotten third
book of De Platone.
It deserves emphasis, however, that the Expositio does
not yield high scores when paired with other texts by Apu-
leius than De Platone, most of which are in different genres
than the Expositio (Platonic philosophy). This is entirely in
line with previous studies which have demonstrated how
difficult it is to apply authorship attribution across different
genres (e.g., Kestemont et al., 2012). Strictly speaking, one
could therefore only reconstruct Apuleius’s oeuvre indi-
rectly on the basis of our results (the Metamorphoses is
attributed to the Florida, the Florida in turn to Apologia, the
Apologia to De deo Socratis, etc.). Nevertheless, the identi-
fication of the authors of De Platone and the Expositio is a
solid result, especially because the Expositio is never attrib-
uted to other authors writing in the same genre (e.g., Cice-
ro’s Timaeus). In combination with the results from the
FIG. 2. Precision-Recall curve. The effect of various thresholds σ* for the
verification score in terms of precision and recall for the same-author
category in the development corpus. For a threshold of σ* = .50, our
method reaches a high precision (.94), meaning that only a single text pair
is incorrectly classified as same-author.
JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015 3
DOI: 10.1002/asi
traditional philological analysis, our quantitative results thus
lend quantitative support to the thesis that the Expositio is a
newly discovered text from antiquity, which is very likely to
have been authored by Apuleius of Madauros.
Conclusion
Classical philologists have long used lexical analyses
(e.g., of stop words) for the attribution and dating of Latin
texts, but usually only selectively and by hand. Unfortunately,
such analyses have previously been unable to conclusively
resolve questions of authenticity in the Apuleian corpus
(Harrison, 2000; Redfors, 1960). The ongoing mass digitiza-
tion of classical works, for instance in the open source
Perseus project or in the Brepols Library of Latin Texts, has
enabled and stimulated the large-scale computational analy-
sis of ancient documents (Crane, 2006; Kestemont, Moens, &
Deploige, 2013). Our research illustrates the rapidly growing
potential of computational methods for humanities disci-
plines in studying our global textual heritage.
The results of the verification method corroborate our
traditional philological analyses, which reveal a probable
dating of the new text to the 2nd century AD, well within the
lifetime of Apuleius, and which show a close intertextual
relationship between the Expositio and Apuleius’s works.
Our results are also in line with codicological evidence
which suggests that the Expositio could have been originally
the thought lost third book of Apuleius’s De Platone. The
quantitative results allow us to support the thesis that the
Expositio is in fact by Apuleius, and probably was an inte-
gral part of De Platone. This discovery has profound and
wide-reaching cultural value, because of the scarcity of
Latin texts surviving from the late 2nd century and the new
light the discovery sheds on the output of an author of major
importance. Especially promising is the application of our
methods to other unresolved cases of disputed authorship in
classical literature.
Acknowledgments
We thank Brepols Publishers for the use of proprietary
material. We would also like to thank James Hankins, Frank
Willaert, Folgert Karsdorp, Piet Maas, and Walter Dael-
emans for critical discussions and reading of the article.
Mi.K. was funded for this research as a postdoctoral
researcher for the Research Foundation of Flanders.
References
Argamon, S. (2007). Interpreting Burrows’s Delta: Geometric and proba-
bilistic foundations. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(2), 131–147.
Burrows, J. (2002). “Delta”: A measure of stylistic difference and a guide
to likely authorship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267–
287.
Crane, G.R. (2006). What do you do with a million books? D-Lib Maga-
zine, 12(3).
Dolbeau, F. (1998–1999). Découvertes récentes d’oeuvres latines incon-
nues (fin IIIe-début VIIIe s). Sacris erudiri, 38, 101–142.
Eder, M. (2013). Computational stylistics and Biblical translation: How
reliable can a dendrogram be? In T. Piotrowski & Ł. Grabowski (Eds.),
The translator and the computer (pp. 155–170). Wrocław, Poland: WSF
Press.
Eder, M., Kestemont, M., & Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: A suite
of tools. In Digital Humanities 2013. Conference Abstracts (pp. 487–
489). Lincoln, NE: ADHO.
Harrison, S.J. (2000). Apuleius: A Latin Sophist. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Juola, P. (2008). Authorship attribution. Foundations and Trends in Infor-
mation Retrieval, 1(3), 233–334.
Kestemont, M., Luyckx, K., Daelemans, W., & Crombez, T. (2012). Cross-
genre authorship verification using unmasking. English Studies, 93(3),
348–364.
Kestemont, M., Moens, S., & Deploige, J. (2013). Collaborative authorship
in the twelfth century: A stylometric study of Hildegard of Bingen and
Guibert of Gembloux. Literary and Linguistic Computing. doi: 10.1093/
llc/fqt063
Koppel, M., & Winter, Y. (2014). Determining if two documents are written
by the same author. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 65(1), 178–187.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Bonchek-Dokow, E. (2007). Measuring differen-
tiability: unmasking pseudonymous authors. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing, 8, 1261–1276.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Argamon, S. (2008). Computational methods in
authorship attribution. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 60(1), 9–26.
Paradis, E. (2012). Analysis of phylogenetics and evolution with R. New
York: Springer.
Paradis, E., Claude, J., & Strimmer, K. (2004). APE: Analyses of phylo-
genetics and evolution in R language. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England),
20(2), 289–290.
Redfors, J. (1960). Echtheitskritische Untersuchung der apuleischen
Schriften De Platone und De Mundo. Lund, Sweden: C.W.K. Gleerup.
Reeve, M. (2000). Cuius in usum? Recent and future editing. Journal of
Roman Studies, 90, 196–206.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 60(3), 538–556.
Van Halteren, H., Baayen, H., Tweedie, F., Haverkort, M., & Neijt, A.
(2005). New machine learning methods demonstrate the existence
of a human stylome. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 12(1), 65–
77.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article at the publisher’s web-site:
Appendix S1. A repository containing the software and
data which can be used to replicate our experiments, as well
as a more detailed description of the corpus used.
4 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—•• 2015
DOI: 10.1002/asi
