A3.1 
Proceedings of Student-Faculty Research Day, CSIS, Pace University, May 7
th
, 2010 
 
 
Stylometry System – Use Cases and Feasibility Study 
 
Gregory Shalhoub, Robin Simon, Ramesh Iyer, Jayendra Tailor, Dr. Sandra Westcott 
Seidenberg School of CSIS, Pace University, White Plains, NY 10606, USA 
{gs23714w, rs53595n, rr08430n, jt08608n} @pace.edu, profwestcott@yahoo.com  
 
 
Abstract 
Stylometry is a discipline that determines authorship of 
literary works through the use of statistical analysis and 
machine learning.  While this discipline has been used 
successfully to determine authorship of famous literary 
works, the area of analyzing digital content is still 
relatively new with much more to discover.  Since the 
early to mid 1990’s the explosion of the Internet has 
opened up new uses for stylometry in the area of email, 
social networking, and various types of digital content.  
This paper is divided into two parts.  Part I discusses 
potential uses of stylometry in the area of Internet content 
and  presents four use cases in areas that have had little 
or no research.  Part II evaluates three existing 
stylometry tools and conducts a feasibility study to 
determine if the tools can correctly assign authorship of 
electronic mail to its original author. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Stylometry is a discipline that determines authorship of 
literary works through the use of statistical analysis and 
machine learning.  When someone authors a literary work, 
document, or email they leave behind certain attributes to 
their writing style that can be analyzed and used to 
determine other works by the same author.  Some of these 
attributes or features are vocabulary usage, sentence 
complexity, specific phrases, and many others.  
Stylometry was born out of the need to identify authors of 
literary works and can be traced as far back as 1439 with 
Lorenzo Valla’s work analyzing Donation of Constantine 
and his assertion that it was a forgery.  One of the most 
widely referenced and convincing applications of 
stylometry was to identify the author of 12 papers which 
were part of a larger work known as the Federalist Papers.  
The Federalist Papers were a collection of 85 documents 
that were originally published anonymously, but now 
known to have been written by Alexander Hamilton, John 
Madison, and John Jay [6].  Mosteller and Wallace (1964) 
applied stylometry to the 12 disputed papers and arrived 
at the conclusion that all 12 papers were written by 
Madison. 
 
Today the ubiquity of the Internet and the millions of 
devices that people use to connect to the Internet have 
generated a need to determine authorship of digital 
content.  This need originated because of the growth of 
cybercrimes.  Cybercrimes can be defined broadly as 
criminal activity involving the use of information 
technology.  With applications and communication 
methods like email, blogs, Facebook, instant messaging, 
Twitter, and on-line communications exchanging of 
information across the globe is easy and instant [18].  In 
many cases people that commit cybercrime are “hiding” 
behind the Internet anonymously or many times use false 
identities or useless screen names.  Cybercrime can range 
from not so serious to very serious type crimes.  Spam and 
phishing may be categorized as not so serious while child 
pornography and terrorism would fall into the serious 
category.  Federal, state, and local law enforcement 
agencies need a way to determine who is behind these 
crimes when the only evidence left behind is in a digital 
format. 
 
1.1. Challenges with digital content 
 
Trying to determine authorship of digital or Internet 
content presents some different and unique challenges that 
were not introduced with conventional stylometry.  One of 
the key challenges is number of authors.  Many of the 
previous studies such as authorship identification of 
Shakespeare’s works and the Federalist Papers, dealt with 
a relatively small number of potential authors, typically no 
more than 10 [18].  Digital content such as electronic mail 
and social networking applications like Twitter could have 
more than 10 authors and sometimes hundreds of potential 
authors.  For example, if someone is planning a crime 
utilizing Twitter they most likely would not use their real 
name or any accurate characteristics to identify 
themselves.  After narrowing their search for an original 
author using other methods this could still leave law 
enforcement with a large pool of potential authors. 
 
Another significant challenge working with digital content 
is length of the work.  For example, email and micro-
A3.2 
blogging content tend be a lot shorter than some of the 
previously mentioned works.  Trying to attribute 
authorship to content of less than 250 words is more 
difficult and challenging [18].  Works like the Federalist 
Papers and the Holy Bible had a larger body of content 
that could be used as a base for machine learning.  One 
way to compensate for the shorter works could be a richer 
feature set that analyzes more than just words and 
vocabulary but actual structure of the documents like 
spaces after a period or carriage returns between 
paragraphs.  Work by the prior Team 2 did an excellent 
job of building a feature set that covered the existing 
categories of features [4].     Based on research already 
completed it is well established that feature sets can be 
broken out into four categories – Lexical, Syntax, 
Structural, and Content-specific [18].  Lexical features can 
be either word or character base.  Syntax refers to the 
patterns used to form sentences.  Structural features 
covers the text’s layout and Content-specific are words 
that are important within a specific domain [1].  In 
addition to what the prior Team 2 covered an additional 
set of features should be added under the Structural 
category - Technical [1].  Figure 1 shows additional 
features to be added to Team 2’s original fifty-five 
features. 
 
Technical Features Examples 
1. Emoticons 
 
2. Font color H I c e z q 
3. Font size v Q b N k 
4. Embedded images 
jpg, gif, bmp inserted in 
documents/web pages 
5. Hyperlinks http://www.pace.edu 
Fig. 1 Possible features to be added 
 
In addition to the technical features in figure 1, another 
feature under the category of Lexical should be added – 
Internet slang.  Internet slang is a form of abbreviation 
when using digital channels to communicate in order to 
save the user time by eliminating keystrokes [17].  
Today’s Internet slang is said to have become mainstream 
with America Online’s instant messenger program back in 
the early 1990’s.  Examples of Internet slang are BRB = 
be right back, TTYL = talk to you later, and LOL = laugh 
out loud.    In some cases an abbreviation could have more 
than one meaning; therefore contextual interpretation 
would need to be built into the stylometry system.  The 
use of Internet slang is on the rise and will continue to 
become part of formal written documents as well as 
texting and messaging among teens – 64% of teens 
incorporate some form of informal styles from their text 
based communications in writing for school [10]. 
 
Finally there exists the challenge of detecting people who 
want to perform an attack or use electronic media for 
inappropriate actions and change their writing style so the 
author cannot be determined using modern stylometric 
methods.  This is an area that has received very little 
attention but one that is certainly important [3].  One 
thought may be to use a richer set of features like 
technical features or Internet slang to help thwart this type 
of scenario [3].       
 
2. Use cases 
Over time stylometry has been used successfully in a 
number of different areas.  Figure 2 displays some of the 
uses of stylometry discovered during the literature survey 
process. 
 
Stylometry uses 
1. Music lyrics [16] 6.Plagiarism [18] 
2. Music melody [16] 7. Social networking 
[8][9] 
3. Paintings [15] 8. Electronic mail [9][4] 
4. Literary works [4] 9. Instant Messaging 
[1][8] 
5. Forensic Linguistics [1]  
Fig. 2 Documented and potential stylometry uses 
 
Items 7, 8, and 9 referenced in figure 2 are in early stages 
of stylometric thought.  The next sections will discuss 
these in more detail with possible use cases.  Social 
networking (item 7) can include applications and tools 
such as Twitter, Facebook, instant messaging, phone texts, 
and blogs. 
 
2.1. Social Networking -  the Twitter case 
 
The popular micro-blogging site Twitter has the concept 
of verified accounts which enables users to easily identify 
which accounts are real and authentic. This becomes 
highly useful when one has to decide upon 10 Donald 
Trumps and 5 Richard Bransons. 
 
Who has a 'Verified Account' badge? We're starting with 
well-known accounts that have had problems with 
impersonation or identity confusion (for example, well-
known artists, athletes, actors, public officials, and public 
agencies) [14]. We may verify more accounts in the 
future, but because of the cost and time required, we're 
only testing this feature with a small set of folks for the 
time being [14].  
 
In Twitter’s own words, the major hindrance in this 
verification process is cost and time, both of which can be 
attributed to the manual process involved [14]. This is 
where use of stylometric verification of Twitter accounts 
A3.3 
comes into the picture. Once implemented a powerful 
stylometry system could automatically do the verification 
thereby making it feasible to verify more accounts, even 
the not so well-known ones.  
 
How it might work 
Consider a non-verified Twitter account, for example: 
http://twitter.com/chetan_bhagat Chetan Bhagat is a well-
known author from India; whose first three novels have 
been best sellers and two have been made into movies. 
http://www.chetanbhagat.com.  This is a good example of 
an account which is well-known in a particular geography, 
while it may not be relevant for others and hence may not 
be considered for by the current verification process.  
 
The stylometric verification would begin by analyzing the 
known books, columns and blogs written by Chetan and 
building his stylometric profile. His tweets (or collation of 
tweets) would then be matched against the profile first 
built to determine/ascertain the identity of the Twitter 
account. 
 
Limitations 
Since the system requires a known stylometric profile, 
only accounts of people with previously known writings 
(books, blogs, etc) can be verified. Another limitation is 
the 140 character tweet limit, and the fact that no existing 
stylometric tool has the strength to verify pieces of texts 
less than 150 words long. A possible solution would be to 
combine all the tweets from that account and consider that 
one piece of text for the tool to analyze. This would mean 
that only Twitter accounts already containing a fair 
number of tweets (say 50 or 100) could be verified. 
 
2.2. Electronic mail case 
 
Many businesses today cannot function without email. 
Although it is used primarily for business use at the work 
place, there are instances where email is used 
unprofessionally.  In this particular case, an anonymous 
and rather offensive email is sent to the CEO of a 
company.  Since the email was from an internal address it 
is certain that it was done by someone in the company. 
Stylometry can be used in this case to suggest who the 
possible offenders can be.  
 
How it might work 
After further investigation of the security information 
team, it was narrowed down to three people in respect to 
the time and date stamp of the email. Fifty emails from 
each of the three individuals were extracted from the 
email servers. These fifty emails were saved as text files 
and then analyzed in the Signature Tool. Each set were 
individually analyzed and combined as three sets of fifty 
emails. The three sets were then tested against the 
offensive email and analyzed. Being that fifty emails were 
used for each person the chances of finding the similarities 
between the offensive and the probable offender are 
higher due to the amount of emails. The prior research 
classes have created a similar application that requires the 
same type of text based sources files. 
 
Additional Use with Third Party Component 
A keypress logger can be installed on the domain level 
that would collect all letters typed on the keyboard. These 
will be collected as a text file and analyzed at a later time 
and could become part of the known authors base work 
and used as an additional element. 
 
Limitations 
Stylometry will help determine the writing style in this 
case, only if the emails that are collected will have enough 
content. This doesn’t exactly 100% prove that the alleged 
person is in fact the offender, other factors such as an 
impersonator might come in to play.  Also, if the 
offending email is lacking the content to analyze, meaning 
only two or three words, then the analytical aspect of the 
tool cannot be used with validity. 
 
2.3. Chat use case 
 
Chat, also known as instant messaging, is a form of real-
time communication between two or more people based 
on typed text. The text is conveyed via devices connected 
over a network such as the Internet. There are dozens of 
instant messaging product available on the web. AIM 
(AOL Instant Messenger), Yahoo Messenger, Windows 
Live Messenger, Google Talk and Skype are some of the 
popular instant messaging (IM) applications.  Every 
second millions of IM’s are sent between different 
products throughout the world via the Internet. Therefore 
there is a high probability of hacking someone’s account 
and sending IM’s on behalf of that person. Once the 
account is compromised then there is no way anyone can 
find out if the IM is sent from a legitimate or authorized 
user.  
 
Stylometry may be able to assist in determining authorship 
of instant messages.  Stylometry tools can play a big role 
because of the vast use of IM products over the Internet.  
IM’s can be verified matching a particular user’s stored 
chatting style. In fact it could be a part of the IM product 
to verify authenticity of the user automatically.  
 
How it might work        
What if someone has hacked the password of a particular 
user, or someone left an IM window open and another 
person used it in the authorized person’s absence to send 
unauthorized IM’s?  In both cases other users do not know 
if the user was fake or legitimate. In this case if stylometry 
A3.4 
algorithms were to be included into IM code then this 
would be helpful in determining if the IM was authentic or 
not. Users can have the choice of enabling stylometry 
while chatting. Users can enable it when they feel any 
particular instant message session is suspicious. Chat 
features could range from a character to a lot of lines with 
lot of smileys (emoticons) and other keywords. Once a 
particular style of any user is stored then all subsequent 
chat messages can be matched. Once matching is done 
then a stylometry tool can provide the results if the user is 
who they say they are. For example if a particular user’s 
style of saying keyword “Hi” is “hiiiiiiii”. What if his 
account is compromised and an unauthorized user types 
“hi” like “hey” or “hello” or “hi” then this could be 
suspicious. Stylometry tools can analyze the text transfer 
and conclude with a certain level of accuracy whether the 
person engaged in an IM session is who they say they are.   
 
Limitations 
Chat or instant messages can vary in size from one 
character to hundreds of characters and words. In this case 
the lack of text may make it difficult to determine the 
identity of someone with whom you are chatting or have 
chatted with.  Another potential issue could be the speed 
of which IM’s are typed and transferred.  If real time 
processing is used for every chat message and sent 
through a stylometry algorithm it could slow down the 
speed of IM conversation.  It also can affect the memory 
of the computer.   
 
2.4. Terrorism use case 
 
Over the last 10-15 years the urgency to track and monitor 
terrorist activity has become one of the most important 
areas of emphasis to the U.S. government and other 
Western countries.  Traditional methods of monitoring 
terrorists groups (wire taps, informants, etc) still are 
applicable but the Internet is adding a new dimension to 
tracking terrorist activity and is proving to be a difficult 
task.  The speed, ubiquity, and potential anonymity of 
Internet media – email, web sites, and Internet forums- 
make them ideal communication channels for militant and 
terrorist organizations [1].  Terrorists are using the 
Internet to spread their messages, recruit new members, 
transfer money, and plan attacks.  Stylometry tools can be 
used to help law enforcement identify authors and monitor 
terrorist activities. 
 
How it might work        
There are two potential use cases that could be used to 
help identify an author of terrorist content.  The first 
analyzes static content like blogs and web forums.  Both 
use cases assume that the law enforcement agency has 
profiles of existing terrorist.  This aligns with the 
traditional approach where a potential list of authors exists 
and text from the media is extracted to determine 
authorship.  The law enforcement technology department 
could conduct a web crawl where potential terrorist sites 
are identified.  Then the content could be compared to the 
known list of terrorist and their profiles.  The other use 
case is an area where there has been little research and 
could be a potential research topic for future consideration 
– real time chat.  Terrorist have used real time chat 
programs to communicate short and urgent messages via 
popular tools like AOL Instant Messenger and Windows 
Messenger.   
 
Limitations 
Much of the research and work related to stylometry has 
been conducted using English as the primary language.  If 
stylometry is going to be used as a tool to identify 
terrorists and help mitigate attacks then other languages 
need to be considered.  But other languages present 
challenges that do not exist when analyzing English.  
Arabic, for example, is a Semitic language that contains 
unique structural and stylistic properties.  Some 
characteristics that can complicate authorship analysis 
include inflection, diacritics, word length, and elongation 
[1].  Arabic builds its vocabulary through the derivation of 
stem words from a root, which is inflection.  Also, within 
the Arabic language, are diacritics which are the markings 
above and below letters to indicate phonetic value [1].  
These characteristics are critical to applying stylometry 
successfully to the Arabic language especially since 
blogging, forum, and instant message content are less than 
250 words. 
 
3. Stylometry tools 
 
During the literature search several existing stylometry 
tools were discovered.  Each tool was tested and evaluated 
with only the more advanced tools being considered for 
testing.  Figure 3 indicates the tools found with some 
general comments about each. 
 
Tool name Comments 
JGAAP [7] Used in testing 
Signature Tool [11] Used in testing 
C# Tool [5] Used in testing 
StyleTool [13] Not chosen, technical issues  
Blog stylometry tool 
[2] 
Not chosen, limited scope – 
blogs only 
Stylometry tool [13] Not chosen, DOS based, out of 
date 
Fig. 3 Tools evaluated 
 
JGAAP (Java Graphical Authorship Attribute 
Program) 
A3.5 
This is a Java-based tool that runs as a stand alone 
application on the Windows platform.  The download 
from the tool’s wiki site also includes a version for Linux 
and Apple’s Leopard’s operating system.  This application 
was developed by a professor (Dr. Juola) and his graduate 
students at the Math Computer Science Department at 
Duquesne University.  The way JGAAP currently works is 
to identify the most likely author of a document from 
among the group of testing authors represented.  If there is 
only one testing author then there is only one candidate 
for most likely author.    
 
Installation – Installation was not of the conventional 
Windows type.  After downloading and the extracting the 
zip file doubling clicking the JGAAP.jar file started the 
application immediately.  Application runs as the standard 
javaw.exe process for Sun’s version of Java. 
 
Test Run – The interface for this application is well 
written and the accompanying documentation on the wiki 
was easy to follow to get started.  In order to determine 
authorship of a particular document the user needs to run 
through a series of 4 steps before pushing the “run” 
button.  Step 1 is to “Acquire” the documents.  This 
involves choosing documents and assigning them an 
author (if known).  The application supports the PDF 
format, a URL, MS Doc, HTML, and generic text 
formats.  Step 2 - After loading the documents in to the 
system the user can choose from a number of canonicizers 
(data type preprocessing); Normalize Whitespace, Strip 
Punctuation, Strip HTML, and Unify Case to apply to the 
documents.  These can be assigned to all the documents or 
individual documents.  Step 3 - After applying the 
canonicizers the user can then begin to build the Event or 
feature Set.  Step 4 - After identifying the Event Set the 
user then moves onto assigning a classification method.  
These Events can then be analyzed using a variety of 
classification methods, including nearest-neighbor 
methods (distances are calculated between each pair of 
documents and documents of unknown authorship are 
assigned to author of the closest document with a known 
author).  If only one author is used then there is only one 
candidate for most likely author, therefore for this test 
multiple works were loaded including other assignments 
from prior courses at Pace. 
 
Signature Tool 
 
The website hosting this software is created by Peter 
Millican (also the developer of Signature) from Hartford 
College, Oxford University who taught Philosophy and 
Computing for 20 years at the University of Leeds. 
 
Installation: Installation was easy and straightforward; the 
self executable sigzip100.exe ran with no issues.  It 
creates a folder named ‘Signature’ to the location you 
directed it to and extracts the Federalists papers in a 
separate folder along with the ‘signature.exe’ file. It seems 
that this is a full fledge stand alone Windows executable 
32 bit application.  Once extracted, to open just run the 
signature.exe file. The operation is straight forward, in 
order to analyze a file, click File then Load and simply 
choose the required files (multiple selection allowed). 
Highlight the ones you’d like to compare and generate the 
results.  The graph is very clear, concise and to the point. 
It covers five areas of which are graphed:  
(Feature sets)   
1) Word Lengths 
2) Sentence Lengths  
3) Paragraph Lengths 
4) Letters  
5) Punctuation 
 
There is also an option to choose 2D or 3D chart style 
along with a custom option.  The color schema is very 
clear and the legend is clearly indicative of what it is 
referring to. The tool is built with comparisons and 
statistics in mind, the data charts in addition to evaluation 
methods are based on that motto. There is also another 
aspect of this tool that was used for running tests to 
evaluate bodies of text while utilizing the Chi-Square 
standard.  Instructions are available on the site as a 
PowerPoint but not included when downloading the self 
executable. This software, although it is very detailed in 
some areas, lacks the finishing touches of the overall 
software package and install due to the lack the inclusion 
of instructions. All the analysis that was done on this tool 
has been precise and data rich.  The application displays 
all the data accurately and at no point did I wonder what I 
was looking at as the color coded legends are positioned 
well.  According to the website, Version 2.0 of this 
software is currently in the works. 
 
C# Tool 
This tool was developed by prior Pace graduate Students 
over the last few years.  It was specifically designed and 
developed for determining authorship of email samples 
when compared to an author's known work.  The detail 
information and project code can be found on 
http://utopia.csis.pace.edu/cs691/2007-
2008/team2/index2.htm. 
 
This tool uses 55 feature sets to process and validate email 
samples [5].  This tool provides a basic user interface (UI) 
developed using the C# programming language.  Using 
this tool a user can upload an existing data set or can 
create a new one by selecting 10 or more email samples. 
Once emails samples are loaded the tool will ask users to 
input user demographic data for each of the email samples 
they have made part of the base data set.  Demographics 
A3.6 
collected are: author’s name, age, sex, highest degree, and 
computer.  Once the data set is created and loaded a match 
comparison can be done by loading an email of the 
unknown author.  The tool will utilize the 55 feature sets 
pre-loaded into the tool and the k-nearest neighbor 
classifier to determine an author match.   
 
With an intuitive UI, easy to install procedure and 
efficient method for inputting large datasets the C # Tool 
can be used by most anyone who has basic computer 
skills.  Also if there should be any doubt on how to use the 
tool or process for determining authorship the 
accompanying user manual is well written with step by 
step instructions for all existing features. 
 
4. Stylometry tool comparison 
 
4.1. Email samples 
 
The types of email used can be either personal or work 
related. The body of the message (only the author’s sent 
portion) will be extracted and copied to a text file using 
notepad. The naming scheme has been predetermined so 
that the team can refer to each unique email with ease, if 
need be. One team member will be assigned 1-20, 21-40, 
41-70 and 71-100 along with the initials of the author. For 
example, the emails submitted by that team member with 
the initials GS will have a file named: ‘Sample10GS’. 
Another example will be named ‘Sample49SP’, and so on. 
This creates a universal format that will enable the team to 
communicate effectively when referring to the various text 
files. 
 
In order to conduct this study the team gathered a total of 
100 emails from various people. Ages varied from 26 
being the youngest and 46 being the oldest. Due to 
privacy concerns none of the emails, full names or any 
personal data of the individuals involved in this survey 
will be released to the public.  
 
Each user provided ten emails which were analyzed. The 
average word count for each author has been recorded 
along with the total average word count of all the emails. 
Figure 4 below displays the results. 
 
Author # of emails Average word count 
GS 10 210 
GSW 10 105 
JG 10 117 
RI 10 107 
SP 10 106 
KH 10 353 
TF 10 405 
JT 10 220 
NG 10 173 
RH 10 161 
Totals 100 1957 
Total Average  195.7 
Fig. 4 Displays averages of individual/all sample email 
 
4.2. Testing methodology  
 
The stylometry tools being evaluated are different in that 
one is used to authenticate an author while the other two 
are used to identify an author.  Therefore the testing 
process for each tool type will be different.  For the 
authentication tool a match/no match testing process will 
be followed.  A 1 of n decision process will be followed 
for the identification tool.  For the match/no match tool 
type a body of work or in this case a number of emails, 
from the same author will be compared to an email with 
an unknown author.  The tool should be able to determine 
whether the unknown email was written or not written by 
the known author – match or no match.  In the case of the 
identification tools (1 of n decision) many email samples 
from different authors will be compared to one email 
whose author is unknown and the tool will determine who 
authored the unknown email.   
 
The results for the identification tools will be calculated 
simply by dividing the total number of correct 
identifications by the total number of tests.  For the 
authentication tool calculations for the False Accept Rate 
(FAR), the False Reject Rate (FRR), and the overall 
accuracy will be conducted.  The FAR is the rate a 
document is falsely attributed to an author.  The FRR is 
the rate a document is not correctly attributed to an author.     
 
4.3. Testing process 
 
The 100 email samples as outlined in section 4.1 will be 
used for all testing. 
 
Initially it was planned that for the match check, the team 
would remove 1 sample at a time, input 9 samples 
from the subject as known and the 10th sample as an 
unknown, and the system should find a match. And, for 
the no-match check, the team would input 10 samples 
from a subject as known and 1 from another subject as 
unknown, and the system should respond with a no-match.  
 
An initial test run with each tool revealed that the exact 
same testing process could not be used across all tools 
since each tool is designed differently with a different 
purpose – authentication vs. identification.  Hence, the 
testing process was modified to suit each tool. Special 
attention was given to make sure that the best possible 
functionality of each tool is being identified and tested.  
A3.7 
The specific process followed for each tool is given 
below: 
 
 
JGAAP Testing (1 to n decision) 
JGAAP is designed to return nearest matching author (of 
all known authors) compared to the unknown author. 
Hence, if the comparison is made between mails of just 
one author and any other mail, the tool invariably matched 
it to the single known author.  Therefore the testing 
compared each unknown sample against all the remaining 
99 samples in order to determine if the tool correctly 
matched the author (from amongst the 10 authors of the 
99 samples).  The first sample from each author was kept 
as unknown and the remaining 99 were kept as known and 
tested for match. This was done for five different event 
sets; words, word length, characters, syllables per word, 
and word bigrams (pairs of words used together). Each 
test was done with the canonizers (remove punctuation, 
convert all to lower case) on and off there by making a 
total of 10 tests for each author (1 sample times 5 events 
types times 2 canonizers). By doing this for each of the 10 
authors, the team obtained 100 test cases for JGAAP 
testing. 
 
Signature Tool (match testing) 
The Signature Tool has the capability to identify if the 
unknown sample matches with the known sample set or 
not (rather than identifying the nearest author). The user 
also has the option to choose from five different event 
sets; word lengths, letters, sentence lengths, paragraph 
lengths and punctuations. Due to the short length of the 
email samples (~150-200 words) sentence lengths and 
paragraph lengths events were not much help in analysis. 
The punctuation event was also not found to be valid 
because of the same short length issue of the samples and 
also possibly because people tend to minimize 
punctuations in emails. Thus, testing was conducted for 
only word lengths and letters.  Removing 1 sample, and 
loading the remaing 9 samples from the subject as known 
it was tested whether the tool correctly matched the 
unknown sample to the known samples. This was done for 
3 samples from each author, thereby making a total of 60 
test cases (3 samples times 10 authors times 2 events)  
  
Signature Tool (no match testing) 
For testing the no-match capabilities of the Signature tool 
the team identified one author as known (all 10 samples 
from the author being loaded as known) and compared 
this against one sample each from the remaining nine 
authors. Ideally the tool should not match any of these 
nine samples to the initial known sample set. This was 
repeated for five known authors making a total of 45 test 
cases (5 authors times 9 remaining unknown samples). 
 
C# Tool Testing (1 to n decision) 
Similar to the JGAAP tool, the C# Tool is designed to 
return the nearest matching author. Thus each unknown 
sample was compared against the remaining 99 samples 
here as well. The C# Tool analyzes 55 different event sets 
to determine a match or no-match, but does not give the 
user an option to choose the event set (All of the 55 events 
are analyzed by default). Thus each sample mail accounts 
to just 1 test case. Taking one sample at a time as 
unknown and keeping the remaining 99 as known, 100 
tests were conducted. 
 
4.4. Results 
 
Given below is the accuracy (in percentage) for all the 
tests performed. 
 
JGAAP Match Test 
Canonizers On Off 
Words 50% 30% 
Word Length 50% 30% 
Characters 60% 40% 
Syllables per Word 40% 30% 
Word Bigrams 70% 60% 
 
Signature Tool Match Test: 
Events Accuracy FRR 
Word Length 53.33% 46.67% 
Letters 46.67% 53.33% 
 
Signature Tool No-Match Test: 
Events Accuracy FAR 
Word Length 53.33% 46.67% 
Letters 82.22% 17.78% 
 
C# Tool Match Test:  
Accuracy 
57% 
 
Taking the best result (wherever applicable for each tool): 
Tool Match No-Match 
JGAAP 70% NA 
Signature 53.33% 82.22% 
 
Categorizing the result based on the country of the author: 
Tool 
Match No-Match 
India USA India USA 
JGAAP 50% 100% NA NA 
Signature 61.11% 75.00% 81.48% 83.33% 
C# Tool 42% 80.00% NA NA 
NB: Only the best result for each set is shown 
 
A3.8 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The moderate accuracy of the test results suggest that 
none of the tools evaluated is capable of accurate 
stylometric email author identification. However, when 
the results are categorized based on the country of the 
author (India and USA in this case), all the tools indicate 
higher confidence in identification of American authors. 
Further study with more samples from each country (and 
more countries) is required to establish if there is any 
significant variation in the tool performance based on the 
origin of the author. 
 
5.1. Recommendations 
 
In order for stylometry to become an accurate and 
consistent method for determining email authorship and 
authorship of other types of digital content that exists 
today, a continued focus and development on the feature 
sets is imperative.  As noted in figure 1 other types of 
features or styles are starting to become more prevalent 
with Internet content and should be included with the 
already extensive list of features developed by the prior 
teams [4].   
 
Also as a stylometry tool is being enhanced or created 
new consideration for people who wish to disguise their 
identity needs to be researched further.  In many cases, the 
email use case included (section 2.2), when someone 
carries out a malicious act they may change their writing 
style or “dumb it down” in order to mitigate the chances a 
stylometry tool could identify them as the author [6].  To 
date most all stylometry tools developed have not taken 
the scenario of disguised authorship into consideration.       
 
  
6. References 
 
[1] Abbasi, Ahmed and Chen, Hsinchum, “Applying 
Authorship Analysis to Extremist Group Web Forum 
Messages”, University of Arizona, IEEE Computer 
Society, 2005 
[2] Blog Stylometry Tool - http://patorjk.com/blog-
stylometry-tool/  accessed November 2009 
[3] Brennan, Michael and Greenstadt, Rachel, “Practical 
Attacks Against Authorship Recognition Techniques”, 
Dept of Computer Science, Drexel University, 2009 
[4] Calix,K, Connors, M,Levy,D, Manzar,H McCabe,G, 
Westcott,S, “Stylometry for E-mail Author Identification 
and Authentication” Pace University, White Plains, NY 
2008 
[5] C# Tool http://utopia.csis.pace.edu/cs691/2007-
2008/team2/index2.htm accessed November 2009 
[6] Gamon, Michael and Kacmarcikm, Gary 
“Obfuscating Document Stylometry to Preserve Author 
Anonymity”, Natural Language Processing Group 
Microsoft Research, 2006 
[7] JGAAP 
http://server8.mathcomp.duq.edu/jgaap/w/index.php/Main
_Page  
[8] Kucukyilmaz,Tayun, Cambazoglu,Barla, Aykanat, 
Cevdet, Can,Fazli “Chat mining: Predicting user and 
message attributes in computer-mediated 
communication”, Elsevier Ltd., Computing Engineering 
Dept. Bilkent University, Turkey, 2007 
[9] Mohtasseb, Haytham and Ahmed, Amr, “Mining 
Online Diaries for Blogger Identification” Department of 
Computing and Informatics University of Lincoln, UK, 
2009 
[10] PEW INTERNET & AMERICAN LIFE PROJECT 
"Writing, Technology and Teens" 2008 
http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2008/
PIP_Writing_Report_FINAL3.pdf.pdf 
[11] Signature Tool 
http://www.philocomp.net/?pageref=humanities&page=si
gnature accessed November 2009 
[12] StyleTool – https://launchpad.net/styletool  accessed 
November 2009 
[13] Stylometry Tool - 
http://hickmansfamily.homestead.com/Stylometry.html 
accessed November 2009 
[14] Twitter -http://twitter.com/help/verified accessed 
November 2009 
[15] USA Today “Is that painting real? Ask a 
mathematician”  
http://www.usatoday.com/tech/science/mathscience/2007-
05-10-painting-by-numbers_N.htm Svoboda, Elizabeth  
May 2007 
[16] Van Kranenburg, Peter and Backer, Eric “Musical 
style recognition – a quantitative approach” Conference 
on Interdisciplinary Musicology, April 2004 
[17] Wikipedia – Interent Slang: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_slang accessed 
November 2009 
[18] Zheng, Rong, Li, Jiexun, Chen, Hsinchun, and 
Huang, Zan “A Framework for Authorship Identification 
of Online Messages: Writing-Style Features and 
Classification Techniques”, Wiley Periodicals Inc, 2005 
