Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  55
The Genre Structure of Bulletin Board Messages
Maite Taboada
Department of Linguistics, Simon Fraser University
mtaboada@sfu.ca
Abstract
Messages posted on bulletin boards on the Internet represent a new form 
of communication. They draw both from casual conversation and from 
other written genres in their structure and characteristics. In this paper 
I explore the genre structure of bulletin board posts. Genre is defined a 
purposeful, goal-oriented activity, which evolves in clearly defined stages. 
Messages posted on bulletin boards correspond to a variety of genres: 
argumentation for an opinion, personal attacks on other posters, pros and 
cons of a certain product, demands for advice, etc. Because the goals of 
each genre are different, the genres will also be different in structure. This 
paper provides definitions of four of these genres and an exploration of 
their structural characteristics. The descriptions are useful in computa-
tional applications such as topic classification and information retrieval.
KEYWORDS: Bulletin boards, linguistics, genre, systemic functional lin-
guistics, rhetorical structure theory, text classification
1. Introduction
Messages posted on bulletin boards can be classified into different types, 
or genres. This classification can be done on an intuitive basis, by examin-
ing the overall purpose of the message, and certain expectations of what 
it is one achieves by posting a message (providing information, asking for 
information, arguing for a certain point of view, etc.). Ideally, this intuitive 
classification should be automated for search and retrieval purposes. 
The problem is how to formalize the classification of individual 
messages based on their characteristics. Research in computational lin-
guistics and information retrieval has provided a number of methods to 
perform automatic text classification. These are often based on the pres-
ence of certain keywords (Lewis, 1992), extraction patterns or signatures 
(Riloff and Lorenzen, 1999); linguistic features (Biber, 1988) and style 
markers (Stamatos et al., 2000); the similarity of a given document to a 
number of “model” or “neighbouring” documents (Friedman, 1999; Yang 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  56
and Liu, 1999); and, in general, statistical techniques (Yang, 2000).
I propose to use structural characteristics of the messages as one 
of the bases for text classification, together with some lexical and gram-
matical characteristics. The first step towards automatic classification is to 
examine the structural characteristics of bulletin board messages in gen-
eral, and of different genres within those messages.  
Such classification could be used when searching for messages. 
One could add the genre of the document to search criteria, and search 
only for messages that are “informative”. Bulletin board administrators 
might want to search for “personal attacks”, to be removed from the board. 
In a political discussion thread, it would be very useful to be able to search 
for messages that offer “pro” and “con” arguments for a particular position 
or point of view.
The characteristics of different genres of bulletin board messages 
described here will not suffice to perform automatic text classification. 
Structural characteristics are not as reliable as the presence of keywords, 
for instance. However, structure can become one more tool in the complex 
task of classifying text automatically.
The paper first makes some remarks about genre, and its relation 
to structure, in Section 2. Section 3 describes the general characteristics of 
bulletin board messages. Section 4 is the main analysis section, describing 
the characteristics of four typical genres within bulletin board messages. 
Section 5 provides some discussion of applications, and conclusions.
2 Genre and Structure
The definition of genre used in this paper borrows from the writings of 
Bakhtin, formalized in the work of systemic functional linguists. For 
Bakhtin, language is realized through individual concrete utterances 
by participants in the various areas of human activity. These utterances 
reflect specific conditions and goals of each such area through different 
aspects namely content, linguistic style (selection of lexico-grammati-
cal resources) and compositional structure. All three aspects are linked to 
the whole of the utterance and determined by the nature of the particular 
sphere of communication where they are produced. “Each separate utter-
ance is individual, of course, but each sphere in which language is used 
develops its own relatively stable types of these utterances. These we may 
call speech genres.” (Bakhtin, 1986:60). Speech genres are numerous and 
diverse, “because the various possibilities of human activity are
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  57
inexhaustible, and because each sphere of activity contains an entire rep-
ertoire of speech genres that differentiate and grow as the particular sphere 
develops and becomes more complex” (Bakhtin, 1986:60).
This notion of genre has been refined and made more specific by 
researchers working in Systemic Functional Linguistics. Martin defined 
genre as “a staged, goal-oriented, purposeful activity in which speakers 
engage as members of our culture” (Martin, 1984:25). Under such defi-
nition, there are very many types of genres, a few of which are: literary 
genres (short stories, romance, tragedies, sitcoms); popular written genres 
(instructional manuals, newspaper articles, recipes); and educational 
genres (lectures, tutorials, essays). Eggins (1994:26) points out that there 
are also a number of everyday spoken genres: buying and selling things, 
telling stories, gossiping, making appointments, chatting with friends. 
Genres are mainly defined through their social purpose and the 
stages necessary to fulfill that purpose. Stages are the steps interlocutors 
take in order to reach their goal(s), and they constitute the genre’s sche-
matic structure. For instance, the high-level generic structure of a tele-
phone conversation consists of an opening, a problem-solving stage (or 
main body) and a leave-taking stage. Mitchell (1957) proposed the follow-
ing schematic structure for a market auction in a Moroccan marketplace. 
The symbol ^ indicates sequence.
 
(1) Auctioneer’s Opening ^ Investigation of Object of 
Sale ^ Bidding ^ Conclusion
Each one of those steps is a stage, and they appear in the order indicated. 
Stages may be recursive: it is quite likely that bidding will include several 
instances of offer and counter-offer. 
Genre is used to describe language use in the context of culture. 
Another construct, register, represents the context of situation. Register is 
concerned with the aspects of the situation that have an impact on the lin-
guistic expressions used. Halliday (1978; 1989) proposed three situation 
variables (also in Eggins, 1994:52):
• Field: what the language is used to talk about.
• Tenor: the role relationships between the interactants.
• Mode: the role language is playing in the interaction.
The following configuration could describe the present paper: field: aca-
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  58
demic discussion of text analysis; tenor: specialist-to-specialist communi-
cation; mode: written. 
We can then use genre to define overall purpose and staging, and 
register to define the situational variables. Whereas situational variables 
may be similar in some of the messages in this study, the structural char-
acteristics and the overall purpose are different, as we will see in Sections 
3 and 4. 
Eggins and Slade (1997:231-235) propose six steps for a generic 
structure analysis. Their study was one of casual conversation, but the 
same steps can be used to study and describe any genre, written or spoken. 
The six steps are:
1. Recognizing a chunk. A “chunk” is a part, a segment 
or series of segments of a text that has a global or macro-
structure. 
2. Defining the social purpose of the chunk and labelling 
the genre. This step not only includes classifying the over-
all function of the genre and its name, but it also involves 
identifying the way the text type constructs social real-
ity. In this step we would define the social practices the 
text refers to, and the attitudes and values formed by and 
reflected in it.
3. Identifying and differentiating stages within a genre. 
Stages are constitutive elements of genres. They can be 
identified through the use of functional labels.
4. Specifying obligatory and optional stages. The obliga-
tory elements are defining of the genre and they are key 
elements in recognizing a genre. Optional elements are 
not defining features and can occur across genres.
5. Devising a structural formula. This includes writing 
down the stages in a linear sequence, together with some 
notation that would show their ordering and whether they 
are obligatory or optional. In Eggins and Slade’s (1997) 
notation -- widely used after Hasan’s (1984) analysis 
of nursery tales and service encounters -- the symbol ^ 
denotes order of the stages with respect to each other, and 
stages enclosed in parentheses are optional. For example, 
a structural formula for narratives would read: (Abstract) 
^ Orientation ^ Complication ^ Evaluation ^ Resolution 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  59
^ (Coda).
6. Analyzing the semantic and lexico-grammatical fea-
tures for each stage of a genre. Lexico-grammatical 
choices (of words, linguistic patterns and discourse char-
acteristics) will differ across genres, but also across the 
different functional stages within a given genre.
In summary, Eggins and Slade’s system will have three basic steps: (1) 
identifying the genre, (2) finding a structural formula that will represent 
most instances of the genre and (3) analyzing the linguistic characteristics 
of each stage. In this paper, I concentrate on the first two steps, identifying 
first four different genres within bulletin board messages (each message 
being a ‘chunk’). In the second step, structural differences outline the dif-
ferences among the four genres. I will only briefly discuss linguistic fea-
tures for each genre (step 3); a more complete analysis of those features is 
left for future research.
 
3 Bulletin Board Messages: General Characteristics
Electronic bulletin boards emerged first as an electronic version of the 
“community bulletin board” (Bulletin Board Corp., 2003) that one can 
find at the grocery store or the post office in a small community. From this 
point of view, bulletin boards are places to exchange information and offer 
or request services. The first dial-up bulletin board, the Chicago Bulletin 
Board System, was created in 1978 by Ward Christensen and Randy Suess 
(Christensen and Suess, 1989)1. These first bulletin board systems were 
places to exchange files and information. In the 1990s, with the advent of 
the HTTP protocol and the use of browsers2, some bulletin boards migrated 
to Internet web sites, and were renamed message boards or web boards. 
There, they became places to not only exchange information and services, 
but to carry on discussions on different topics: products, politics, the stock 
market, hobbies, etc.  
Messages posted on bulletin boards range in content and espe-
cially in format, from the letter-like style to the conversation-like stream, 
making it difficult to classify them as either writing or speech (Herring, 
2001). Crystal (2001:42) describes web pages, e-mail, chat groups and 
virtual worlds according to what spoken or written language criteria they 
fulfill. The picture that emerges from Crystal’s description is that the com-
munication that takes place on a bulletin board shares characteristics of 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  60
both written and spoken language (loosely structured, but not face-to-face; 
space-bound, but not graphically rich).
S. Yates (2000) argues that most computer-mediated genres have 
an origin in the office memo, and J. Yates and Orlikowski (1992) trace 
a chain of evolution, from business letters to memos and from those to 
e-mail communication. The messages are indeed similar to letters in that 
they often have the familiar structure of letters: opening, body, closing. 
For instance, Example (2)3 could be, from a structural point of view, a 
written letter, or an e-mail message. It has a salutation (Rad & others), a 
main body, and a closing (Good luck: Joe). Its language would not qualify 
as that of a formal written letter. The structure, however, is very similar4.
(2) By: JOEGELT
18 Nov 2000
Rad & others 
100% correct (imho) on this Basher call !! 
Have many other Basher sightings worth investigating. 
Good luck : 
Joe 
Bulletin board messages include many other characteristics that one would 
not find in a letter, such as a lack of openings and closings (including no 
signature). In that sense, they are closer to the structure of informal e-mail 
communication. Herring (1996) studied messages sent to a listserv, and 
found they were quite similar to letters, except that few (13% of the ones 
studied) had a salutation, possibly because headers including “to” fields 
are inserted automatically by the system. Example (3) has only a brief 
opening (doc), on the same line as the message, and no closing. It also 
makes use of capitalization for emphasis.
(3) By: angiela22
04 Apr 2001
doc - you do great research, thanks. We REALLY need to 
know about revenues! 
Additionally, messages exhibit some of the characteristics of conversation, 
in that they are turns in an ongoing exchange, and are often informal in 
style. Example (4) is a turn in response to two other posts, whose authors 
are mentioned (Steve and Putter). The language is quite informal.
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  61
(4) Date: 4-22-2001 22:48:00
Subject: OT: take the high road
Author: trustme2069
Steve I agree with you on this one for sure. And I do 
understand Putter asking for e-mail, because its too easy 
to get caught up in a P***isg contest with these jerks. 
They come they go they change their name or steal ID’s 
from others, but within 2 or 3 posts, we all know where 
they are headed...to the ignore list.trustme
 
The label persistent conversation has been applied to this type of commu-
nication (Erickson, 1999), because, although it is conversational in many 
aspects, it is also preserved for future review. Bregman and Haythornth-
waite (2003) consider that capturing the communication at the time of 
delivery is an essential attribute of persistent conversation (as opposed 
to reproducing or summarizing an instance of communication after it has 
taken place). It is also crucial that the logging of the proceedings is per-
formed as part of the activity, not to serve a secondary purpose. Court 
recordings are recorded for archival and reviewing processes, but the judi-
cial process may be performed without them. Message archival, on the 
other hand, defines bulletin boards to a large extent. Without archival, they 
would become mailing lists or simply private e-mail messages.
On the other hand, bulletin board messages are unlike conver-
sation in that conversational openings often receive no response. Her-
ring and Nix (1997)5 found that 18% of messages in a chat room were 
not responded to. In a study of three asynchronous listserv discussions, 
Herring (in press) reports that 34% of participants who posted messages 
received no response. 
These messages are at the same time clearly anchored in the writ-
ten domain, with links to previous written documents (quoting other post-
ers’ messages). Herring (1999; 2001) argues that quoting creates the illu-
sion of conversational coherence, recreating an adjacency pair, as if the 
previous turn (the quoted material) and the current turn had happened at 
the same time. Tanskanen (2001) observed that quoting was frequently 
used to show disagreement with an earlier message, or to initiate a cor-
rection of the quoted material. Example (5) uses quotes to refer to specific 
parts of another poster’s message, and to disagree with those. An interest-
ing aspect of this message is that the author used quotation marks (single 
and double), rather than the usual on-line > symbol (or a line to the left of 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  62
the paragraph) to indicate quoted material. 
(5) By: soup
03 May 2002
cherokeeruby: It’s not ‘just a ticker change.’ The ticker was 
changed as a symbolic representation of precisely what 
you state in the rest of your sentence: ‘new beginning, a 
new company’ in which the contributions of the old CPQ 
and old HWP are both recognized. 
“Besides just a ticker change it could be an attempt to 
signal a new beginning, a new company, so to speak.”
Taking a look at the new stock symbols, HPQ, we CPQ 
shareholders are not making as big a change as HWP 
shareholders--we only have to change the ‘C’ to ‘H’ 
whereas they only retain the ‘H’ and have to change ‘WP’ 
to ‘PQ.’ 
I have been in communication with someone at HWP’s 
IR off and on during the past 2 weeks [I think their IR 
is MUCH more responsive that our current CPQ IR]. 
Yesterday I mentioned to the fellow how much I liked the 
new stock symbols and he replied that it is going to take 
people a while to get used to them in his division. 
On this point I totally disagree with you: “Would not 
surprise me a bit if in the not too distant future the name 
of the new company was changed to HPQ Corp”
Changing a corporate name is expensive and not a move 
any corporation takes lightly. Changing stocks symbols 
is a big move, too. Had there been any serious interest in 
changing the corporation’s name, it would be done right 
now. “Hewlett-Packard” is a world recognized brand 
name. Changing it to “HPQ” would be a disaster in my 
mind. Now, changing it to ComPac might not be so bad 
;> Lynn 
Other studies of computer-mediated communication have found that it lies 
in the area between spoken and written language. Ko (1996) examined 28 
linguistic features of computer-mediated communication, as compared to 
both written and spoken English. The results showed that computer-medi-
ated language is closer to speech, although still sharing many of the char-
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  63
acteristics of written language. However, the language is in some aspects 
“more speech-like than actual speech” (Ko, 1996:20), e.g., in that it uses 
more wh-questions and second person pronouns than a sample of speech. 
The messages examined for this study are all related to publicly 
traded companies. Different sites, such as Yahoo! (http://messages.yahoo.
com/), Raging Bull (http://ragingbull.lycos.com/), Motley Fool (http://
boards.fool.com/), Silicon Investor (http://www.siliconinvestor.com/), or 
Stockhouse (http://www.stockhouse.com/) offer boards, typically classi-
fied by company or sector. Messages found on these boards vary from 
requests for advice, “insider” tips, and press releases, to attacks on the 
company’s management or against other posters’ opinions. Many post-
ers draw attention to a recently announced press release, or any other 
event that could affect the price of the stock. Messages are typically short, 
reflecting the celerity with which the stock is being traded (see Table 1 for 
average message length). 
Part of the definition of a genre includes its purpose, reflected in 
structural characteristics. Some of the messages examined seem to have a 
dual purpose: they are often directed at individuals, in response to a previ-
ous post, but they will be widely read by all the contributors and “lurkers” 
on the board. Typically, messages contain both very personal addresses 
(dismissing or criticizing other posters’ opinions), but also a soap-box-like 
argumentative style (defending an opinion, bashing or pumping the stock). 
One example is presented in (6) below, where the poster makes it clear that 
he is addressing all the readers on the board (I thought it good…to remind 
myself as well as others on this board…). 
(6) Date: 23-4-2001
Subject:  TXN a player in the optical space
Author: gurdjieff2000
TI’s Breakthrough Technology Revolutionizes Optical 
Wireless Networking per yahoo and PRitem. I thought it 
good to diverge from thisatmosphere of doom and gloom 
to remind myself as well as others on this board, that TXN 
isa MAJOR player in the semiconductor industry,and 
these prices several years from now willbe but a dream. 
These drastic sell offs occurin technology every 5 years 
or so, and onething for sure, the dynamics that caused 
this stock price correction will reverse one day,and the 
industry will be back in favor. Youshould ask yourself this 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  64
question, where doyou want to be at that time!!!
The dual purpose is a general characteristic of all bulletin board messages. 
In the following section, I argue that there are further possible classifica-
tions within the bulletin board descriptor, each type having a more specific 
purpose.
 In terms of register, all messages studied have a similar configura-
tion:
• Field: specialized discussion about stocks and company 
performance.
• Tenor: specialist-to-specialist (sometimes novice-to-
specialist), informal, low affective involvement among 
participants.
• Mode: computer-mediated communication, written to 
be read, -visual, -aural, +rapid feedback.
The field description is clear and straightforward. In all the messages, the 
topics of discussion are stocks, stock performance, and company perfor-
mance. In terms of tenor, the messages are among specialists, and some-
times from novice to specialist (requests for advice). Although the tenor is 
informal, there is low affective involvement among the participants, given 
that most likely they do not know each other. Finally, the mode is com-
munication mediated by a computer, and all the communication is in the 
form of text written to be read. There is no visual or aural feedback, but the 
written feedback is usually prompt6. The only variation in the four genres 
studied lies in the tenor, which sometimes is not completely friendly, as is 
the case with attacks.
Register is not enough of a descriptor to help us characterize the 
messages. They all have similar register configurations. The different types 
of messages are distinguished because they have different purposes, and, 
according to genre theory, those different purposes should be reflected 
in different structural characteristics. The next section investigates those 
structural characteristics.
4 Structural Characterization of Four Bulletin Board Genres
Bulletin board messages have general structural characteristics in common. 
In this section, we will first of all examine those, and then we will study 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  65
four different types of messages, which can be differentiated based on 
further structural characteristics.
One first approach to structural description of all bulletin board 
posts is the familiar letter style: opening, body, closing. As mentioned in 
the previous section, electronic posts also usually contain a link to previ-
ous discourse, either via a reference or through quoting other posters’ mes-
sages, in part or in full. They also often lack introductions and closings, 
in which they are more similar to turns in spoken language. One initial 
characterization is presented in Example (7). The three-part structure is 
still present, with an opening (Hi Guus), a closing (Teddybull), and a main 
body. The labels are inserted in bold type.
(7) By: teddybull06 
Mar 2003, 10:48 AM EST 
Opening
Hi Guus, 
Body
I didn’t know about Boss/WH-deal, but it does not surprise 
me completely as the press release of Cryp stated that WH 
would exclusively use CERTAIN casino games, so not 
ALL of them. This shows increasing margin pressure in 
the egaming business, which has been going on for the 
last 2 years. Only few of the parties will survive, probably 
Boss and Cryp (approx twice the size of Boss(?)) are both 
survivors. Cryp is still the market leader by far and jumped 
just in time into Poker it looks like. Earnings growth looks 
pale, but cash in hand is more than o.k.. Let’s wait for 
some new licencees, big names can improve the growth 
potential. Analyst coverage diminished, last CC was short 
and quite... contarry indicator? If net margins would drop 
to 10%, Cryp delivers USD 3 to 4 mln earnings a year, P/E 
just above 10 for a debt free - cash overloaded company. 
Does not worry me at all. 
Closing
Teddybull
 
In the body of the message, we can have a further breakdown into back-
ward- and forward-looking material, with a link to what Guus, the inter-
locutor, has said before, and a contribution by the current author. 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  66
          
(8) Link to previous material
I didn’t know about Boss/WH-deal, 
New contribution
but it does not surprise me completely as the press release 
of Cryp stated that WH would exclusively use CERTAIN 
casino games, so not ALL of them. This shows increasing 
margin pressure in the egaming business, which has been 
going on for the last 2 years. Only few of the parties will 
survive, probably Boss and Cryp (approx twice the size 
of Boss(?)) are both survivors. Cryp is still the market 
leader by far and jumped just in time into Poker it looks 
like. Earnings growth looks pale, but cash in hand is more 
than o.k.. Let’s wait for some new licencees, big names 
can improve the growth potential. Analyst coverage 
diminished, last CC was short and quite... contarry 
indicator? If net margins would drop to 10%, Cryp 
delivers USD 3 to 4 mln earnings a year, P/E just above 
10 for a debt free - cash overloaded company. Does not 
worry me at all. 
The new contribution part can, in turn, be divided according to rhetorical 
purposes. The author is making a point, and he or she7 uses evidence to 
prove it. For now, however, we will concentrate on the following division 
of the main body of a message:
• Link to previous material
• New contribution
• Link to following discourse
The first and last components can always be recursive, weaved into the 
new contribution. Herring (1996) proposes a similar characterization for 
messages to a listserv, which were divided into: link to an earlier message; 
expression of views; appeal to other participants. One problem with such a 
characterization is that it is overly general. It only identifies the messages 
as being dialogic. According to Bakhtin, all language is dialogic in some 
sense or another:
The dialogic orientation of discourse is a phenomenon that is, 
of course, a property of any discourse. On all its various routes toward 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  67
the object, in all its directions, the word encounters an alien word and 
cannot help encountering it in a living, tension-filled interaction. Only the 
mythical Adam, who approached a virginal and as yet verbally unqualified 
world with the first word, could really have escaped from start to finish 
this dialogic inter-orientation with the alien word that occurs in the object. 
(Bakhtin, 1981:279).
Given that link to previous and following discourse are not distin-
guishing structural characteristics, we need to find other ways of identify-
ing different types of messages. I have selected four types of messages 
within the financial domain, based on their purpose (part of the definition 
of a genre), and then examined their structural characteristics. The four 
genres are:
• Request for advice or information 
• Argumentation for and against an opinion
• Bashing and pumping the stock/company
• Attacks against other posters in the message board
These are all posted on bulletin boards related to the financial domain. The 
messages are collected from boards organized by company (e.g., Micro-
soft, Nortel, General Electric, etc.), or by type of investment (real estate, 
futures, utilities, etc.). This is an interesting domain, because emotions run 
high. It is very important to have the most up-to-date information, since 
many investors use that information to make decisions on buying or sell-
ing stock in the particular company.
The messages were collected randomly, and later divided into 
the four different genres (messages that seemed to belong to other genres 
were discarded). Two sets of collections took place: one during the first 
few months of 2001 (February-April), and another one in 2003 (March-
June). Thirty messages were collected for each genre, to a total of 120 for 
the study. Table 1 provides the total number of messages and size of the 
corpus in words. Table 2 breaks down the average word length per genre. 
Word counts were performed automatically, and may not be completely 
accurate, since they assume a space between words. 
Total number of messages 120
Total number of words 13,879
Average words per message (overall) 115.66
Table 1. Size of the corpus
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  68
Genre Average word count
Requests for advice 63.59
Argumentation 212.52
Bashing and pumping 96.10
Attacks 98.76
Table 2. Average length of messages (in words)
4.1 Requests for advice or information 
Example (9) is a typical request for advice. These are usually from posters 
who present themselves as novices, looking for advice from the experts8.
          
(9) Date: 4-22-2001 20:35:00
Subject: can’t find industry rankings anywhere!! 
Author: justcallmeangst_inthemorning
somehow I CANNOT find the rankings of individual 
stocks in each sector.....i know it is somewhere in yahoo 
finance......can you help me?thanks,ANGST!!!!!!!
 
From a structural point of view, the messages contain two characteristic 
stages:
• Background information
• Question
The order is flexible (background + question or question + background). 
However, a question never occurs in between two instances of background 
information. Requests for advice are the easiest to distinguish of the four 
types of messages: they are usually short, and they always contain a ques-
tion: a general one, such as can you help me? in Example (9), or a request 
for specific information, such as btw, has anyone tried selling those frac-
tional shares you received?
Requests for advice are the types of messages that are closest to 
the original idea of bulletin boards (electronic or not): a participant has 
a need, for services or information, and he or she draws on the common 
available expertise to satisfy that need. Answers to the requests were not 
included in the study, but they are often prompt and helpful. 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  69
The genre of requests for advice is characterized by its purpose 
(demand information), and by characteristic stages (background infor-
mation plus question). Its most relevant grammatical device is the use of 
questions. The structural formula is represented in (10). 
(10) Background information ̂  Request / Request ̂  Back-
ground information 
4.2 Argumentation 
Messages that argue for a particular position or point of view, or that defend 
an individual or a company, are quite frequent in bulletin boards. They are 
usually meant to provoke and often to sway other readers’ opinions on the 
particular company or product being discussed. 
Example (11) illustrates some of the typical characteristics of an 
argumentation post. It concedes that another post had good points, but it 
provides further evidence for the author’s point of view (that PLLL is a 
solid company, and that their investments are sound). 
(11) Date: 4-22-2001 22:43:00 
Subject: Wilcox Risks
Author: z24blackjet
Seismo,I thought your post was very thoughtful and 
balanced. However, I haven’t sensed that anyone on this 
board has misrepresented the Wilcox prospects.We might 
get excited and talk about Scooter’s party, but that’s just 
normal enthusiasm for our investment in PLLL. I think 
we all recognize that the Wilcox results must be positive 
for PLLL to hit $10 per share in the near future (6-12 
months), unless NG prices go through the roof. I also 
think everyone realizes the Wilcox drilling carries higher 
risks than the wells currently in production.Sans Wilcox, 
we’ve just got another $7 stock on our hands by October. 
Which, by the way, is good enough for me. PLLL is too 
smart (and experienced!) to bankrupt themselves on a 
solo Wilcox play. I like the way this company thinks and 
operates. - Z
From a structural point of view, argumentation messages usually have the 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  70
following stages. Elements in parentheses are optional.
• Link to previous discussion
• (Statement of author’s point of view)
• Objection to previous argument
• Statement or restatement of author’s point of view
• (Examples)
• (Disclaimer)
Grammatical characteristics include the use of concessive 
relations between major parts of the text:
• X might be true, but I think Y
• Positive comments about X. However, X is not the case; 
Y is. Further evidence for Y. 
• Argumentation messages also show a high number of 
counterfactuals (If X were true, then Y would have hap-
pened). 
Example (12) is an excellent illustration of an argumentation post, which 
is presented with numbers attached to each clause. The message starts with 
a concession to a previous poster (thanks… I agree with you that…). The 
next element, clause 3, is a statement of disagreement, clearly signalled 
by the discourse marker however. The statement is followed by evidence 
the author produces in order to further his case, this time signalled by for 
example. The message ends with a summary of the opinion (I think), in 
clause 17, followed by a disclaimer (anything can happen). 
(12) Date: 4-22-2001 23:09:00
Subject: weekend update
Author: tzmw
1 cmn07,Thanks for sharing your insights. 
2 I agree with you that the daily chart shows an overbought 
condition. 
3 However, it can stay overbought for an extended periods 
of time. 
4 For example, if you take a closer look at the weekly 
chart, 
5 you will see it’s started to show an overbought condition 
around 3000 and kept staying overbought until 5000. 
6 Anyway, based on the weekly chart, 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  71
7 we now have had two white soldiers, 
8 if I read it correctly. 
9 I am hoping for another one, 
10 then it would be very bullish. 
11 Farmer_MO perhaps can help us to explain a little 
more in detail. 
12 We might get it 
13 if the market sentiment is just right. 
14 Who knows. 
15 The STOCH is turning up, 
16 so is the RSI(weekly chart). 
17 I think its trend is more likely to remain intact, 
18 at least for now. 
19 Again, anything can happen in this kind of market. 
20 I’ve learned to expect the unexpected. 
The message can be analyzed in more detail if we use rhetorical relations 
(Mann and Thompson 1988), which are represented in Figure 1. Rhetori-
cal relations are relations between parts of a text that capture the effect the 
writer wants to achieve on the reader. They are most often hypotactic (a 
main and a subordinate part), although some of them are paratactic (two 
main parts combined, similar to coordination). I will not provide here a 
detailed discussion of rhetorical relations; the names and the representa-
tion in the figure should be intuitive enough to capture the relations repre-
sented. Numbers in the figure are those of each unit in Example (12). The 
figure shows that the main organization of the text is one of Concession 
(although I agree with part of what you said, I have a different opinion). 
Then the post is organized around an opinion, expressed in 3, and sup-
ported with different pieces of evidence. The opinion is again summarized 
in 17. 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  72
Figure 1. Rhetorical analysis of an argumentation post
A rhetorical analysis shows the highly structured nature of argumentation 
messages. Although not all are as complicated as the example shown in 
(12), each displays some of those elements (concession, conditions, state-
ments of opinion). Thus, the main structural characteristic of argumenta-
tion posts is their organization around an idea or opinion. A general struc-
tural formula is provided in (13).
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  73
(13) Link ^ (Statement) ^ Objection ^ (Re)statement ^ (Examples) 
^ (Disclaimer)
In terms of grammatical and lexical devices, the most important charac-
teristic of argumentation messages is the presence of discourse markers 
and conjunctions that indicate the rhetorical relations present (however, if, 
although, etc.).9 
4.3 Bashing and pumping
While most investors want the stock they invest in to increase in value 
(“buy low, sell high”), some investors borrow stock at a high price, sell it, 
and make a profit by paying off the borrowed stock at a low price (“short-
ing”). Thus, it is easy to find instances of both pumping and bashing on 
a company’s board. The terms ‘bash’ and ‘pump’ are commonly used, by 
other posters, to characterize this type of messages. 
These messages are different from argumentation posts in that 
very little support for the opinions expressed is offered. Sometimes press 
releases or other sources of information are used, but often with a spin 
(or “de-spin”, exposing public relations jargon). They are also different 
in that opinions are exclusively positive or negative towards a company. 
Argumentation posts contain a wider range of opinions (on the market, on 
a particular business strategy, etc.). Bashing and pumping posts are often 
exclusively all negative or all positive towards a company. 
In terms of structure, the messages contain either all-positive or 
all-negative opinions, sometimes accompanied by evaluation or justifica-
tion on the opinion. The stages are:
• Negative opinion / positive opinion
• (Justification)
 
Example (14) is a typical pumping message. The author uses recent news 
(supposedly about Phillips entering into a partnership with other compa-
nies; it is unclear from the message) to declare Phillips a good company. 
(14) Date: 4-22-2001 20:44:00
Subject: netster...re phillips news.....ot 
Author: waytoomanyzs
this is great news. phillips motorola and att could there 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  74
be better partners ? phillips has been on the leading edge 
technologically ever since i can remember. if they see 
promise in adco i believe it adds more creditability to it. 
Bashing is illustrated in Example (15). The author uses justification (poor 
customer service) to discredit a company. He or she also explicitly links 
the customer dissatisfaction to the owning of shares in that company, stat-
ing that he/she will sell the shares as soon as possible. 
(15) Date: 4-23-2001 1:43:00
Subject: Bad Long distance Bad wireless it ne
Author: kensas
I agree... I’ve had nothing but problems with my cell   
service. They signed me up for one plan only to bill me 
at a much higher plan. Now they tell me the plan I signed 
up for doesn’t exist. They promise to call me back and 
never did. Waited over 30 min for customer service to 
pick up! Thanks for the e-complaints site... Just sent them 
my story...I plan to sell all my WCOM on a decent uptick.
I guess being a dissatisfied customer prevents me from 
being a satisfied investor...
Most messages are entirely positive or entirely negative. A few use nega-
tive statements about other companies in a similar sector to then conclude 
positively on a different company, or vice versa. In Example (16), the author 
uses a negative opinion by somebody else (that Apple will not launch new 
products in a long time) to prove the other poster wrong. The author also 
compares Apple’s performance to that of other companies (Dell, Compaq, 
Gateway and Microsoft) to highlight Apple’s achievements. 
(16) Date: 4-23-2001 1:38:00
Subject: A look at the next 3 quarters 
Author: dsheehy
1) No new designs. There has been no significant changes 
in the design form factor of the iMac since its introduction 
other than color/translucency. Time and effort on re-
design seem to have been focused on individual projects 
like the iBook and then the Cube. Given the known (and 
speculated) product development cycle for those two 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  75
products, I doubt we’ll see anything in the next 6 months. 
If new designs are coming, it won’t be until March, 
2001.Darn, that’s hilarious. A perfect example of overly 
negative spin. Well, we got our new designs, or new 
OS, and we’re very happy with them.Now what exatly 
have Dell, Compaq, Gateway and Microsoft done in this 
time?Oh, that’s right - lay off employees.While we get 
a nice new boost from these wonderful products. The Ti 
Powerbook is the hottest thing in computing today. Too 
bad Plato didn’t see that one coming - despite everyone 
here knowing about “Mercury” for around a year or so!
From the point of view of the lexico-grammar, bashing and pumping mes-
sages can be identified because they contain a large number of evaluation 
words and patterns (Hunston and Thompson, 2000). Although adjectives 
by themselves help identify a text as being positive or negative (Turney, 
2002), the most reliable method is to find patterns of evaluation and 
Appraisal (Martin, 2000; White, 1998).
The structural formula for these messages is as follows:
(17) Negative/positive opinion ^ (Justification)
4.4 Attacks
The final type of message is the direct attack towards other members of the 
board. These are relatively common, and often seem to have as ultimate 
purpose to discredit other posters, and, by extension, their opinions.
Personal attacks are an unfortunate side effect of the medium. 
A certain amount of anonymity10 allows posters to express uncensored 
opinions that they might not express in face-to-face communication. This 
behaviour has been characterized as flaming. O’Sullivan and Flanagin 
(2003:84) define flames as “intentional (whether successful or unsuccess-
ful) negative violations of (negotiated, evolving, and situated) interac-
tional norms.” According to O’Sullivan and Flanagin, in the past, flaming 
has been recognized only based on the content of the message: there are 
a number of content analysis studies of the frequency of flaming in on-
line communication11. However, content by itself, and the intentions of the 
author, are not enough, in their opinion. They argue that uptake is crucial 
in flaming behaviour, i.e., a third party observer might miss instances of 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  76
flaming, or see flaming in messages that are not considered as flames by 
the participants. 
The messages classified as “attacks” here are all taken as such from the 
point of view of an outside observer. In most cases, it is very clear that 
they are attacks mainly meant to discredit somebody’s point of view. It is 
not clear, however, whether they qualify as flames, because it is possible 
that they do not violate the interactional norms of the boards. Expertise 
and credibility are at a premium on these boards, where much of the infor-
mation exchanged is personal opinions or assessments. Thus, if an expert 
discredits a member of the board, the expert could be benefiting the whole 
community, by exposing somebody whose opinions should not be taken 
into account. 
The crucial problem, then, is to distinguish attacks posted by 
experts, and thus worthy of attention, and attacks posted by authors with 
hidden agendas (pumping or bashing the stock through the bashing of 
other posters). In (18) we can see an example of an attack message. 
(18) Date: 4-23-2001 13:07:00
Subject:  Positive comments on JCP....... 
Author: TailSpin77
Well wallstreet--you come across as a total dimwitted 
dipstick. JCP does not need morons like you in or around 
their stores. I would suggest security be called whenever 
morons like you get near the store. Go play a game of 
pocket pool with yourself..
The distinguishing structural characteristics of attacks are:
• Attack
• Elaboration
• (Attack/dismissal)
Those are not very different from bashing messages, except for their target: 
persons for attack messages versus companies or products for bashing mes-
sages. Attacks are short (98.76 words on average in the sample studied), 
but so are “bashing and pumping” messages (96.10 words on average). 
Attacks are best distinguished using lexical and grammatical properties:
• They use swear words
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  77
• They use “you” and frequent vocatives, especially at the 
beginning of the message
• They contain rhetorical questions (e.g., who the hell do 
you think you are?)
The Appraisal framework would also be useful in distinguishing these 
messages. Most frequent are values of Judgement to do with social esteem, 
and the capacity of the person under attack (Martin, 2000). The following 
structural formula describes the attacks examined in this study:
(19) Attack ^ Elaboration ^ (Further attack) ^ (Dismissal)
 
5 Discussion
Bulletin board messages are not homogeneous, modified versions of either 
conventional letters or e-mail messages. The register, in terms of field, 
tenor and mode, defines and shapes the characteristics of these messages. 
However, if we consider register configurations alone, we find that most 
bulletin board messages are similar in content, interpersonal style and 
medium. Register is not enough of a descriptor for the variability observed 
in the messages. 
Genre, on the other hand, provides us with the tools to make dis-
tinctions between different types of messages. The definition of a genre 
includes its purpose, and since bulletin board messages have different pur-
poses, they should be classified into different genres. The crucial question 
is one of how genre is reflected in the structure or content of the messages, 
and how we can use those differences to perform a genre-based classifica-
tion.
The purposes of the messages are varied. First of all, in terms of 
audience, they are mixed: some of them are personal (especially attacks), 
but they will be read by an audience, the other members or readers in 
the same board. There is a continuum, from the very personal (attacks on 
other posters), to the general-audience target of argumentation messages. 
Of course, “general audience” refers to the audience within the board, pos-
sibly also other readers who encounter the board by chance.
Purpose defined the four major genres chosen for this study. From 
that starting point, we set out to describe the different structural charac-
teristics. As can be seen from the descriptions in Section 4, the messages 
develop in different stages according to their purposes. In each genre, there 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  78
is a characteristic stage that helps define the genre: questions in requests 
for advice; statement of point of view in argumentation messages; state-
ment of positive or negative opinion in pumping/bashing messages; and 
attacks in attack messages. Around that main stage we find other obliga-
tory or optional stages that contribute to the overall purpose. 
Structure is more evident in genres that have a long-standing writ-
ten tradition. Argumentation messages are characterized by complex rhe-
torical relations, often signalled by discourse markers. We have also seen 
that arguments, bashing/pumping and attacks all share some similarities, 
in that they include the writer’s personal opinion, and expressions that 
reflect the writer’s appraisal (of an idea, a company, a person). 
A practical application of genre-based analyses is in the area 
of topic detection. Topic detection and classification is a computational 
method of automatically identifying the main topic of a text, so that it can 
be retrieved or classified with other texts in the same topic area (Yang and 
Liu, 1999; Yang, 2000). A method for topic detection can benefit from 
some knowledge of the structure of the text. If we were to classify the mes-
sages included in this study, we could use the structural formulas outlined 
above. 
Crucial to topic detection is the identification of the different 
stages. That identification needs to rely on lexical and grammatical pat-
terns. For instance, the concessive relations we saw in argumentation mes-
sages are indicated by discourse markers (however, although, nonethe-
less). However, relying on structure exclusive will not provide sufficient 
identification. Not all the messages in each of the genres fit the structural 
descriptions above. Generic characterizations describe, but they do not 
determine the possible realizations within a genre:
 [T]his relationship between context and text is theorized 
as probabilistic, not deterministic: an interactant setting 
out to achieve a particular cultural goal is most likely to 
initiate a text of a particular genre, and that text is most 
likely to unfold in a particular way―but the potential for 
alternatives is inherent in the dialogic relationship between 
language and context. (Eggins and Martin, 1997:236).
Therefore, a method to classify texts should use a combination of struc-
tural and lexical methods. 
To conclude, this study has presented a new way of exam-
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  79
ining the characteristics of bulletin board messages, by classify-
ing them in terms of genre. The study analyzed four different genres 
within financial boards: requests for advice, argumentation, pump-
ing and bashing a company, and attacks on other posters. There are 
a number of other genres in the area of financial boards (for example, 
commercials), and possibly more in other bulletin boards in general. 
  
Endnotes
1 Jason Scott is currently producing a documentary on the history of the Bulle-
tin Board System. Two web pages are associated with this project: a main page 
<http://www.bbsdocumentary.com/> and a timeline page <http://timeline.textfi-
les.com/ >. 
2 The first browser, NCSA Mosaic, was released in 1993, according to Slashdot 
<http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=03/03/14/1534218&tid=95>. 
3 Messages are reproduced as posted, including typos, spelling and grammatical 
mistakes. I have included dates, subject line and author information in the order 
and format displayed on the board.
4 The main structural difference with a letter is the date, which is automatically 
generated, i.e., not provided by the author.
5 Cited in Herring (1999).
6 The description of mode is similar to the one Eggins (1994:54) proposes for e-
mail communication.
7 It is often difficult to establish the gender of contributors to message boards, 
although Thomson and Murachver (2001) suggest that there are some defining 
characteristics.
8 The issues around voice and self-presentation in on-line communication are too 
complex to discuss here. For a treatment of voice and power in Internet discourse, 
see Mitra and Watts (2002). 
9 For a discussion of rhetorical relations and discourse markers, see “Taboada 
(2004, forthcoming).” A general description of discourse markers can be found 
in Schiffrin (1987).
10 Most posters use nicknames and/or false information in their personal profiles. 
11 Content analysis (Krippendorf, 1980; Neuendorf, 2001) is a method used in the 
social and behavioural sciences to analyze text based on the presence or absence 
of certain features, defined by the researcher. One example is the analysis of spee-
ches during political campaigns (Hart, 2000). 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  80
References
Bakhtin, Mikhail. “Discourse in the Novel.” Trans. Caryl  Emerson and Michael 
Holquist. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by M. M. Bakhtin. 
Ed. Michael Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981. 259-
422. 
---. Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Trans. V. W. McGee. Austin: Univer-
sity of Texas Press, 1986.
Biber, Douglas. Variation across Speech and Writing. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988.
Bregman, Alvan, and Caroline Haythornthwaite. “Radicals of Presentation: 
Visibility, Relation and Co-Presence in Persistent Conversation.” New 
Media and Society 5.1 (2003): 117-40.
Christensen, Ward, and Randy Suess. The Birth of the Bbs. 1989. Available: 
<http```://www.chinet.com/html/cbbs.html>. April 30 2003.
Corp., Bulletin Board. Why Create a Bulletin Board? 2003. Available: <http://
www.bulletinboardscom/about.htm>. April 30 2003.
Crystal, David. Language and the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001.
Eggins, Suzanne. An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics. London: 
Pinter, 1994.
Eggins, Suzanne, and James R. Martin. “Genres and Registers of Discourse.” 
Discourse as Structure and Process, Discourse Studies: A Multidiscipli-
nary Introduction. Ed. Teun A. van Dijk. Vol. 1. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 1997. 230-56. 
Eggins, Suzanne, and Diana Slade. Analysing Casual Conversation. London: 
Cassell, 1997.
Erickson, Thomas. “Persistent Conversation: An Introduction.” Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication 4.4 (1999): <http://www.ascusc.
org/jcmc/>.
Friedman, Jerome. Flexible Metric Nearest Neighbor Classification: Department 
of Statistics. Stanford University, 1994.
Halliday, Michael. “Context of Situation.” Language, Context and Text. Eds. 
Michael Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1989. 3-14. 
---. Language as Social Semiotic. London: Arnold, 1978.
Hart, Roderick P. Campaign Talk: Why Elections Are Good for Us. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2000.
Hasan, Ruqaiya. “The Nursery Tale as Genre.” Nottingham Linguistics Circular 
13 (1984): 71-102.
Herring, Susan. “Computer-Mediated Discourse.” The Handbook of Discourse 
Analysis. Eds. Deborah Schiffrin, Deborah Tannen and Heidi E. Hamil-
ton. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2001. 612-34. 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  81
---. “Interactional Coherence in Cmc.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Commu-
nication 4.4 (1999): <http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc>.
---. “Two Variants of an Electronic Message Schema.” Computer-Mediated 
Communication: Linguistic, Social and Cross-Cultural Perspectives. 
Ed. Susan Herring. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1996. 81-106. 
---. “Who’s Got the Floor in Computer-Mediated Communication? Edelsky’s 
Gender Patterns Revisited.” Computer-Mediated Conversation. Ed. 
Susan Herring. Creskill, NJ: Hampton Press, in press. 
Herring, Susan, and Carole Nix. “Is “Serious Chat” an Oxymoron? Academic 
Vs. Social Uses of Internet Relay Chat.” Presented at the American 
Association for Applied Linguistics. Orlando, Fl., 1997.
Hunston, Susan, and Geoff Thompson, eds. Evaluation in Text: Authorial Stance 
and the Construction of Discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000.
Ko, Kwang-Kye. “Structural Characteristics of Computer-Mediated Language: 
A Comparative Analysis of Interchange Discourse.” Electronic Journal 
of Communication 6.3 (1996): <http://www.cios.org/www/ejcmain.
htm>.
Krippendorf, Klaus. Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1980.
Lewis, David. “Feature Selection and Feature Extraction for Text Categoriza-
tion.” Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural 
Language, 1992. 212-17.
Mann, William C., and Sandra A. Thompson. “Rhetorical Structure Theory: 
Toward a Functional Theory of Text Organization.” Text 8 (1988): 243-
81.
Martin, James R. “Beyond Exchange: Appraisal Systems in English.” Evalua-
tion in Text. Eds. Susan Hunston and Geoff Thompson. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000. 142-75. 
---. “Language, Register and Genre.” Children Writing: Reader. Ed. Frances 
Christie. Geelong, Victoria: Deakin University Press, 1984. 21-29. 
Mitchell, T. F. “The Language of Buying and Selling in Cyrenaica: A Situational 
Statement.” Hesperis 26 (1957): 31-71. Reprinted in Principles of Neo-
Firthian Linguistics, Longman, London. 167-200.
Mitra, Ananda, and Eric Watts. “Theorizing Cyberspace: The Idea of Voice 
Applied to the Internet Discourse.” New Media and Society 4.4 (2002): 
479-98.
Neuendorf, Kimberly. The Content Analysis Guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 2001.
O’Sullivan, Patrick B., and Andrew J. Flanagin. “Reconceptualizing ‘Flaming’ 
and Other Problematic Messages.” New Media and Society 5.1 (2003): 
69-94.
Riloff, Ellen, and Jeffrey Lorenzen. “Extraction-Based Text Categorization: 
Number 2,  2004               TEXT Technology  82
Generating Domain-Specific Role Relationships Automatically.” Natu-
ral Language Information Retrieval. Ed. Tomek Strzalkowski. Dordre-
cht: Kluwer, 1999. 167-96. 
Schiffrin, Deborah. Discourse Markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1987.
Stamatos, Efstathios, Nikos Fakotakis, and George Kokkinakis. “Automatic Text 
Categorization in Terms of Genre and Author.” Computational Linguis-
tics 26.4 (2000): 471-95.
Taboada, Maite. “Discourse Markers as Signals (or Not) of Rhetorical Rela-
tions.” Journal of Pragmatics. forthcoming.
---. Building Coherence and Cohesion: Task-Oriented Dialogue in English and 
Spanish. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 2004
Tanskanen, Sanna-Kaisa. “Avoiding Conflict in Computer-Mediated Discus-
sions, or, Fear of Flaming.” English in Zigs and Zags, (Anglicana Tur-
kuensia 23). Eds. R. Hiltunen, et al., 2001. 227-42. 
Thomson, Rob, and Tamar Murachver. “Predicting Gender from Electronic Dis-
course.” British Journal of Social Psychology 40 (2001): 193-208.
Turney, Peter. “Thumbs up or Thumbs Down? Semantic Orientation Applied to 
Unsupervised Classification of Reviews.” Proceedings, 40th Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002. 417-24.
White, Peter. Telling Media Tales: The News Story as Rhetoric. Unpublished 
Ph.D. Dissertation. Sydney: University of Sydney, 1998.
Yang, Yiming. “An Evaluation of Statistical Approaches to Text Classification.” 
Journal of Information Retrieval 1.1/2 (2000): 67-88.
Yang, Yiming, and Xin Liu. “A Re-Examination of Text Categorization 
Methods.” Proceedings of ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ‘99), 1999. 42-49.
Yates, JoAnne, and Wanda Orlikowski. “Genres of Organisational Communica-
tion: An Approach to Studying Communication and Media.” The Aca-
demy of Management Review 17.2 (1992): 299-326.
Yates, Simeon. “Computer Mediated Communication: The Future of the Letter?” 
Letter Writing as a Social Practice. Eds. David Barton and Nigel Hall. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2000. 233-51.
