Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Machine Learning and Cyhemetics, Shanghai, 26-29 August 2004 
E-MAIL AUTHORSHIP MINING BASED ON SVM FOR COMPUTER 
FORENSIC 
GUI-FA TENG’J, MAO-SHENG LAI I, JIAN-BIN MA’, YING L I ~  
I Department of Information Management, Peking University, Beijing 100091, China 
School of Information Science and Technology, Agricultural University of Hebei, Baoding 071001,China 
E-MAIL. tguifa@pku,edu.cn, search@vip. 163.com 
2 
Abstract: 
In this paper, we describe our work which attempts to 
mine e-mail authorship for the purpose of computer forensic. 
We extract various e-mail document features including 
linguistic features, header features and structural 
characteristics. These features together are used yith the 
Support Vector Machine learning algorithm to classify or 
attribute authorship of e-mail messages to an author. The 
primary experiments ou a number of e-mail documents have 
given ideal results, which indicate that the pmject has laid a 
firm groundwork for the future work. 
Keywords: 
Computer Forensic 
1. Introduction 
Authorship mining; E-mail; Support Vector Machine; 
Nowadays many industries and governments have 
become dependent on the use of e-mail as an expedient and 
economical form of communication over the Internet and 
Intranet. E-mail is used for many purpose, for example, 
many companies and institutions rely on e-mail for 
transaction business and individuals for communication. 
Thus the amount of e-mail traffic has increased markedly 
particularly since the inception of the World Wide Web. 
Unfortunately with the increase in e-mail traffic comes 
an undesired increase in the use of e-mail for illegitimate 
reasons. Examples of misuse include: sending Spam or 
unsolicited commercial e-mail, which is the widespread 
distribution of junk e-mail; sending threats: sending hoaxes 
or forbidden propaganda; the distribution of computer 
viruses and worms and unauthorized conveyance of 
sensitive information. Furthermore, criminal activities such 
as traffic in drugs or child pornography can easily he aided 
and abetted by sending simple communications in e-mail 
messages. As a result, these e-mail misuse phenomena do a 
lot of harm to people‘s benefit, even influence social 
stability. 
Now there are not effective methods for preventing 
these phenomena. The current methods are merely some 
passive defending measures such as e-mail filtering, 
installing firewall, etc. But they have inhered limitations 
and cannot put an end to the e-mail misuse phenomena. So 
the ability to provide empirical evidence and identify the 
original author of e-mail misuse is an important factor in 
the successful prosecution of an offending user by means of 
law. 
Computer forensic technique can be thought of 
investigation of computer-based evidence of criminal 
activity, using scientifically developed methods that 
attempt to discover and reconstruct event sequences from 
such activity. The principal objectives are to collect 
sufficient and accurate evidence for courtroom. 
Undoubtedly, it would be useful to have a computer 
forensic technique that can he used to mine the illegitimate 
e-mail’s real identity and collect evidence for computer 
forensic professionals and law enforcement agencies. 
Identifying the author’s identity encounters difficulties 
since the sender will attempt to hide hidher identity in 
order to avoid detection. However, humans are creatures of 
habit and have certain personal traits which tend to be 
persisted. That is why, for example, we have a handwriting 
style that is consistent during periods of our life, although 
the style may vary as we grow older. Likewise for writing, 
an author is sure to have certain writing habits, and these 
habits are unconscious and deeply ingrained. It means that 
even if one were to make a conscious effort to disguise 
one’s style, this would be difficult to achieve. The writing 
habits usually display in certain characteristics that pertain 
to language, composition and writing, such as particular 
syntactic and structural layout traits, pattern of vocahulary 
usage, unusual language usage, stylistic and sub-stylistic 
features. So it is feasible to grasp the documents’ 
characteristics and identify their real authorship based on 
text categorization. 
A closely related area of authorship mining is text 
categorization which attempts to categorize a set of text 
documents based on its content-type. Text categorization 
’ 0-7803-8403-2/04/$20.00 82004 IEEE 
1204 
Proceedings of the Third Intemadonal Conference on Machine kaming and Cybernetics, Shanghai, 26-29 August 2004 
provides support for a wide variety of activities in 
information mining and information management. The 
main techniques are to extract text characteristic and then 
use a learning algorithm such as decision trees [I], neural 
network, Bayesian ~ probabilistic approaches, or support 
vector machines [2] to classify the text document. 
Compared to longer, formal text documents, e-mail 
documents have several characteristics which make 
authorship categorization challenging. Firstly, e-mail 
documents &e generally brief and to the point, and can be 
punctuated with a larger number of grammatical errors etc. 
Secondly, the author’s composition style used in e-mails 
can evolve quite rapidly over time. Finally, e-mail 
documents have generally few sentences and paragraphs. 
These provide difficulties compared to text classification. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes our choice of the feature selection and extraction 
methods. Section 3 briefly outlines the support vector 
machines learning algorithm. Section 4 provides our 
research methods. And conclude the paper with a 
discussion on ongoing works in section 5. 
2. Feature selection and extraction 
We adopt Vector Space Model (VSM) to represent the 
document information. In VSM, text-based documents are 
represented as vktors in a high-dimensional vector space 
where the value of dimensions is based on the words 
occurring in that document. Each document is represented 
as a vector of term and weight pairs. So a document d will 
be represented byavector v=((r~ ,~) . ( r~ .y) , . - . ( t , ,w . ) ) .  We 
calculate the weight of the vector by the common technique 
r f  idf (term frequency-inverse document frequency) value: 
+ 
-i r f @ ,  d )  xlog(%, + 0.01) 
(1) W(r ,  d )  = I/- 
where wet,;) is the weight of term t in document d, 
rf(r.2) is the frequency of term t in document d, N is the 
total number of documents, nr is the number of documents 
that contain term t. 
A technique for managing the computational costs 
associated with text classification is feature selection. The 
most popular approach to featurt selection is to select a 
subset of the available features using methods like 
document frequency OF) ,  information gain (IG), mutual 
information (MI), term strength (TS), the X*-test (CHI). A 
prior study has showed that CHI statistics generally 
outperforms other feature selection techniques. So we 
adopted X 2 ( ~ ~ ~ )  as the feature selection criteria. 
(2) 
2 N x (AD - CB)’ 
( A +  C)x ( E  + D ) x ( A  + E ) x  (C + D) x (t,c) = 
where A is the number of times t and c CO-occur, B is 
the number of time the t occurs without c, C is the number 
of time the c occurs without t, D is the number of times 
neither c nor t occurs, and N is the total number of 
documents. 
Unlike some formal text documents, e-mail documents 
are more than free-form text. The body of a document is 
unstructured text. A document also contains a structured 
header. The header fields include the sender (the From 
field), a list of recipients (the To field), short description 
(the Title field), reply message (the Reply field) and 
attachment message. The body of e-mail documents 
sometimes is short. So the structural characteristics and 
header features cannot be ignored. 
The From and To field always contain e-mail address. 
Because the word of From or To field appears in the 
document only once, the weight of vector equals 1 or 0. If 
the particular word appears in the document, then the value 
is 1, or the value is 0. The header and some structural 
features are listed in table]. - 
rable 1. E 
Attribute 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
I 
8 
9 
10 
11 
]ail document’s header and structural features 
Attribute type 
The From message 
The To message 
Whether or not have title 
Whether or not have attachments 
Whether or not have reply 
Uses a greeting acknowledgement 
Uses a farewell acknowledgement 
Contain signature text 
Mean sentence length 
Mean paragraph length 
Number of blank linesltotal number of lines 
3. Support vector machine cider 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a relatively new 
class of machine learning techniques first introduced by 
Vapnik [14]. Based on the structural risk minimization 
principle of the computational theory, SVM seeks a 
decision surface to separate the training data points into 
two classes and makes decisions based on the support 
vectors that are selected as the only effective elements from 
the training set. 
Given a set of linearly separable points 
1205 
S=(r i l i=I ,z . . . ,~ ]  ,.each p i n t  xi belongs to one of two classes 
labeled as y i e  {-L+l] , a separating hyper-plane divides 
S into two sides, each containing points with the same 
class label only. The separating hyper-plane can be 
identified by the pair (wh) that satisfies 
w*x+b=O ( 3 )  
for any training sample xr E S , the goal of the SVM 
learning is to find the optimal separating hyper-plane (OSH) 
that has the maximal margin to both sides. This can be 
formularized as: 
minimize .LllW~p (4) 
2 . .  
( 5 )  
The points that are closest to the OSH are termed 
U, subject to 
support vectors (Figure 1). 
yj(w xi + b) 2 1 
Figure 1. Separating hyper-plane (the set of solid lies), 
optimal separating hyper-plane (the bold solid line), and 
support vectors (data points on the dashed lines) 
During classification, SVM makes decision based on 
the globally optimized separating hyper-plane. It simply 
finds out on which side of the OSH the best pattern is 
located. This property makes SVM highly competitive with 
other traditional pattern recognition methods in terms of 
predictive accuracy and efficiency. 
The SVM problem can be extended to non-hear 
models by mapping the input space into a very 
high-dimensional feature space based on kernel function. 
Examples of common kernel functions are: 
Polynomial ~ ( x , , x j )  = (c + (xo y))d ( 6 )  
The idea of the Support Vector Machine is to find a 
model for which we can guarantee the lowest hue error by 
controlling the model complexity (VC-dimension) based on 
the structural risk minimization principle. This avoids 
over-fitting, which is the main problem for other learning 
algorithm. So the distinctive advantage of the SVM is its 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybemedcs, Shanghai, 26-29 August 2004 
1206 
ability to process many high-dimensional applications, such 
as text classification and authorship categorization. 
4. Researchmethods ’ 
In preprocessing, citations (marked with >, I. etc.) 
removal and sentence segmentation of the original E-mail 
documents should be performed using pre-specified rules. 
Some header information such as mail address, reply text, 
titles and attachments should not be removed because the 
header of e-mail contains some important information that 
we can’t dnceive. 
When the classification problem has only a small set 
of data to work with, it can be difficult to provide enough 
data for disjoint training and testing data. This is likely to 
be the case in a forensic study, where there may only be a 
small a m p t  of data to produce a model of authorship. So 
we want t6 measure the performance of each feature by 
cross-validation evaluation methods to provide a more 
meaningful result. 
There’ are some free Support Vector Machine 
softwares available. We adopt Libsvm as the machine 
learning algorithm which is a simple, easy-to-use, and 
efficient software for SVM classification and regression. 
As Support Vector Machine only compute two-way 
categorization, multi-class classification models should be 
used. These models are ‘one against all’ classification and 
‘one against one’ classification. To avoid computation cost, 
the approach used in this research was ‘one against all’. 
To evaluate the categorization performance on the 
e-mail document corpus, we calculate the accuracy, recall 
(R), precision (P), and combined FI performance measures 
commonly employed in the text categorization, where: 
(9) 
To obtain an overall performance figure over all 
binary categorization ‘tasks, a macro-averaged FI statistic 
F : ~ ’  is calculated, where: 
where NAc is the number of author category and 
F 1 . a ~ ~  is the per-author-category FI statistic for author 
category ACi(i  = 1.2, ... , N,,-) . 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Machine L&nhg and Cybernetics, Shanghai, 26-29 August 2004 
5. Conclusions and outlook 
We attempt to investigate methods for e-mail 
authorship mining for the purpose of computer forensic. We 
resort to the techniques of text categorization and try to 
extract various e-mail document features including 
linguistic features, header features and structural 
characteristics and use the Support Vector Machine as the 
learning algorithm to classify or attribute authorship of 
e-mail. F’ritnary experiments on a limited number of 
documents have given promising results, which indicate 
that these methods are feasible. And the research provides a 
new approach to computer forensic. 
Further work must be done in the future. Firstly, we 
consider that some performance will be gained if we 
combine SVM with other machine learning algorithms. 
Secondly, some additional features should be investigated 
in order to extract the optimal feature sets of e-mail 
documents. Thirdly, authorship characterization or cohort 
profiling for authorship, such as gender, language 
background, and education level should be investigated 
further in order to reduce the size of the list of possible 
suspects for forensic purpose. Fourthly, some citation text 
in the e-mail documents should he identified in order to 
increase the classification accuracy. 
References 
C.Apte, EDamerau, S.Weiss, “Text mining with 
decision rules and decision tree”, In workshop on 
Leaming from text and the Web, Conference on 
Automated Learning and Discovery, 1998. 
TJoachims, “Text categorization with support vector 
machines: Learning with many relevant features”, In. 
Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine 
Learning, Springer, 1998. 
LKrsul, “Authorship analysis: Identifying the author 
of a program”, Technical report, Department of 
Computer Science, E’urdue University, 1994. 
LKrsul and E.Spafford, “Authorship analysis: 
Identifying the author of a program”, Computers and 
Security, No.16, 1997.pp.248-259. 
ESpafford and %Weber, “Software forensics: 
tracking code to its authors”, Computers and Security, 
No.12, 1993.pp.585-595. 
[6] Malcolm Walter Corney, “Analysing E-mail Text 
Authorship for Forensic Purpose”, Master thesis, 
University of Software Engineering and Data 
Communications. 
[7] E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, G. Kokkinakis, 
“Automatic Authorship Attribution”, Dept. of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering University of 
Patras. 
[81 Malcolm Corney, Olivier de Vel, Alison Anderson, 
George Mohay, “Gender-Preferential Text Mining of 
E-mail Discourse”. 
[91 Olivier de Vel, “Mining E-mail Authorship”, 
KDD-2000 Workshop on Text Mining, ACM 
International conference on knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining, Boston, MA, USA, 2OOO. 
[IO] 0. de Vel, A. Anderson, M. Corney, G. Mohay, 
“Multi-Topic E-mail Authorship Athibution 
Forensics”. ACM Conference on Computer Security - 
Workshop on Data Mining for Security Applications, 
November 8, 2001, Philadelphia, PA. 
[I 11 Yuta Tsuboi, “Authorship Identification for 
Heterogeneous Documents”, Master’s Thesis, Nara 
Institute of Science and Technology, University of 
Information Science, 2002. 
[12] Ji He, Ah-Hwee Tan, Chew-Lim Tan, “On Machine 
Learning Methods for Chinese document 
categorization”, Applied Intelligence, NO. 18, 
2003,pp.3 11 -322. 
1131 C.Cortes and V.Vapnik, “Support vector networks’’, 
Machine Learning, Vo1.20, pp.273-297, 1995. 
1141 V.Vapnik, ‘The Nature of Statistical Learning 
Theory”, Wiley, New York, 1998. 
[151 A.Anderson, M.Comey, O.de Vel, G.Mohay, 
“Identifying the authors of Suspect E-mail”, 
communications of the ACM, 2001. 
[I61 R.Kobavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap 
for accuracy estimation and model selection”, In 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 1995. 
[171 B.Kjell, “Authorship attribution of text samples using 
neural networks and -Bayesian classifiers”, In IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, San Antonio, TX, 1994. 
[I81 Y.Yang, “An evaluation of statistical approaches to 
text categorization”, Journal of Information Retrieval, 
vol.1, pp.67-88, 1999. 
1207 
