Inf Syst Front
DOI 10.1007/s10796-015-9596-8
Extracting the patterns of truthfulness from political
information systems in Serbia
Nenad Tomašev1
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
Abstract In modern information societies, there are infor-
mation systems that track and log parts of the ongoing
political discourse. Due to the sheer volume of the accu-
mulated data, automated tools are required in order to
enable citizens to better interpret political statements and
promises, as well as evaluate their truthfulness. We pro-
pose an approach to use the established machine learning
and data mining techniques for analyzing annotated political
statements and promises available via the Serbian Truth-o-
meter (Istinomer) system in order to extract and interpret the
hidden patterns of truthfulness and deceit. We perform stan-
dard textual processing and topic extraction and associate
topical truthfulness profiles with the promise makers, for
pattern discovery and prediction. Prevailing trends in Ser-
bian political discourse emerge as strong association rules
where truthfulness is set as the target variable. The evalu-
ated set of standard content-based prediction models exhibit
a bias towards the negative outcomes, due to an overall low
truthfulness rate in the data. Our results demonstrate that
it is possible to use data mining within political informa-
tion systems for generating insights into the workings of
governments.
Keywords Data mining · Text mining · Information
systems · Politics · Truthfulness · Association rules
 Nenad Tomašev
nenad.tomasev@gmail.com
1 Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Jožef Stefan Institute,
Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
1 Introduction
Governments across the world are using various systems
for tracking public opinion and citizen activity and some
concerns have recently been raised about the significant
decrease of privacy in the modern age (Danna 2002; Cate
et al. 2012; Custers et al. 2013; Sanches et al. 2013; Vaidya
2012; Mostafa and El-Masry 2013). Transparency is impor-
tant in order to prevent corruption and the abuse of power.
The public requires access to information that tracks gov-
ernment policies and/or historical political discourse in the
media. This is especially true for countries undergoing
a political transition towards modern democracy, such as
Serbia.
A high rate of corruption in the post-communist Euro-
pean countries (Vachudova 2009) has lead to an increase
in apathy and a general loss of interest among the vot-
ers (Greenberg 2010). Previous studies have shown that
the overall truthfulness of political discourse varies greatly
across different countries and that the rate of promises being
kept is far from uniform (PÃtry 2009). Lying has been iden-
tified as a commonly used tool (Cliffe et al. 2000). An
in-depth analysis of the political discourse has become an
important topic (Fairclough and Fairclough 2013). How-
ever, modern data analytic techniques have not yet become
widely used when addressing these issues.
We propose to use a semi-automated data mining
approach for uncovering patterns in online textual archives
of political promises. As a use case, we analyze the anno-
tated set of promises made by politicians in Serbia over
the span of several years. The analysis was performed
on the publicly available Truth-o-meter data (Istinomer,
Inf Syst Front
http://istinomer.rs/). The proposed approach is language-
independent and therefore easy to generalize for analyzing
political promise archives in other regions of the world.
Text mining (Miner et al. 2012) is a form of data mining
that aims at extracting high-quality information from text
by detecting hidden patterns and trends (Zhong et al. 2012).
This usually involves some sort of natural language process-
ing (Jackson and Moulinier 2007). Text mining techniques
are used throughout many different domains (Dörre et al.
1999), including life sciences (Dai et al. 2010; Uramoto
et al. 2004), media, marketing and healthcare applications.
However, up until now, text mining has not been widely
used in political discourse analysis. As political debates tend
to be quite complex, the analysis is often done manually by
experts and analysts. Text mining has been used for assess-
ing public opinion on certain topics (Balasubramanyan et al.
2010) and predicting election outcome (Murray et al. 2009;
Campbell 2008). These automated tools are used mostly
by governments and political parties in order to adapt their
public relations strategies (Howard 2005) and are usu-
ally not available to the general public for monitoring the
performance of appointed representatives.
This paper is structured as follows. We begin by summa-
rizing the major contributions of our work in Section 1.1
and reviewing related research in Section 2. Serbian Truth-
o-meter data is described in detail in Section 4, as well as
the information retrieval and text processing techniques that
were used to produce the final data representation. Section 5
presents exploratory visualizations of some important trends
in the data and sets ground for more complex analysis and
introduces the reader to the topic. In Section 6, a way
for detecting typical promises in the corpus is proposed.
Section 7 compares topical truthfulness profiles of differ-
ent politicians and discusses most similar politician pairs.
Finally, Section 8 discusses possibilities for content-based
automated truthfulness prediction, as well as a set of asso-
ciation rules mined from the examined corpus. Section 9
summarizes the results and Section 10 concludes the
paper by setting directions for improvements and plans for
future work.
1.1 Contributions
This paper is among the first to apply modern analytic tech-
niques for truthfulness prediction in political information
systems and the first one that addresses this issue in Serbian
Truth-o-meter data in particular. This is important due to the
well-known intricate dynamics of Balkan politics.
Political promise statements and comments were rep-
resented in a language-independent way via n-grams
and extended by automatically extracted topics. Topical
truthfulness tendencies were used for discovering truthful-
ness patterns in the data along with the original textual
representations.
Topical promise profiles were generated for all politi-
cians present in the database and utilized for prediction,
as well as cross-politician comparisons. The initial results
suggest that politicians in similar roles tend to make very
similar promises. This might come as a slight surprise, as the
data covers several government mandates where the ruling
parties often had opposing political programmes.
Automatic extraction of association rules was used for
pattern discovery in the data, with truthfulness as the target
variable. These patterns show that Serbian politicians are
more/less likely to be truthful on certain sets of topics than
others. For example, if there is a promise made in a name of
a political party regarding building new infrastructure dur-
ing the election campaign - it is most likely not going to be
fulfilled.
Finally, we have evaluated several standard predictive
models for on-line promise truthfulness prediction. It was
determined to be a challenging task in the absence of meta-
data and the predictions were skewed towards the negative
outcomes. However, not all promise makers were found
to be equally difficult to predict, which gives rise to opti-
mism about future research directions and better and more
effective prediction pipelines.
2 Related work
Public opinion mining and topic popularity analysis is usu-
ally based on data acquired from news websites (Scharl
and Weichselbraun 2008), blogs (Adamic and Glance 2005)
and other social media (Helbing and Balietti 2011; Stieglitz
and Dang-Xuan 2012), like Twitter (Balasubramanyan et al.
2010) and Facebook. Relevant information can be extracted
both from posts and comments, as well as likes and/or dis-
likes, if available. An alternative is to infer topic trends by
mining search queries (Weber et al. 2012).
Many trends can be observed by simply analyzing text
via standard bag-of-words or n-gram models, but more fine-
grained approaches have lately become quite popular by
employing different sorts of sentiment analysis and opinion
mining (Maragoudakis et al. 2011; Liu 2007). It is possi-
ble to determine the attitude of an article or a comment by
analyzing the sentiment expressed in individual sentences
towards the mentioned terms and concepts (Pang and Lee
2008). Some a-priori knowledge of the positive and nega-
tive words and constructs of the language is required and
is usually loaded from specially prepared databases and
dictionaries (Baccianella et al. 2010).
Inf Syst Front
Social network analysis can be incorporated into the
textual analysis of informal online discourse for determin-
ing the political beliefs of forum participants (Malouf and
Mullen 2008).
Large-scale online sentiment analysis in the context of
tracking political trends is often done with intent of pre-
dicting or influencing the results of the upcoming elections
(Murray and Scime 2010; Grosskreutz et al. 2010). News
sources are a valuable source of information for tracking
informal political discourse as well and are often analyzed
alongside the associated blogs (Gamon et al. 2008).
Roll call voting data has been incorporated in various leg-
islative studies (Clinton et al. 2004; Jackman 2001). Special
attention has been given to incorporating recording bias into
the models in order to ensure the correctness of the analysis
(Carruba et al. 2006).
Modern information systems can also be quite useful
for the general public, as they enable voters to directly
express their opinions on certain public policy proposals
(Charalabidis et al. 2012; Loukis and Charalabidis 2012;
Charalabidis and Koussouris 2012) and interact with the
government via e-government systems (Rana et al. 2013;
Weerakkody et al. 2013; Janssen et al. 2012). These crowd-
sourcing legislative models represent a step towards a
more open and direct democracy. Some information sys-
tems are capable of detecting the early spread of political
misinformation, whether random or intentionally induced
(Ratkiewicz et al. 2011).
Ways of dealing with factual inconsistencies and the dis-
semination of misinformation are becoming a necessity.
The public seems to be overwhelmed with media infor-
mation and is often unable to reliably distinguish between
facts and fabrications. This is why some media groups
have begun working on specialized fact-checking services,
introducing truth-o-meters and databases of statements
and promises. PolitiFact (http://www.politifact.com/) is one
such service. The Serbian analogue is the Istinomer website
(http://istinomer.rs/) that we will be analyzing in this paper.
PolitiFact and Istinomer are not the only initiatives for
establishing ground-truth factual information about politi-
cal discourse. Some notable examples include http://www.
truthfulpolitics.com/ and http://www.factcheck.org/.
3 Overview of the proposed approach
The proposed approach for detecting patterns of truthfulness
in political promise data involves multiple steps. Figure 1
gives a brief outline of the major components and goals in
the analysis. All of these steps will be discussed in full detail
in the following Sections.
Fig. 1 A high-level overview of the proposed approach for analyzing
political promise data
The approach relies on two separate feature extraction
components. The syntactic component provides the basic
textual representation used in the analysis. This syntactic
representation is semantically enriched by topic extraction
in order to enable topic-level analysis of the data. These
representations are then used either separately or combined
in subsequent steps in the analysis. Topic-level representa-
tion is better suited for pattern mining while the enriched
syntactic representation can be used for similarity-based
prediction and prototype selection or clustering.
For different languages, the process can be either fully
automated or semi-automatic. This depends on the over-
all availability of natural language processing tools and
services for each language in particular.
4 Data
Information retrieval approaches implicitly assume that the
fetched data had not previously been falsified and that the
overall noise levels are acceptably low. However, in heated
political debates, opposing politicians often make entirely
opposite claims and there is a high level of inaccurate
or false information being spread. The discourse data is
spread over diverse heterogenous sources and knowledge
integration remains a difficult technical challenge.
In our analysis, we have focused on using the expert
annotated political promise/statement data. In Serbia, this
service is provided by Istinomer, similar to the PolitiFact
Truth-o-Meter in the US.
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 2 An example from the
Istinomer website: a promise
given by Mirko Cvetković
stating that the size of the
government is going to be
reduced in January 2011. This
promise was not fulfilled
4.1 The Istinomer project
Istinomer is a non-government project lead by a group of
news reporters, political analysts and actively participating
citizens that help in populating the database of political
statements, promises, comments and insults. The readers
may participate by proposing certain actions and initiatives.
The goal of the Istinomer team is, as stated on the webpage,
to enforce responsibility when addressing the public and to
keep the people from forgetting the controversial events and
affairs.
Fig. 3 The number of promises given by politicians and processed by
Istinomer, aggregated by politician
The content offered via the Istinomer web portal is
divided into several sections. The major sections include:
promises, truthfulness, consistency, insults, investigations,
look-back, notes, topics, polls and a list of tracked political
figures. The truthfulness section covers the statements that
are obviously false at the time when they are given, when
a simple check is sufficient to uncover the real truth. The
promises section deals with the announcements of future
plans, promises that are given to the voters at a certain time
in order to gain their trust and support. An example is given
in Fig. 2.
Even though analyzing the factual truthfulness data is
interesting in its own right, this paper focuses on analyz-
ing the truthfulness of political promises instead. Factual
truthfulness can more easily be checked with little or no
computer aid, so there is less need for using automated
analytic support systems. However, truthfulness of given
promises can not be reliably estimated at the time when they
are given. This is where automated profiling can potentially
be useful.
The following information is provided within each
promise page: title, upload date, date of the initial statement,
politician name, short statement (usually a sentence or two,
sometimes more), as well as a one-line contextual clarifica-
tion and a comment/analysis by the Istinomer team. Public
comments are allowed, but rarely used, so most articles
contain no user comments.
We have analyzed both the short political statements
themselves and the more detailed Istinomer comments
(pruned of certain words, see Section 4.2). The latter are
similar in content to news articles reporting on promises and
statements in real-time.
4.2 Preprocessing and data representation
We have implemented a web-crawler in Java and down-
loaded the content of the webpages containing the reviews
of the political promises on the Istinomer website. The data
was crawled on 21.7.2013., so the data contains only the
promises that were evaluated and published on the web-
site up to that point. This dataset comprises 1380 promise
statements and comments made by 273 different politicians.
The distribution of promises is highly skewed to the right,
as shown in Fig. 3. Most statements in the corpus were given
by a small number of very influential officials and many
Inf Syst Front
Table 1 Fuzzy quantification of qualitative truthfulness estimates
Qualitative estimate θ
“the work has not even started” 0
“unfulfilled” 0
“started but then stopped” 0.25
“working on it” 0.5
“almost fulfilled” 0.75
“fulfilled” 1
politicians have only 1 or 2 assigned promises. This follows
the distribution of political power, as the more powerful
politicians are able to make and fulfil more promises. Addi-
tionally, they are the usually in the focus of political studies,
so this might also have been caused by a reporting bias.
The Istinomer promises data is not annotated with any
tags or keywords that might help with topic detection. This
means that all analysis must be based on the free text state-
ments and comments. The data is available exclusively in
Serbian.
Unlike for English, there is no stable and reliable text
mining and natural language processing toolkit for Serbian
that has been thoroughly tested in practice and used consis-
tently in various analytic projects. These tools are currently
being developed and improved by several research teams
(Vitas et al. 2003). Attempts are being made at building
an effective stemmer for Serbian (Vlado and Šipka 2008;
Milošević 2012), but a quick analysis reveals that this partic-
ular rule-based implementation does not perform very well
on complex texts and discussions.
A language-independent approach for handling state-
ment and comment texts was applied, via character n-grams
(Damashek 1995), instead of the more usual bag-of-words
representation. For reasons stated above, no stemming or
lemmatization was performed.
Character n-grams have been successfully used in the
past in many text mining applications, including plagia-
rism detection (Stamatatos 2009), document categorization
(Cavnar and Trenkle 1994), authorship attribution (Keṡelj
Fig. 5 The best and worst promise keepers, among those that have
given at least 5 promises
et al. 2003) and named entity recognition (Klein et al. 2003).
Previous studies have shown that using n = 4 is a good
choice for most European languages, so we have followed
this recommendation and used 4-character long sequences
in our own analysis of the Istinomer data.
Some comments had an explicit mention of whether
the promises were fulfilled or not within the comment
text, so all the occurrences of “fulfilled” (“ispunjeno”) and
“unfulfilled” (“neispunjeno”) were removed from Istinomer
comments prior to extracting the n-grams. Also, all of the
special punctuation characters have been removed from the
texts and all the whitespace characters have been merged
Fig. 4 The distribution of
truthfulness in Istinomer
promise data
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 6 The number of positive
topic matches in Istinomer
promise comments and
statements
to a single whitespace delimiting separate words. All words
were transformed to lower case.
We have implemented a simple n-gram extractor in Java
and have generated the n-gram representations both for the
statements and the associated comments made by the Isti-
nomer team. In the following analysis, we will examine
the results obtained from the statement and comment data
separately.
The short statement texts were merged with the one-
sentence contextual clarifications, that contain some basic
semantic information and nothing that would point directly
towards the truthfulness of the statements. Here is an exam-
ple of a statement context: “TheMinister of Education about
the construction of the student dormitory in Čačak.” (“Min-
istar prosvete o izgradnji studentskog doma u Čačku.”). This
contextual clarification was given for the statement where
the minister promised that the construction of the dormitory
will begin on June 1st 2013, which has not been fulfilled.
4.3 Quantifying truthfulness
Each Istinomer article presents an evaluation of a certain
political promise both in form of a free text comment and
a truth-o-meter score. This score is qualitative and can take
one of the following values: “the work has not even started”
(“ni započeto”), “unfulfilled” (“neispunjeno”), “started but
Fig. 7 The average truthfulness
of topics automatically extracted
from Istinomer promise
comments
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 8 The number of promises
made by government officials in
Serbia, over the past couple of
years
then stopped” (“krenuli pa stali”), “working on it” (“radi
se na tome”), “almost fulfilled” (“skoro ispunjeno”), “ful-
filled” (“ispunjeno”). In order to be able to measure cumu-
lative truthfulness over many statements, we have decided
to assign each of these qualitative grades with a number
θ ∈ [0, 1], approximately quantifying the truthfulness of the
statement. The fuzzy approximation was done as shown in
Table 1.
It should be noted that this fuzzy interpretation of the
qualitative promise fulfilment tags is not unique and not
necessarily optimal. Ideally, we would be working directly
with the objective quantitative scores obtained by collabo-
rative grading. In practice, such high-quality evaluations are
rarely available and are not provided for Istinomer database.
The overall truthfulness of political promises in Serbia
is very low, the average being merely 0.305 - which is far
less than 50 %. It is also much less than what was reported
in some similar studies for other European countries (PÃtry
2009), where the authors claimed that the political parties
fulfill 67 % of their promises, on average. This discrepancy
might indicate that there is an actual difference in truthful-
ness and that the overall truthfulness in Serbia is lower than
in most developed democracies or, alternatively, that there
was a certain data acquisition bias. It might be the case that
the Istinomer team is focusing on unfulfilled promises for
delivering their critique or that the previous studies have
had a similar positive bias for interpreting truthfulness rates.
The distribution of truthfulness in Istinomer promise data is
shown in Fig. 4.
The least truthful and most truthful promise makers
are shown in Fig. 5. The two least truthful promise mak-
ers, according to Istinomer data (by July 2013), are Zoran
Jakovljević and Miloš Miloševic, the ex-mayor and city
councilor of Valjevo and the ex-mayor of Šabac. They
are closely followed by Velimir Ilić, a controversial figure
and the founder of the ‘New Serbia’ political party. As
for the promise fulfillers, Goran Knežević seems to have
the highest truthfulness score, regardless of the aflatoxin
controversy in 2013 (http://goo.gl/uhXg2Z). The second
best promise fulfiller is Mileta Mihajlov, the ex-mayor of
Zrenjanin.
4.4 Topic extraction
Different promises relate to different types of social
and economic problems. In order to perform a detailed
analysis of the political statements, it is necessary to
assign some higher-order semantics to the processed state-
ments. We propose to approach the problem by automat-
ically detecting the topics from statement and comment
texts.
Forming topic models from text is a difficult task and
various types of approaches have been developed in the
past, including clustering (Seo and Sycara 2004), keyword-
based approaches (Wartena and Brussee 2008), singular
value decomposition and independent component analysis
(Hamamoto et al. 2005), as well as the frequently used
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (AlSumait et al. 2008).
Many of these approaches are unsupervised and based on
an assumption that the full set of topics is not known
in advance. However, the political statements address cer-
tain topics of public interest that can easily be defined
manually.
In our analysis of Istinomer data, we have manually
defined 25 different topics, as follows: Police, Judicial,
Organization Director, Local, Business, Energy, Privatisa-
tion, Political Parties, Public, Law, Money, Elections, Dead-
line, Sports, Infrastructure, Natural Disasters, European
Union, Pensions, Resignations, Humanitarian, Kosovo,
Education, Culture, Health, Ecology. Many of these topics
Fig. 9 Governments in Serbia,
in the period analyzed in the
Istinomer data
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 10 The average ‘age’ of
evaluated promises, measured in
days
pop up very frequently in daily political debates. Court pro-
cesses (topic: Judicial) have been separated from passing
laws (topic: Law), since applying and proposing regulations
are two different things.
Automatic topic detection in statements and comments
was performed via regular expressions that contained sets
of of positive and negative indicator keywords for each
topic within the text. The used keywords were mostly stems
of words that are often used in certain contexts. A list of
keywords was compiled after several iterations of careful
examination of the Istinomer data and the vocabulary that is
used within the texts.
The vocabulary that the politicians use when addressing
the public is kept quite simple, unlike in literary texts. This
is beneficial for this type of regular expression topic extrac-
tion. In fact, an initial evaluation of the implemented regular
expression based topic extraction component showed good
performance on the observed subsample of the comment
data. It achieved a precision of 95 % and a recall of 91 %,
which is quite satisfactory given its simplicity. In future
work we intend to explore more complex topic models as
well in order to achieve even better performance and to
make the approach easier to generalize to other data sources
that incorporate richer vocabularies and more challenging
phrasing.
Figure 6 shows the number of positive topic matches
for statements and comments, respectively. Not surprisingly,
there were more topic matches among the comments (6368
compared to 3265), as they are much longer than the state-
ments themselves. More than 2 topics per statement are
detected on average and more that 4 topics per comment.
This is quite satisfactory. Also, the shape of the two discrete
topic distributions is very similar.
In both topic distributions, Business and Local are the
next leading topics. The Local topic discusses issues regard-
ing governance of individual cities or regions. They are
followed by several other frequent topics: Money, Public,
Law, Infrastructure, Political Parties, Education, European
Union and Police. The least frequent topic is the humani-
tarian one. It should also be noted that the detected topic
frequency is not directly correlated with the number of key-
words used for topic detection and is not an artefact of the
topic extraction process.
Different levels of truthfulness can be seen when address-
ing different topics, as shown in Fig. 7. Serbian politicians
are most truthful when addressing humanitarian issues in
case of natural disasters and least truthful when addressing
the elections, infrastructure, privatisation and the European
Union. It should be mentioned, though, that the high truth-
fulness in case of humanitarian issues stems from a very low
number of positive humanitarian examples in the Istinomer
promise dataset.
4.5 Measuring promise similarity
In some of the following experiments, mostly in Sections 6
and 8, a similarity-based analysis of the promise data is
discussed. As the data is represented by the standard vec-
tor space model (Raghavan and Wong 1986) in the 4-gram
feature space, the similarity between two statements and/or
comments is defined as the cosine similarity between the
corresponding vectors (Feldman and Sanger 2006). V =
Fig. 11 The number of fulfilled
and unfulfilled promises of
various ages
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 12 The evolution of
truthfulness in Serbian political
discourse, based on Istinomer
promise data
[v1, v2..vW ] is the 4-gram vocabulary that defines a |V |-
dimensional feature space. Statements and comments are
represented as vectors of weights, determined by the widely
used TF-IDF (term frequency, inverse document frequency)
rule (Feldman and Sanger 2006). Let P be the set of all
examined promises and let xi = [x1i , x2i . . . xWi ] and xj =[x1j , x2j . . . xWj ] be the vectors representing two promise
texts. The cosine similarity between the promises is then
calculated as in Eq. 1.
sim( xi, xj ) = xi · xj‖ xi‖·‖ xj ‖ =
∑W
z=1 xzi ·xzj√
(
∑W
z=1(xzi )2)·(
∑W
z=1(xzj )2)
(1)
5 Visualizing the emerging trends
Political discourse evolves over time and changes with gov-
ernments, coalitions, treaties, as well as various internal
and external factors. As the promise and evaluation dates
were attached to each Istinomer article, we have used this
information to plot several interesting temporal trends.
Figure 8 shows the temporal promise landscape - the
number of promises given by various government officials
changes over time in a non-uniform way. The curve is far
from smooth, with many maxima and minima. The last
major recorded peak was in 2012, at the time of the Ser-
bian parliamentary and presidential elections (see Fig. 9).
These elections were quite uncertain until the very end and
all the involved parties were trying to convince the voters
by promising many improvements and future investments.
The apparent decline at the very end of the curve is a bit
deceiving, as there might be some long-term promises there
that are yet to be evaluated by the Istinomer team in the
future.
After a promise is made, some time needs to pass
before its truthfulness can be evaluated, as large projects
take a lot of time to complete. Therefore, there is a
notable delay between the dates at which the statements
are made and the evaluation dates when Istinomer com-
ments are posted on the website. Figure 10 shows the
temporal evolution of the average time between the promise
statement and the promise evaluation. Even though there
are some short-term promises that are immediately evalu-
ated, the average evaluated promise age often exceeds one
year. This means that there are many long-term projects
that have been announced. Unfortunately, according to the
assigned truthfulness score, most of them have not been
accomplished.
The number of fulfilled and unfulfilled promises for
different promise ages is shown in Fig. 11. There is essen-
tially the same number of fulfilled and unfulfilled promises
among those that are evaluated within a month or two
from when they are made. Afterwards, there is a much
higher number of unfulfilled that fulfilled promises, across
the examined promise age range. This indicates that the
very short term promises might be somewhat easier to
fulfil.
Fig. 13 The evolution of
business and EU topics in
Istinomer promise data
Inf Syst Front
The average promise fulfillment levels have evolved over
time with different ruling governments and this trend is
shown in Fig. 12. Unfortunately, there is very little data for
the period prior to 2008 and it has only been one year since
the 2012 elections at the time this data is being analysed
- so we are unable to make statistically valid comparisons
between the truthfulness of different ruling coalitions at this
time.
Promise topics also evolve over time. We have gen-
erated the monthly-binned topic trends for all the topics
extracted from statements and comments. Figure 13 shows
the co-evolution of business and European Union men-
tions in Serbian political promises. There is an interesting
trend: each peak in EU mentions corresponds to an even
larger peak in business-related promises. This might indi-
cate that the government is considering all sorts of trade
agreements and EU-based investments and projects at the
same time when it is working on finishing certain stages of
the process towards the EU membership. Of course, the cor-
relation could partly also be attributed to the overall increase
in promise rates at certain pre-election times, though it
would not be able to account for most of the existing peak
alignments.
6 Typical statements as promise hubs
In order to better summarize the data, it is useful to exam-
ine the central and most influential concepts, in this case
- the most typical promises being made in various top-
ics. We have extracted the typical promise statements by
analyzing the promise n-gram feature representations and
exploiting some recently described high-dimensional phe-
nomena related to the structure of the k-nearest neighbor
graphs (kNN).
Textual data is intrinsically high-dimensional, due to its
rich semantics. Therefore, it is known to exhibit substan-
tial hubness (Nanopoulos et al. 2009). In intrinsically high
dimensional data, centers of influence emerge as exceed-
ingly frequent k-nearest neighbors, under many common
similarity measures. These highly influential points are
known as hubs. Hubness is an important phenomenon,
since k-nearest neighbor methods are widely used in many
machine learning systems and applications.
Let Nk(xi) denote the total neighbor k-occurrence fre-
quency of xi . The overall hubness of the datasets is defined
as the skewness of the neighbor occurrence frequency dis-
tribution, as follows:
SNk =
1
n
∑n
i=1(Nk(xi) − k)3
( 1
n
∑n
i=1(Nk(xi) − k)2)3/2
(2)
A high skewness of the neighbor occurrence distribution
means that a small number of points occurs very frequently
in k-neighbor sets (hubs) and most points either never occur
as neighbors or do so very rarely. Hubs are, therefore, on
average, very similar to many other points, which allows
them to become frequent neighbors in the feature space. The
hubness phenomenon is closely related to the concentration
of distances (François et al. 2007), a pathological behavior
of many standard metrics in intrinsically high-dimensional
data.
In high-dimensional feature spaces, data lies approxi-
mately on hyper-spheres around local cluster means. It has
recently been shown that the neighbor occurrence frequency
is highly correlated with cluster centrality (Tomašev et al.
2013) and that hubs emerge as the most central concepts in
the observed metric space.
Due to their centrality, hubs can be used as cluster pro-
totypes (Tomašev et al. 2013) and they are often used as
representatives when analyzing PPI (protein-protein interac-
tion) networks (He and Zhang 2006), where they often play
the role of essential proteins. They have also been used for
representing typical word meanings (Agirre et al. 2006).
Fig. 14 The k-neighbor occurrence frequency skewness (hubness) of
promise statements and comments in 4-gram representations, under
cosine similarity, for several different neighborhood sizes (k)
Inf Syst Front
The Istinomer promise data exhibits very high hubness,
as shown in Fig. 14. Any value of SNk > 1 can be con-
sidered high, and here the neighbor occurrence skewness
exceeds 20, both for the statements themselves and the asso-
ciated comments. This means that the Istinomer promise
data harbours hubs and that it is possible to extract the cen-
tral and influential concepts by finding the major hubs in the
data.
In order to extract the typical promises, we have con-
structed a 1-NN graph both for statement and comment
texts and calculated the neighbor occurrence frequencies.
The hub articles with most occurrences have been taken as
typical promise representatives.
We have applied the proposed approach for detecting
topic-specific typical statements, by looking for the major
hubs as the most frequent nearest neighbors among the
articles within separate topics. The list of typical topic-
specific statements extracted as major topic-hubs is shown
in Table 2. In the Money topic, the article on highway
construction was assigned to it because a bank loan is men-
tioned in the statement text. “Several weeks, several weeks”
is an article that sets the deadline for passing a strategy for
Kosovo. In the statement under the title “I will be a presi-
dent of Serbia, not of SNS”, Tomislav Nikolić promises to
resign as the president of SNS if he gets elected president
of Serbia, which he did. All extracted hub promises seem to
correspond well to their topics.
7 Detecting similar promise-makers
We have compared politicians based on their promise-
making profiles. It is possible to create these profiles both
from the statement and the comment texts - and it is possible
to use either the n-gram representation or the assigned topic
model. We have performed all 4 possible types of similar-
ity comparisons. Truthfulness was not taken into account in
this particular case.
We have created the politician promise-making profiles
by averaging the representation vectors that represent all the
promises that they have made. The n-gram promise repre-
sentations were previously weighted by TF-IDF. The cosine
similarity was used to measure the similarity between differ-
ent politicians. In Table 3, we report the top 5 most similar
Table 2 The most typical statements for all the automatically extracted topics individually, selected based on article hubness
Topic Title (original) Title (translation) θ
Police Novi Sad dobija načelnika policije Novi Sad is going to get a chief of police 0
Judicial Advokati, izdavaćete fiskalne račune! Lawyers will issue fiscal bills. 0
Org. Director Novi Sad dobija načelnika policije Novi Sad is going to get a chief of police 0
Local A načelnika nema And the chief is not there 0
Business Jura u Leskovcu do kraja 2011. Jura in Leskovac by the end of 2011 0.75
Energy Model otkupa električne energije do 10. jula Model of electric energy purchase by July 10th 0
Privatisation Privatizacija JATa do kraja godina Privatisation of JAT by the end of the year 0.25
Political Parties Resori čekaju na većnike Sections are waiting for city councilors 0
Public Sa Bosnom protiv kriminala With Bosnia against crime 1
Law Penzije 70 % plate Pensions 70 % of the salaries 0.25
Money Autoput počinje, samo ugovor da imamo Starting with the highway, we only need a contract 0
Elections Ja predsednik Me president 0
Deadline Socijalni zakon na čekanju The ‘social law’ on wait 0
Sports Jagodinski plivači na suvom Swimmers in Jagodina are left dry 0
Infrastructure Izbori donose autoput Elections will bring the highway 0
Natural Disasters Pomoć za poplavljeni jug Aid for the flooded South 0.75
European Union I Evropa će nam zavideti na porezima Europe will envy us for our taxes 0
Pensions Penzije 70 % plate Pensions 70 % of the salaries 0.25
Resignations Biću predsednik Srbije a ne SNS I will be a president of Serbia, not of SNS 1
Humanitarian Srpsko-ruski humanitarni centar Serbian-Russian humanitarian center 1
Kosovo Nekoliko nedelja, nekoliko nedelja Several weeks, several weeks 1
Education Niški studenti dobijaju dom The students in Niš are getting a dormitory 0
Culture Medijska strategija na pomolu Media strategy on the horizon 1
Health Kraće liste čekanja Shorter waiting lists 0
Ecology Na proleće muljamo mulj In Spring we will be mulling the mud 0
Inf Syst Front
Table 3 The most similar promise-makers
(a) Similarity based on average extracted statement topics
Igor Pavličić Miloš Simonović
Dragan Šutanovac Zoran Drobnjak
Zoran Stanković Tomica Milosavljević
Milan Krkobabić Dragan D̄ilas
Miloš Simonović Slobodan Kocić
(b) Similarity based on average extracted comment topics
Igor Pavličić Dragan D̄ilas
Igor Pavličić Miloš Simonović
Miloš Simonović Dragan D̄ilas
Mlad̄an Dinkić Mirko Cvetković
Mileta Mihajlov Dragan D̄ilas
(c) Similarity based on average extracted statement n-grams
Zorana Mihajlović Petar Škundrić
Goran Knežević Dušan Petrović
Zoran Stanković Tomica Milosavljević
Mlad̄an Dinkić Nebojša Ćirić
Dušan Petrović Saša Dragin
(d) Similarity based on average extracted comment n-grams
Zorana Mihajlović Petar Škundrić
Slobodan Homen Snežana Malović
Mlad̄an Dinkić Nebojša Ćirić
Zoran Stanković Tomica Milosavljević
Igor Pavličić Dragan D̄ilas
politicians, according to each of the 4 examined approaches.
Only the politicians that made at least 5 promises were taken
into account, in order to avoid trivial similarities between
almost empty representation vectors.
Many of the reported similarities can easily be accounted
for. Igor Pavličić, DraganD̄ilas, Miloš Simonović, Mileta
Mihajlov and Slobodan Kocić are all current or former
city mayors and Milan Krkobabić was an advisor to the
mayor of Belgrade for a while. Zoran Stanković and Tom-
ica Milosavljević have both led the Ministry of Health in the
past. Goran Knežević, Saša Dragin and Dušan Petrović were
both ministers of agriculture and both Mlad̄an Dinkić and
Nebojša Ćirić are economic experts. Zorana Mihajlović and
Petar Škundrić were heads of the Ministry of Energetics.
We can conclude that our models are able to auto-
matically infer semantically correct connections between
different current and ex government officials based on their
previous statements. This also means that people in similar
positions tend to make similar types of promises. An exam-
ple in Fig. 15 is given by a comparison between Mlad̄an
Dinkić and Mirko Cvetković, who were both leading the
finance sector at their time.
These comparisons between the topic models of different
politicians are possible for any pair of politicians tracked
by the Istinomer team and we hope that they might help
in revealing some potentially interesting correlations in the
context of political promise tendencies.
8 Promise fulfilment prediction
There are many reasons why some promises might remain
unfulfilled or only partially fulfilled. Sometimes, there is
no true intent for fulfilling a promise and it is only made
to appease the public short-term and advertise or promote
the political party prior to elections. At other times, it might
be due to incompetence or a lack of required organiza-
tional and management skills. Finally, it might just be a
random confluence of unexpected events. However, if the
promises are being made responsibly and carefully, such
random problems should not be occurring too frequently.
Our hypothesis was that political promise fulfilment is
not entirely random and that there exist some patterns
and regularities that could be discovered via standard data
mining techniques.
8.1 Discovering hidden patterns with association rules
Association rule mining (Adamo 2001) is frequently used
in data analysis (Cagliero and Fiori 2013; Hong et al. 1999)
as it allows for unsupervised pattern discovery. Many algo-
rithms exist that enable association rule extraction and they
are implemented across a variety of data mining libraries. In
our experiments, we have used the MagnumOpus software
(http://www.giwebb.com/).
Fig. 15 A comparison between
the promise comment topic
models of Mlad̄an Dinkić and
Mirko Cvetković, displaying
high average topic similarity
Inf Syst Front
The approach was applied to a list of topic vectors
extracted from the Istinomer article comments, extended
by truthfulness and politicians’ names. Truthfulness was
set as the target attribute for prediction. The numeric
ranges for truthfulness were set as θ ∈ [0, 0.5] and
θ ∈ (0.5, 1]. This way, we have aggregated the promises
that were mostly fulfilled and those that were mostly not
fulfilled.
There are several ways to rank the association rules based
on their informativeness (Adamo 2001). We have decided
to rank them based on rule strength (confidence) (Agrawal
et al. 1993), followed by leverage (Piatetsky-Shapiro 1991),
for tie-breaking. Rule confidence measures the probability
of the right-hand side being true, given the left hand side.
Leverage also takes coverage into account.
Table 4 a list of top association rules extracted from
Istinomer promise data, as ranked by the MagnumOpus
association rule discovery tool. All of the below listed rules
have a confidence of 1 and are only distinguished by the
leverage, which measures statistical dependence between
the involved variables on the left hand side and the right
hand side.
All of the strongest rules shown in Table 4 predict a
low chance of promise fulfillment. Rule AR4 says that if a
promise involves the elections and the European Union, it is
most likely not going to be fulfilled. Even more prominent
is AR2, where we see that promises that involve building
new infrastructure right before, during or after the elec-
tions and are initiated by certain political parties are also
most likely not going to be fulfilled. The promises made by
Mlad̄an Dinkić involving elections and the promises made
by Petar Škundric involving monetary issues of loans and
investments are not likely to be fulfilled.
While the more general uncovered truthfulness patterns
may not come as a surprise to those familiar with the proper-
ties of general political discourse, the person-specific rules
can be very helpful in understanding and interpreting the
emerging political trends. In particular, it is possible to
observe these rules in aggregate, based on political party
affiliation and political orientation of the politicians being
observed.
However, these rules are not so appropriate for on-line
real-time promise fulfilment prediction. Strong rules have
a rather low coverage, so it would not be possible to apply
them very often. While these rules remain a useful abstrac-
tion of the semantics in the discourse, they do not take into
account all of the promise content and some of the discarded
details can prove to be very useful for prediction as they
relate to the exact phrasing of promises and more specific
micro-topics.
Table 4 The strongest association rules for predicting the promise truthfulness on Istinomer data
Index Association rule Conf. Lever.
AR1 Politician=Igor Pavličić ∧ Topic=Public =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0033
AR2 Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Elections ∧ Topic=Infrastructure =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0031
AR3 Topic=Energy ∧ Topic=Public ∧ Topic=Law =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0033
AR4 Topic=Elections ∧ Topic=European Union =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0031
AR5 Politician=Oliver Dulić ∧ Topic=Infrastructure =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0029
AR6 Topic=Law ∧ Topic=Deadline ∧ Topic=Infrastructure =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0027
AR7 Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Law ∧ Topic=Money ∧ Topic=Deadline =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0025
AR8 Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Elections ∧ Topic=Deadline =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0025
AR9 Topic=Police ∧ Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Sports =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0025
AR10 Politician=Božidar Delić ∧ Topic=Public =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0025
AR11 Topic=Public ∧ Topic=Law ∧ Topic=Culture =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0025
AR12 Politician=Slobodan Homen ∧ Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Public ∧ Topic=Law =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0023
AR13 Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=European Union ∧ Topic=Elections =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0023
AR14 Politician=Milan Marković ∧ Topic=Public =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0023
AR15 Topic=Law ∧ Topic=Elections =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0023
AR16 Politician=Milutin Mrkonjić ∧ Topic=Education =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0023
AR17 Politician=Petar Škundrić ∧ Topic=Money =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0020
AR18 Politician=Mlad̄an Dinkić ∧ Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Elections =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0020
AR19 Topic=Police ∧ Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Elections =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0020
AR20 Topic=Energy ∧ Topic=Political Parties ∧ Topic=Public ∧ Topic=Law =⇒ θ ≤ 0.5 1 0.0020
Inf Syst Front
Table 5 Promise fulfilment prediction on Istinomer promise data
(a) Statement texts
Perf. Not true! θ(Pol.) AV Gm(θ) kNN HIKNN NHBNN NB NB(kNN) NB(HIKNN)
FM1 0.27 0.32 0.38 0.38 0.39 0.33 0.32 0.31 0.38
Acc. 66.6 % 59.6 % 57.4 % 62.1 % 61.1 % 56.3 % 50.7 % 62.2 % 61.5 %
Errθ 0.31 0.33 0.30 0.33 0.33 0.37 0.36 0.31 0.33
(b) Comment texts
Perf. Not true! θ(Pol.) AV Gm(θ) kNN HIKNN NHBNN NB NB(kNN) NB(HIKNN)
FM1 0.27 0.32 0.38 0.38 0.39 0.34 0.32 0.31 0.36
Acc. 66.6 % 59.6 % 57.4 % 58.3 % 58.5 % 56.3 % 50.9 % 64.9 % 56.9 %
Errθ 0.31 0.33 0.30 0.36 0.38 0.35 0.35 0.30 0.36
Average estimator performance is shown, after examining all the promises in chronological order. Best result in each line is given in bold
8.2 Evaluating different promise fulfilment prediction
strategies
We have implemented and examined several different
approaches for promise fulfilment prediction based on n-
gram textual representations and extracted topic models.
These approaches were also compared to some simple base-
lines. The promises were evaluated in the chronological
order and the predictive models were built incrementally as
new promises were made and evaluated.
Zero-rule (“Not true!”) was taken as the first base-
line, due to a high percentage of unfulfilled promises.
For the second baseline, we have considered the average
truthfulness of the politician, up until that time (θ(Pol.)).
The third baseline was the moving average of truthfulness
within a short time-window m (AV Gm(θ)), where we have
used m = 5.
We have evaluated the performance of kNN, HIKNN
(Tomašev and Mladenić 2012), NHBNN (Tomašev et al.
2011) and Naive Bayes (NB) (Witten and Frank 2005).
Furthermore, we have investigated a hybrid approach of
using either kNN or HIKNN to determine the priors in
the Naive Bayes rule. We will refer to these variants
as NB(kNN) and NB(HIKNN). Only the positive topic
matches were used as features in both NB(kNN) and
NB(HIKNN). Using the local neighborhood information in
Naive Bayes is quite common and we wanted to see if the
n-gram and topic representations could be used together
for better prediction performance. In the k-nearest neighbor
approaches, the neighborhood size of k = 1 was used, as
it gave the best results for this particular data in our initial
experiments.
Three different classes were defined, based on the truth-
fulness scores. Promises with truthfulness θ < 0.375
were considered ‘probably false’. Promises with truthful-
ness 0.375 ≤ θ < 0.625 were considered ‘undetermined’.
Finally, promises with truthfulness 0.625 ≤ θ were consid-
ered ‘probably truthful’.
Even though the labels have been assigned to certain
truthfulness ranges, the prediction models themselves were
trained on the fuzzy truthfulness scores θ and have been set
to return a fulfillment prediction value between 0 and 1. Bin-
ning was performed afterwards and had no impact on model
training.
Due to a high class imbalance of the Istinomer promise
data, which is highly skewed towards the negative exam-
ples, the macro-averaged F1 score (FM1 ) was taken as a
primary evaluation metric (Witten and Frank 2005). It is fre-
quently used for class imbalanced classification evaluation.
The global accuracy was also calculated, as well as the error
in truthfulness probability itself.
Table 5 gives a summary of average estimator per-
formances. Clearly, trying to predict promise truthfulness
based on short statement texts alone is not an easy task. The
highest average accuracy is actually achieved by zero-rule,
which assigns a truthfulness of θ = 0 to every statement
it encounters. The moving average of truthfulness achieves
the lowest error in probability, though it still remains high.
The content-based approaches achieve a significantly
higher FM1 score than zero-rule or θ(Pol.). This shows that
Fig. 16 The evolution of FM1 score in truthfulness prediction, over
time
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 17 The evolution of truthfulness prediction accuracy, over time
it is possible to utilize at least some of the textual informa-
tion correlated with promise fulfillment. Also, disregarding
the zero-rule, the content-based methods achieve a signifi-
cantly higher accuracy than the other two baselines. This is
important, as the zero-rule does not in fact attempt to make
meaningful truthfulness predictions. Saying that everything
is false might be fairly accurate on such imbalanced data,
but it is not a potentially useful real-life estimation strategy
(Table 5).
Estimating promise truthfulness from the detailed com-
ments seems not to be better than basing the decisions
on the short statements. It also seems that the aug-
mented automatically extracted topic vectors do not encode
enough truthfulness-related information. Naive Bayes per-
forms very badly on this data. However, the topic vectors
themselves are still useful in other contexts, as we have
already seen that they can be used to capture semantically
correct similarities between different politicians (Section 7).
The hybrid approaches were not much better than the
rest, though they did clearly outperform the basic Naive
Bayes, suggesting that correctly setting the priors is quite
important.
HIKNN, a hubness aware kNN method, achieved the
highest FM1 score, though it was not significantly better than
kNN. As kNN is easier to interpret and implement, we will
focus on kNN as the primary estimator in the remaining
discussion.
Fig. 18 Precision of different truthfulness estimation methods on dif-
ferent types of promises. Truthful and partially truthful promises seem
to be much more difficult to recognize than those that are mostly or
entirely false and end up not being fulfilled
Fig. 19 The 5 most predictable major promise makers, based on kNN
truthfulness estimation
Figures 16 and 17 show that the average performance
summaries do in fact reflect a difference between the
compared approaches, as their average performance met-
rics remain clearly separated over time, as promises are
introduced and evaluated.
In Fig. 17, it can be seen that the accuracy of all
approaches is decreasing along with the increasing truth-
fulness of promises (this easily follows from the drop
in zero-rule performance). This indicates that it might be
more difficult to detect the positive examples, promises that
are probably going to be fulfilled. Therefore, most errors
are pessimistic, in a sense that the truthful promises are
being estimated as non-truthful. This has been confirmed
by examining the confusion matrices. Figure 18 shows dif-
ferent truthfulness class precisions for different estimators
on Istinomer promise data. The truthfulness skewness of the
dataset certainly plays a role in the pessimistic bias of the
models, but other factors might be involved as well.
A detailed analysis of the results has revealed that the
prediction precision varies for different politicians and dif-
ferent topics, as some tend to be easier and some more
difficult to predict accurately.
On average, better prediction precision is achieved for
the politicians that fulfil fewer promises, as prediction qual-
ity is better for the less likely promises. A list of 5 most
predictable promise makers and 5 least predictable promise
Fig. 20 The 5 least predictable major promise makers, based on kNN
truthfulness estimation
Inf Syst Front
Fig. 21 The precision of kNN
truthfulness estimation for
different automatically extracted
topics on Istinomer promise data
makers (with at least 5 promises in the database) is shown
in Figs. 19 and 20, respectively.
The least predictable major promise maker, based
on kNN, is Slobodan Kocić. His Istinomer promise
profile reads as follows (according to the considered
promises by July 2013): 3 unfulfilled promises, 2 projects
that have not been started, still working on 2 projects
and 1 promise that has been fully fulfilled. The most pre-
dictable major promise maker, based on kNN, is Veroljub
Stevanović. Out of his promises, 3 have not been ful-
filled and 3 have been started and aborted. In other words,
all 6 of them belonged to the merged ‘probably false’
truthfulness category that was used in precision/accuracy
calculations.
There results suggest that it is still possible to achieve
a high truthfulness prediction accuracy for certain promise
makers. It might be possible to develop separate content-
based truthfulness models for different politicians instead,
in order to improve the prediction performance.
Similarly, it seems that not all topics are equally well
suited for the similarity-based kNN approach. This can
be seen in Fig. 21. The k-NN truthfulness estimator was
best at estimating the truthfulness of promises pertaining to
Kosovo, Culture, Elections and Privatisation.
9 Conclusions
We have implemented a pipeline for analyzing Serbian
political discourse by applying standard data mining and
visualization techniques to an information system of anno-
tated political promises publicly available on the Serbian
Truth-o-meter (Istinomer) website.
The textual data was represented via n-grams and was
semantically enriched by a set of 25 topics that were semi-
automatically extracted from the text.
Topical promise profiles were generated for the politi-
cians present in the data and were used alongside n-gram
representations for cross-politician comparisons. The com-
parisons have revealed that politicians in similar roles tend
to make similar promises. This shows that the chosen data
representation is able to capture the hidden semantics in the
data and is appropriate for conducting further analysis.
In order to better summarize the topics, we have pro-
posed to use statement hubs as promise prototypes. This
possibility is backed up by recent discoveries in high-
dimensional data clustering and analysis. This might help
with gaining quick insights into the topical statement
structure.
Statement topic vectors were used for discovering truth-
fulness patterns in Istinomer data via association rules. The
analysis has revealed some interesting correlations. Most
of the strong rules predict negative outcomes, promises not
being fulfilled.
Several truthfulness estimators were implemented and
estimated incrementally on chronologically ordered state-
ments. The content-based methods outperformed most sim-
ple baselines in terms of the FM1 score, but had a lower
accuracy compared to a baseline that views all promises
as ‘probably false’, which is a consequence of severe class
imbalance in the data. However, the results suggest that
some topics and politicians are easier for prediction than
others, so it should be possible to make future improve-
ments, by using feature selection and metric learning.
The proposed approach is language-independent and
can easily be used for analyzing political statements from
other countries, in cases where the appropriate annotated
databases of factual political statements exist and are pub-
licly available.
10 Limitations of the proposed approach
and future work
While the proposed method enables us to gain some useful
insights, there is plenty of room for improvement.
The truthfulness labels assigned by the annotators are
highly subjective and it is unclear whether the fuzzy inter-
pretation presented in the paper can fully capture the under-
lying semantics. This is a limitation in data collection.
Inf Syst Front
Ideally, the truthfulness grades would be assigned collabora-
tively by integrating opinions frommultiple experts, thereby
reducing the bias in the data and assigning each promise
a singular quantitative score that is the overall truthfulness
estimate.
The data that was used focuses on the most prominent
politicians and their statements. It does not provide full
coverage of the political discourse. It may be beneficial to
attempt to extract the promises and statements automatically
from large news corpora instead, in order to achieve better
coverage. Such extracted statements might then be pruned
and evaluated by human annotators.
Finally, the textual analysis could employ some recently
developed language-independent techniques for represen-
tation learning (Mikolov et al. 2013), as well as entity
extraction. Topic extraction can also be more automated,
which would make it easier to build the final enriched
statement representation. More mature techniques might
allow for the development of interactive software that would
enable people to gain better understanding of the political
process.
References
Adamic, L., & Glance, N. (2005). The political blogosphere and the
2004 U.S. election: Divided they blog. In In LinkKDD’05: Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd international workshop on Link discovery
(pp. 36–43).
Adamo, J. (2001). Data Mining for Association Rules and Sequential
Patterns: Sequential and Parallel Algorithms. Berlin: Springer.
Agirre, E., Martı́nez, D., de Lacalle, O.L., & Soroa, A. (2006). Two
graph-based algorithms for state-of-the-art WSD. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 585–593).
Agrawal, R., Imieliński, T., & Swami, A. (1993). Mining associa-
tion rules between sets of items in large databases. SIGMOD Rec,
22(2), 207–216.
AlSumait, L., Barbara, D., & Domeniconi, C. (2008). On-line LDA:
Adaptive topic models for mining text streams with applications
to topic detection and tracking. In Eighth IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) (pp. 3–12).
Baccianella, A.E.S., Sebastiani, F., & Sentiwordnet 3.0 (2010). An
enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10). European
Language Resources Association (ELRA), Valletta, Malta.
Balasubramanyan, R., Routledge, B.R., & Smith, N.A. (2010). From
tweets to polls : Linking text sentiment to public opinion time
series.
Cagliero, L., & Fiori, A. (2013). Discovering generalized association
rules from twitter. Intelligent Data Analysis, 17(4), 627–648.
Campbell, J.E. (2008). Evaluating u.s. presidential election forecasts
and forecasting equations. Int. J. Forecast., 24(2), 259–271.
Carruba, C., Gabel, M., Murrah, L., Clough, R., Montgomery, E., &
Schambach, R. (2006). Off the Record: Unrecorded Legislative
Votes, Selection Bias and Roll-Call Vote Analysis. Br. J. Polit. Sci.,
36(4), 691–704.
Cate, F.H., Dempsey, J.X., & Rubinstein, I.S. (2012). Systematic gov-
ernment access to private-sector data. International Data Privacy
Law, 2(4), 195–199. doi:10.1093/idpl/ips027.
Cavnar, W.B., & Trenkle, J.M. (1994). N-gram-based text catego-
rization. In Proceedings of SDAIR-94, 3rd Annual Symposium on
Document Analysis and Information Retrieval (pp. 161–175).
Charalabidis, Y., & Koussouris, S. (Eds.) (2012). Empowering Open
and Collaborative Governance - Technologies and Methods for
Online Citizen Engagement in Public Policy Making: Springer.
Charalabidis, Y., Triantafillou, A., Karkaletsis, V., & Loukis, E.
(2012). Public policy formulation through non moderated crowd-
sourcing in social media, (pp. 156–169): Springer.
Cliffe, L., Ramsay, M., & Bartlett, D. (2000). The politics of lying:
Implications for democracy: St Martin’s Press.
Clinton, J., Jackman, S., & Douglas, R. (2004). The Statistical Analy-
sis of Roll Call Data. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev., 2, 355–370.
Custers, H., Calders, T., & Zarsky, T. (2013). Discrimination and Pri-
vacy in the Information Society: Data Mining and Profiling in
Large Databases. Studies in applied philosophy, epistemology and
rational ethics: Springer.
Dai, H.J., Chang, Y.C., Tzong-Han Tsai, R., & Hsu, W.L. (2010).
New challenges for biological text-mining in the next decade. J.
Comput. Sci. Technol., 25(1), 169–179.
Damashek, M. (1995). Gauging similarity with n-grams: Language-
independent categorization of text. Science, 267(5199), 843–849.
Danna, A. (2002). Gandy OscarH., J.: All that glitters is not gold: Dig-
ging beneath the surface of data mining. J. Bus. Ethics, 40(4), 373–
386.
Dörre, J., Gerstl, P., & Seiffert, R. (1999). Text mining: finding
nuggets in mountains of textual data. In Proceedings of the fifth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, KDD ’99 (pp. 398–401). New York: ACM.
doi:10.1145/312129.312299.
Fairclough, I., & Fairclough, N. (2013). Political Discourse Analysis:
A Method for Advanced Students: Taylor & Francis.
Feldman, R., & Sanger, J. (2006). The Text Mining Handbook:
Advanced Approaches in Analyzing Unstructured Data: Cam-
bridge University Press.
François, D., Wertz, V., & Verleysen, M. (2007). The concentration of
fractional distances. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 19(7), 873–886.
Gamon, M., Basu, S., Belenko, D., Fisher, D., Hurst, M., & Konig,
A.C. (2008). BLEWS: Using Blogs to Provide Context for News
Articles. In ICWSM, 2008.
Greenberg, J. (2010). There’s nothing anyone can do about it: Partic-
ipation, apathy, and ”successful” democratic transition in postso-
cialist serbia. Slav. Rev., 69(1), 41–64.
Grosskreutz, H., Boley, M., & Krause-Traudes, M. (2010). Subgroup
discovery for election analysis: A case study in descriptive data
mining. In Discovery Science (pp. 57–71). Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer.
Hamamoto, M., Kitagawa, H., Pan, J.Y., & Faloutsos, C. (2005).
A comparative study of feature vector-based topic detection
schemes a comparative study of feature vector-based topic detec-
tion schemes. InWeb Information Retrieval and Integration, 2005.
WIRI ’05. Proceedings. International Workshop on Challenges in
(pp. 122–127).
He, X., & Zhang, J. (2006). Why Do Hubs Tend to Be Essential in
Protein Networks PLoS Genet., 2(6).
Helbing, D., & Balietti, S. (2011). From social data mining to forecast-
ing socio-economic crises. The European Physical Journal Special
Topics, 195(1), 3–68.
Hong, T.P., Kuo, C.S., & Chi, S.C. (1999). Mining association rules
from quantitative data. Intelligent Data Analysis, 3(5), 363–376.
Inf Syst Front
Howard, P.N. (2005). Deep democracy, thin citizenship: The impact of
digital media in political campaign strategy. The ANNALS of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 597(1), 153–
170. doi:10.1177/0002716204270139.
Jackman, S. (2001). Multidimensional Analysis of Roll Call Data via
Bayesian Simulation: Identification, Estimation, Inference, and
Model Checking. Polit. Anal., 9(3), 227–241.
Jackson, P., & Moulinier, I. (2007). Natural Language Processing
for Online Applications: Text retrieval, extraction and categoriza-
tion. Second revised edition. Natural Language Processing: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Janssen, M., Charalabidis, Y., & Zuiderwijk, A. (2012). Benefits,
adoption barriers and myths of open data and open government.
Inf. Syst. Manag., 29(4), 258–268.
Keṡelj, V., Peng, F., Cercone, N., & Thomas, C. (2003). N-gram-
based author profiles for authorship attribution. In Proceedings of
the conference pacific association for computational linguistics,
PACLING, (Vol. 3 pp. 255–264).
Klein, D., Smarr, J., Nguyen, H., & Manning, C.D. (2003). Named
entity recognition with character-level models. In Proceedings of
the seventh conference on Natural language learning at HLT-
NAACL, CONLL ’03., Association for Computational Linguistics
(pp. 18–183). USA: Stroudsburg. doi:10.3115/1119176.1119204.
Liu, B. (2007). Opinion mining. In Web Data Mining, Data-Centric
Systems and Applications (pp. 411–447). Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer.
Loukis, E., & Charalabidis, Y. (2012). Participative public policy mak-
ing through multiple social media platforms utilization. Int. J.
Electron. Gov. Res., 8(3), 78–97. doi:10.4018/jegr.2012070105.
Malouf, R., & Mullen, T. (2008). Taking sides: user classification for
informal online political discourse. Internet Research, 18(2), 177–
190.
Maragoudakis, M., Loukis, E., & Charalabidis, Y. (2011). A review of
opinion mining methods for analyzing citizensâĂŹ contributions
in public policy debate. In Electronic Participation (pp. 298–313).
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. In ICLR
Workshop.
Milošević, N. (2012). Stemmer for Serbian language: ArXiv e-prints.
Miner, G., Elder, J., Hill, T., Delen, D., & Fast, A. (2012). Practical
Text Mining and Statistical Analysis for Non-Structured Text Data
Applications. Academic Press: Academic Press.
Mostafa, M.M., & El-Masry, A.A. (2013). Citizens as con-
sumers: Profiling e-government servicesâĂŹ users in egypt via
data mining techniques. Int. J. Inf. Manag., 33(4), 627–641.
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.03.007.
Murray, G.R., Riley, C., & Scime, A. (2009). Pre-election polling:
Identifying likely voters using iterative expert data mining. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 73(1), 159–171. doi:10.1093/poq/nfp004.
Murray, G.R., & Scime, A. (2010). Microtargeting and elec-
torate segmentation: Data mining the american national elec-
tion studies. Journal of Political Marketing, 9(3), 143–166.
doi:10.1080/15377857.2010.497732.
Nanopoulos, A., Radovanović, M., & Ivanović, M. (2009). How does
high dimensionality affect collaborative filtering? In Proceedings
of the third ACM conference on Recommender systems, RecSys ’09
(pp. 293–296). USA: ACM.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis.
Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 2(1-2), 1–135. doi:10.1561/1500000011.
Piatetsky-Shapiro, G. (1991). Discovery, analysis and presentation of
strong rules. InKnowledge Discovery in Databases (pp. 229–248):
AAAI Press.
PÃtry, F., Collette. (2009). In L.M. Imbeau (Ed.) Measur-
ing how political parties keep their promises: A positive
perspective from political science (Vol. 15, pp. 65–80). New York:
Springer.
Raghavan, V.V., & Wong, S.K.M. (1986). A critical analysis of vector
space model for information retrieval. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci., 37(5),
79–287. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(198609)37:5<279::AID-
ASI1>3.0.CO;2-Q.
Rana, N., Dwivedi, Y., & Williams, M. (2013). A meta-analysis of
existing research on citizen adoption of e-government. Inf. Syst.
Front., 1–17.
Ratkiewicz, J., Conover, M., Meiss, M., Gonçalves, B., Flammini,
A., & Menczer, F. (2011). Detecting and tracking political abuse
in social media. In Proc. 5th International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).
Sanches, P., Svee, E.O., Bylund, M., Hirsch, B., & Boman, M. (2013).
Knowing your population: Privacy-sensitive mining of massive
data Vol. 1: Network and Communication Technologies.
Scharl, A., & Weichselbraun, A. (2008). An automated approach to
investigating the online media coverage of U.S. presidential elec-
tions. Journal of Information Technology and Politics, 5(1), 121–
132. doi:10.1080/19331680802149582.
Seo, Y.W., & Sycara, K. (2004). Text clustering for topic detection.
Tech. Rep. CMU-RI-TR-04-03. Pittsburgh: Robotics Institute.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). Intrinsic plagiarism detection using character
n-gram profiles. In 3rd PAN Workshop. Uncovering Plagiarism,
Authorship and Social Software Misuse (pp. 38–46).
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2012). Social media and political com-
munication: a social media analytics framework. Soc. Netw. Anal.
Min., 1–15.
Tomašev, N., & Mladenić, D. (2012). Nearest neighbor voting in
high dimensional data: Learning from past occurrences. Computer
Science and Information Systems, 9, 691–712.
Tomašev, N., Radovanović, M., Mladenić, D., & Ivanović, M. (2013).
The role of hubness in clustering high-dimensional data. IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 99(PrePrints), 1.
Tomašev, N., Radovanović, M., Mladenić, D., & Ivanovicć, M. (2011).
A probabilistic approach to nearest neighbor classification: Naive
hubness bayesian k-nearest neighbor. In Proceeding of the CIKM
conference.
Uramoto, N., Matsuzawa, H., Nagano, T., Murakami, A., Takeuchi,
H., & Takeda, K. (2004). A text-mining system for knowledge
discovery from biomedical documents. IBM Syst. J., 43(3), 516–
533.
Vachudova, M.A. (2009). Corruption and compliance in the EU’s post-
communist members and candidates. JCMS: Journal of Common
Market Studies, 47, 43–62.
Vaidya, J. (2012). Privacy in the context of digital government. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Annual International Conference on Digital
Government Research, dg.o ’12 (pp. 302–303). New York: ACM.
doi:10.1145/2307729.2307796.
Vitas, D., Krstev, C., Obradović, I., Popović, L., & Pavlović-Lazetić,
G. (2003). An overview of resources and basic tools for processing
of Serbian written texts.
Vlado, K., & Šipka, D. (2008). A suffix subsumption-based approach
to building stemmers and lemmatizers for highly inflectional lan-
guages with sparse resources. INFOTHECA. Can. J. Inf. Libr. Sci.,
9(1), 23–33.
Wartena, C., & Brussee, R. (2008). Topic detection by cluster-
ing keywords. In 19th International Workshop on Database
and Expert Systems Application, 2008. DEXA ’08 (pp. 54–
58).
Weber, I., Garimella, V.R.K., & Borra, E. (2012). Political
search trends. In Proceedings of the 35th international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in informa-
tion retrieval, SIGIR ’12 (pp. 1012–1012). New York: ACM.
doi:10.1145/2348283.2348437.
Inf Syst Front
Weerakkody, V., Irani, Z., Lee, H., Osman, I., & Hindi, N. (2013). E-
government implementation: A birdâĂŹs eye view of issues rela-
ting to costs, opportunities, benefits and risks. Inf. Syst. Front., 1–27.
Witten, I.H., & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine
Learning Tools and Techniques, Second Edition (Morgan Kauf-
mann Series in Data Management Systems). USA: Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.
Zhong, N., Li, Y., & Wu, S.T. (2012). Effective pattern discovery for
text mining. Knowledge and Data Engineering. IEEE Transactions
on, 24(1), 30–44.
Nenad Tomašev is a software engineer. He received his PhD in
machine learning from the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at Jožef
Stefan Institute in Ljubljana, Slovenia in 2013. The focus of his
research was on machine learning in many dimensions and the phe-
nomenon of hubness in particular. In his research, Dr. Tomašev
designed novel algorithms for classification, clustering, metric learn-
ing, representation learning, ranking and instance selection. Dr.
Tomašev previously interned at Google and Telvent DMS. He also par-
ticipated in organizing summer schools in Višnjan and Petnica Science
Center.
