 http://tso.sagepub.com/
Teaching Sociology
 http://tso.sagepub.com/content/41/4/377
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1177/0092055X13490750
 2013 41: 377 originally published online 23 May 2013Teaching Sociology
Mary Nell Trautner and Elizabeth Borland
Using the Sociological Imagination to Teach about Academic Integrity
 
 
Published by:
 http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
 
 
 American Sociological Association
 can be found at:Teaching SociologyAdditional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 http://tso.sagepub.com/cgi/alertsEmail Alerts: 
 
 http://tso.sagepub.com/subscriptionsSubscriptions:  
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.navReprints: 
 
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.navPermissions: 
 
 What is This?
 
- May 23, 2013OnlineFirst Version of Record 
 
- Oct 1, 2013Version of Record >> 
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Teaching Sociology
41(4) 377 –388
© American Sociological Association 2013
DOI: 10.1177/0092055X13490750
ts.sagepub.com
Many students do not understand what kinds of 
behaviors are dishonest, and, perhaps even more 
troubling, many do not think of actions that faculty 
would consider to be academic dishonesty as prob-
lematic (Howard and Davies 2009; Jones 2011; 
Power 2009). Despite widespread institutional, 
departmental, and course-level policies promoting 
academic integrity,1 both classic and contemporary 
studies find academic dishonesty to be prevalent 
among college students. For example, LaBeff et al. 
(1990) found that more than half of students had 
engaged in dishonest behavior within a six-month 
period; fewer than 2 percent had been caught. 
More recently, Stephens, Young, and Calabrese 
(2007) and McCabe, Butterfield, and Trevino 
(2012) found that more than two-thirds of college 
students report some form of cheating behavior.
Instructors find such behaviors to be very trou-
blesome. Confronting students about plagiarism or 
other academic misconduct is unpleasant, and 
stopping cheating can create distance between 
faculty members and their students (Bertram Gal-
lant 2008). “Policing” academic dishonesty has 
been compared to a splinter that irritates (Murphy 
1990); it distracts instructors from ensuring that 
their students are learning (Bertram Gallant 2008) 
and from acting as mentors (Howard 2001). Even 
when they do confront students, faculty are reluc-
tant to bring forward official charges because of 
the time and effort involved (Moore 2002; Schnei-
der 1999).
In her book on plagiarism in college culture, 
anthropologist Susan Blum argues that there are 
two distinct “ideologies of quotation” (2009:58): 
490750 TSOXXX10.1177/0092055X134907
50Teaching SociologyTrautner and Borland
2013
1University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, NY, USA
2Department of Sociology and Anthropology, The 
College of New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, USA
Corresponding Author:
Mary Nell Trautner, Department of Sociology, University 
at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA. 
Email: trautner@buffalo.edu
Using the Sociological 
Imagination to Teach about 
Academic Integrity
Mary Nell Trautner1 and Elizabeth Borland2
Abstract
The sociological imagination is a useful tool for teaching about plagiarism and academic integrity, and, in 
turn, academic integrity is a good case to help students learn about the sociological imagination.  We present 
an exercise in which the class discusses reasons for and consequences of dishonest academic behavior and 
then examines a series of scenarios using the sociological imagination. Students and instructors consider 
whether each scenario is a violation of academic integrity norms and how it can be viewed as both 
personal and public. We demonstrate that this kind of discussion helps students learn about academic 
integrity and how to think of violations (including causes and a range of outcomes) sociologically. In other 
words, we encourage students to think of academic dishonesty (both causes and consequences) not just 
as “personal troubles” but also as “public issues.”
Keywords
ethics, sociological imagination, student writing
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
378  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
one generally held by faculty, which emphasizes 
authorship and authenticity of expression, and one 
often found among students, which places value on 
sharing and allowing “others to speak for or through 
them” (2009:65)—often using quotations and links 
to popular culture, a process facilitated by the Inter-
net. In fact, technology presents a variety of new 
ways to cheat and allows easy access to a wide array 
of tools for dishonest behavior. For example, dozens 
of videos on YouTube demonstrate cheating meth-
ods, a “how to” Wiki details more than 25 tech-
niques for cheating on a test,2 online paper mills 
abound, and Twitter makes it easy to look for papers 
from former students.3
A great deal of educational literature attempts 
to help faculty detect and prevent dishonest behav-
ior in their classrooms. Suggestions range from 
including clear academic integrity policies in 
course syllabi (e.g., Davis 2009; Svinivki and 
McKeachie 2011) to designing “plagiarism proof” 
assignments (e.g., Nilson 2010; Svinivki and 
McKeachie 2011), giving a quiz or homework 
assignment on plagiarism (e.g., Cizek 2003; 
Schuetz 2004), having students check their work 
using plagiarism-detection software such as Turnit 
in.com, or assigning online plagiarism modules, 
such as those found at Purdue University,4 The 
College of New Jersey,5 and elsewhere. While such 
practices may be helpful, the majority of these sug-
gestions and modules focus only on plagiarism, 
ignoring other kinds of academic dishonesty in 
which students might engage. They are also likely 
to be generic solutions and do not engage students 
in thinking about academic integrity as it relates to 
broader questions common in sociology.
Academic integrity is important for a number 
of reasons. As Whitley and Keith-Spiegel (2002) 
argue, academic dishonesty affects all students, not 
just those who cheat. Those who witness cheating 
and see no repercussions can become disillusioned 
with the educational system. Moreover, academic 
dishonesty exerts a toll on faculty, damages fac-
ulty-student relationships, and gets in the way of 
teaching and learning (Bertram Gallant 2008). At 
stake is the reputation of the institution and even 
public confidence in higher education.
Attention to such issues in the academic com-
munity is widespread. Our search of Higher Edu-
cation Abstracts, a journal that indexes more than 
200 education-related journals in a wide range of 
disciplinary fields, found 230 journal articles pub-
lished between 1992 and 2012 that included the 
phrases “academic dishonesty,” “plagiarism,” and/
or “academic integrity” in their abstracts. The arti-
cles cover a range of related topics, including stu-
dent behaviors and/or perceptions in particular 
disciplines (e.g., Eastman, Eastman, and Iyer 2012; 
Woith, Jenkins, and Kerber 2012), student self-
reports of dishonest behavior (e.g., Gaberson 1997; 
Marsden, Carroll, and Neill 2005), detection of 
academic dishonesty (e.g., Fulda 2009; Stamatatos 
2011), and prevention (e.g., Weidler, Multhaup, 
and Faust 2012; Williams and Hosek 2008).
Despite the importance of academic integrity 
and the fact that some have identified “plagiarism 
panic” to be “the quintessential new millennial 
dilemma” (Maruca  2006:241), there has not been 
much attention devoted to the topic in sociology. 
Only a small handful of studies in sociology jour-
nals have applied sociological theories to cheating. 
For example, Vowell and Chen (2004), Cochran 
et al. (1998), and Cochran et al. (1999) tested 
criminological theories in relation to academic 
dishonesty (including rational choice/deterrence, 
social bond, self-control, social strain, and differ-
ential association theories); LaBeff et al. (1990) 
and McCabe (1992) analyzed students’ rationales 
for cheating in terms of Sykes and Matza’s (1957) 
“techniques of neutralization”; and Pershing 
(2003) considered the use of neutralization when 
students decide how to respond to honor code vio-
lations. With regard to the sociological pedagogy 
literature, a quick search of the Teaching Sociology 
archives turned up only five articles that mention 
the word “plagiarism,” three that mention “aca-
demic dishonesty,” and two that use “academic 
integrity.” With the exception of Brezina (2000), 
who asked students to submit anonymous personal 
accounts about academic cheating and led a class 
exercise about motivations for this behavior in a 
discussion of deviance, none of these articles 
appear to have plagiarism or academic integrity as 
a central focus.
We propose an exercise that teaches and facili-
tates a discussion about academic integrity while at 
the same time teaching about the “sociological 
imagination” (Mills 1959) and helping students 
learn how it applies to the case of academic 
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Trautner and Borland 379
dishonesty. In this exercise, students use their 
sociological imagination to brainstorm and discuss 
(1) reasons why students sometimes behave dis-
honestly; (2) student-level, faculty-level, class-
level, and institutional-level effects of academic 
dishonesty; and (3) reasons why students and fac-
ulty might see the same behaviors differently. We 
present a series of six vignettes that address a wide 
range of behaviors—not just plagiarism—that may 
or may not be academically dishonest. For each 
scenario, the instructor leads a discussion about the 
situation, the reasons why it would be considered 
academically honest or dishonest behavior, and its 
implications.
We think this discussion exercise is more likely 
to foster student learning about academic integrity 
than are more individually oriented activities (e.g., 
those done online or at home). According to Blum 
(2009), academic dishonesty stems from a lack of 
communication between students and faculty and a 
kind of culture clash; thus, dialogue about faculty 
expectations can be a way to teach students about 
norms of citation and academic integrity, while 
recognizing student culture and norms about stu-
dent practices. Moreover, the context of the discus-
sion—couched in terms of the sociological 
imagination—is a good way to engage students in 
thinking about a familiar personal dilemma in 
broader terms, which reinforces a sociological 
perspective on the world around them and helps 
them to better understand the relationship between 
“personal troubles” and “public issues.” Because 
the sociological imagination is central to sociol-
ogy, this exercise is appropriate in a wide array of 
courses.
EXplANATION Of ThE EXErCISE
This exercise is a universal technique that is appro-
priate for almost any undergraduate sociology 
class and, depending on the instructor’s goals, 
could be effectively used to teach about academic 
integrity, the sociological imagination, or both. We 
have successfully used this exercise at a liberal arts 
college in classes of 15 to 30 and at a large public 
research university in classes of 60 to 80. 
Instructors should gauge course level to determine 
how much background students are likely to have 
in academic integrity policy and practice. We 
propose five or six vignettes below; instructors 
could use all of them or a selection and could tailor 
the vignettes to the course or students. The sce-
narios we present here are broadly applicable, but 
instructors could add or subtract vignettes. For 
example, for a course that involves an internship 
requirement, one could include a vignette about 
misreporting internship hours; for a course in 
which student attendance is monitored, one could 
add a vignette about “signing in” another student 
for attendance. Academic integrity policies at any 
given institution cannot cover the specifics of 
every possible violation, but this is an assignment 
that gets students thinking about academic integ-
rity in a way that is at once broad and anchored in 
the course and sociological material.
SETUp Of ThE EXErCISE
The first part of the exercise is to review the institu-
tion’s academic integrity policy with the class.6 
Policies are generally posted online, and if technol-
ogy is available to project the site on a screen, it 
might be helpful to show students how to navigate 
to the site and to review it together, highlighting the 
most important parts of the policy. If the classroom 
is not equipped to do this, instructors might want to 
print out a handout with this material.
In the second part of the exercise, the instructor 
should ask students to brainstorm about why students 
cheat and—if possible—note their responses in a list 
on the board. Students commonly make suggestions 
such as “everyone does it,” “they think it doesn’t mat-
ter,” “it’s an easy way out,” “they think they won’t get 
caught,” “they feel pressure to perform,” “they pro-
crastinate,” and (less often) “they don’t know any 
better.” In a large class, it might be appropriate to 
divide the class into small groups to brainstorm about 
why students violate academic integrity policies and 
then to share with the whole class as the instructor 
writes on the board. By building on responses, the 
instructor can reinforce them, perhaps by adding 
quotes to engage students (e.g., in response to the 
common rationale “procrastination,” Trautner shares 
a quote from her brother, who says, “Procrastination 
and desperation are wild-eyed lovers”). If students do 
not come up with some of the items the instructor 
wants to discuss, they can be added as the instructor’s 
contribution to the brainstorm.
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
380  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
After brainstorming, the instructor should lead a 
discussion on the listed items using the sociological 
imagination. Teachers can ask how “personal prob-
lems” like pressure to perform could be thought of 
as “public issues.” For example, for the item “they 
think it doesn’t matter,” one could use follow-up 
questions to draw out public consequences. Instruc-
tors might question whether dishonesty matters 
more for some majors than others (specifically, 
would cheating matter if a doctor, accountant, or 
engineer cheated through his or her training?). The 
instructor can also inquire how academic dishon-
esty might matter to a college or university—does 
it cheapen the value of the college’s degree? It is 
valuable to ask students to consider an instructor’s 
perspective and how dishonest behavior in one 
class might have repercussions for future students 
whom that instructor will teach.
We discuss the rationales “they think they 
won’t get caught” and “they don’t know any bet-
ter” by highlighting a 2004 case in which a UK 
student, penalized for plagiarism in his final year 
of schooling, tried to sue his university for not 
catching him sooner. The student said, “If they had 
pulled me up with my first essay at the beginning 
and warned me of the problems and consequences, 
it would be fair enough. But all my essays were 
handed back with good marks and no one spotted 
it” (BBC News 2004). Using this or other media 
reports—possibly by showing the articles on 
screen in class—can help to illustrate some of the 
implications of academic integrity in a way that 
engages student interest and encourages discussion 
and interaction.
DISCUSSION Of VIgNETTES
After brainstorming about why students might 
engage in dishonest behavior, we tell them to reflect 
on hypothetical cases presented as vignettes (see 
Table 1), asking whether the cases violate the insti-
tution’s policy. We use PowerPoint slides to present 
each vignette individually, but if this is impossible, 
one could read the vignette aloud or ask a student 
volunteer to do so. Before presenting the vignettes, 
instructors should change the names so that no stu-
dent’s name in the class is used. Vignettes are par-
ticularly well suited to broaching such a dialogue 
because they are a good way to get people to con-
sider sensitive topics they might otherwise put off or 
distance themselves from (Barter and Renold 1999; 
Finch 1987; Schoenberg and Ravdal 2000).
Table 1.  Vignettes.
Vignette 1. Jane writes a paper for an Introduction to Management course on the topic of “flexible 
Workplace Benefits in a Diverse Workforce.” The following year, in a class on Benefits and Compensa-
tion, she submits the same paper. has she behaved dishonestly? (Illustrates misrepresentation.)
Vignette 2. Kristen was absent with bronchitis for a week. She obtained the notes from Bob and copied 
them. Kristen then used the notes to study for the upcoming midterm exam. has she behaved dishon-
estly? (Illustrates no dishonest behavior; red herring.)
Vignette 3. Sarah and peter were lab partners in a chemistry class. One week they split the 30 homework 
problems in half. Sarah did the odd numbers and peter did the even numbers. They met Sunday night 
to share the answers. On Monday, Sarah and peter individually submitted the completed 30 problems. 
have they behaved dishonestly? (Illustrates misrepresentation.)
Vignette 4. Jeff is writing a paper for a political science class. he needs to describe the workings of the 
British parliamentary system. he has a source that explains the system very concisely and well. he 
can’t think of a better way to summarize the system, so he uses some of the exact phrases of the 
source interspersed among his own words. he cites the source at the end of the paragraph. has he 
behaved dishonestly? (Illustrates plagiarism.)
Vignette 5. robert writes an excellent essay on the causes of crime for his criminology class and offers it 
for sale the following year. has he behaved dishonestly? (Illustrates facilitating plagiarism.)
Vignette 6. A professor distributes a review sheet to students in Organic Chemistry. Jessica answers 
all the questions on the review sheet and sells it to other students. has she behaved dishonestly? 
(Illustrates new possible violation of academic integrity, intellectual property violation, facilitation of 
plagiarism, cheating.)
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Trautner and Borland 381
Vignette 1 is a clear case of misrepresentation: 
The student resubmits a paper that she wrote for 
another class. According to common institutional 
policies, it is academically dishonest to submit 
required material that has been previously submit-
ted—in whole or in substantial part—in another 
course, without the new (and sometimes previous) 
instructor’s prior and expressed consent. This is a 
good opportunity for instructors to illustrate their 
own policies about previously submitted work; for 
example, one might encourage students to speak 
with the instructor about how to extend a project 
from another class. To apply the sociological imagi-
nation, the instructor can ask how this “double dip-
ping” can be seen as a “public issue” and how it 
affects students (e.g., encourages academic laziness, 
forecloses a chance to learn from the assignment), 
faculty (e.g., facilitates distrust of students, wastes 
their time), the class (e.g., equity), and the institu-
tion (e.g., credentials graduates with less mastery in 
research and writing). It may also be useful to ask 
students to consider the same example applied to 
situations or professions other than academia, for 
example, a journalist who “recycles” writing.
We include Vignette 2, an example of students 
sharing notes as they prepare for an exam, as a “red 
herring”—to illustrate the point that some collabo-
ration can be helpful. The instructor may want to 
illustrate how this would be the case in the course. 
We find that this scenario helps “break the ice” in 
conversations about academic integrity. It also 
offers the chance to think about a positive case in 
terms of the sociological imagination (how stu-
dents, faculty, the class, and the institution can 
benefit from an ethos of cooperation).
Vignette 3 is another case of misrepresentation, 
for the lab partners in the example are passing off 
someone else’s work as their own. Including this 
vignette would be particularly helpful in courses 
where students complete homework and dishonest 
collaboration might be tempting. However, it 
might also be good to include it in courses where 
this is not a problem as a precursor to Vignette 4 
(on plagiarism), so students get used to talking 
about the cases in a nonthreatening fashion.
One of the most important scenarios for sociol-
ogy courses is in the plagiarism case presented by 
Vignette 4. Discussing this vignette brings up the 
need to paraphrase and quote properly, and the 
instructor can review how to use citations. This is 
also a good time to discuss how tempting it is to 
use Internet sources like Wikipedia but that stu-
dents must learn to use their own words and not 
copy other people’s phrasings. Instructors can 
review any specific policies about sourcing for 
course assignments (e.g., use of peer-reviewed 
articles). Again, the class could brainstorm about 
how the personal problem of feeling unable to find 
a better way to phrase the information might be 
seen as a public issue in terms of technology and 
easy access to others’ writings and also could dis-
cuss how and why such actions might be viewed 
differently by the student, the instructor, class-
mates, and the institution.
We include Vignettes 5 and 6—cases of selling 
papers and answer sets—to address increasingly 
common practices. The first (Vignette 5) is a gen-
erally agreed upon example of dishonest behavior, 
and almost every student easily recognizes why 
selling (or purchasing) a course paper is dishonest. 
However, there is a lot of variability with regard to 
the second (Vignette 6), and despite a proliferating 
market for such services,7 many universities do not 
in fact have clear policies with regard to the selling 
and buying of academic materials other than 
papers. Instructors themselves might have differ-
ent perspectives on the issue, so we think it is 
especially important for faculty to make clear to 
students their own policies. The vignette’s exam-
ple arose for Trautner in 2011 when she learned of 
a student who was selling online study guides for 
her course to other enrolled students (for $6 each). 
During the discussion of this vignette, some stu-
dents revealed that they routinely receive 5 to 10 
emails from other students selling course materials 
before every exam, in every class. While the level 
of usage of websites selling course materials will 
vary by campus, and instructors have a range of 
arguments for or against this practice, Trautner 
framed the discussion in terms of violating The 
University at Buffalo’s policies against “selling . . . 
any inappropriate assistance in the preparation, 
research, or writing of any assignment” (Univer-
sity at Buffalo 2013). She argued that instructors 
view exam study guides as an opportunity to learn 
and review and that selling a completed study 
guide to another student is in fact selling assistance 
in the preparation of an assignment (the exam).
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
382  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
In class discussions, we have found students to be 
most vocal about Vignettes 1 and 6. In response to 
Vignette 1, about 25 percent of students in both 
classes we evaluated spoke up and about half of these 
argued they have a right to use any original work they 
have completed for any purpose, at any time. Some 
students have difficulty understanding the institu-
tion’s norms against such use; thus, it is helpful for 
them to consider the views of others. For many of the 
same reasons, students struggle with Vignette 6 
(although this may vary by campus culture). From a 
seller’s perspective, they wonder why they should not 
be free to profit from their hard work, and from a 
buyer’s perspective, they wonder how buying a 
review sheet that someone else created is any differ-
ent from hiring a tutor or using the popular study 
guide CliffsNotes. In this case, again, it is useful for 
students to consider others’ perspectives and for 
instructors to make very clear their own views and 
course expectations.
There are numerous other possible vignettes that 
instructors might consider including in addition to, 
or instead of, those in Table 1. For example, the 
instructor might include a vignette about changing 
graded exam answers to claim they were graded 
incorrectly or misrepresenting a family emergency to 
postpone an exam. Another idea is to use actual cases 
from the home institution, stripped of all identifying 
material. As an anonymous reviewer suggested, 
using real cases of academic dishonesty might make 
the vignettes more meaningful to students.
In this exercise, we concluded our conversation 
about academic integrity with a step-by-step dis-
cussion of what happens in cases of suspected 
violations and of our institutions’ particular poli-
cies regarding student rights and the possible pen-
alties that may be applied. In technology-equipped 
classrooms, it may be useful to return to the institu-
tion’s website to review the specific policy.
METhODS Of EVAlUATION
We had three goals in designing and implementing 
this exercise. We wanted students to better under-
stand the sociological imagination, to better under-
stand policies and issues surrounding academic 
integrity, and to see the relationship between the 
two. Our evaluation of the exercise demonstrates 
that we achieved all three goals.
We assessed the effectiveness of this exercise 
through a pretest/posttest survey in two classes at two 
institutions. The first class is an 80-student, 300-level 
criminology elective at Buffalo, a large, research-
intensive state university that enrolls approximately 
20,000 undergraduate and 10,000 graduate students. 
The class attracts students from a wide range of 
majors, as there are no prerequisites. While 58 per-
cent of students are sociology majors, 34 percent 
come from other social science majors and a few 
from humanities (5 percent) or professional schools 
(3 percent). In contrast, the second class, a 16-stu-
dent, 300-level applied sociology elective at The 
College of New Jersey (TCNJ), a liberal arts college 
that enrolls about 6,000 undergraduate students, is 
dominated by sociology majors (100 percent in the 
semester studied). Introduction to Sociology is a pre-
requisite, and the majority of students had taken sev-
eral sociology courses before taking this class (the 
average was 4 courses). Table 2 presents a variety of 
information about the students and courses.
We administered the pretest to both sets of stu-
dents on the very first day of class. We asked students 
to define the sociological imagination in their own 
words and to rate their confidence in their knowledge 
of their institution’s academic integrity policies on a 
7-point scale. We asked the same questions in the 
posttest survey, which was administered one week 
after the vignette exercise and discussion. In addition, 
we asked students whether they learned anything new 
about academic integrity (and, if so, what they 
learned), whether they believed it was effective to 
examine academic integrity using the sociological 
imagination (and to elaborate why or why not), and 
whether the discussion enhanced their understanding 
of the sociological imagination or academic integrity. 
Other than learning that the TCNJ students start out 
with more accurate definitions of the sociological 
imagination, we found no significant differences 
between the students at the two institutions in terms 
of the outcomes reported here, and thus we combine 
both classes in our discussion of the results.
UNDErSTANDINg ThE 
SOCIOlOgICAl IMAgINATION
We scored students’ open-ended definitions of 
the sociological imagination on a 3-point scale. 
Responses were scored as 2 if they effectively 
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Trautner and Borland 383
demonstrated understanding of the relationship 
between personal troubles and public issues and/or 
biography and history: for example, “To connect 
personal problems to social issues. Putting things 
into a broader context; taking things usually under-
stood on an individual level and understanding them 
as a more public issue,” or “When someone can see 
their private troubles and how they relate to public 
issues, they have a sociological imagination. How 
your biography relates to history.” We applied a 
fairly stringent standard, only awarding a score of 2 
to responses that demonstrated full understanding.
We scored responses as 1 if they demonstrated 
some understanding of the relationship between 
individual and society but not a complete articula-
tion of that relationship linked with the concept 
(personal troubles and public issues, or history and 
biography): for example, “the idea that we are a 
product of our surroundings” or “society and indi-
viduals being connected.” These responses indi-
cated that students had some knowledge of the 
sociological imagination argument but did not 
articulate a complete sense of it. Some responses 
in this category omitted the notion of the individ-
ual (biography, personal problems): “a way of 
thinking and explaining events using whatever 
knowledge you may have about society.”
Finally, we scored responses as 0 if they were 
left blank, if they stated “I don’t know” or some-
thing similar, if they simply restated the question, 
or if they noted something that did not demonstrate 
any knowledge of the meaning of the concept at 
all. Examples included “the reason why people do 
things,” “means that an individual thinks about the 
world in an imaginary way,” “an imagination or 
creative outlook on society,” “creativity in sociol-
ogy,” or “being able to view the world through a 
sociological lens.” If the student only mentioned 
C. Wright Mills in their response without defining 
the concept, we coded the response as 0.
Our analysis of student definitions of the socio-
logical imagination suggests that the exercise was 
very effective in helping students learn the con-
cept. On the first day of class, just 6 of the 94 stu-
dents who took the pretest (6 percent) scored 2 for 
their definition, and only 8 (9 percent) scored 1. 
The remaining 80 students (85 percent) scored 0. 
In contrast, 40 of the 84 students who took the 
posttest scored 2 (48 percent), 17 scored 1 (20 
percent), and 27 scored 0 (32 percent). We per-
formed a t test to compare the difference in means 
for the pretest and posttest definition scores for 
each student who took both tests, which resulted in 
a t value of −9.256, significant at the .000 level.8
Table 2. Comparison of the Two Cases.
Institution Buffalo TCNJ
Course 300-level criminology elective 300-level applied sociology elective
Class size 80 undergraduates 16 undergraduates
Schedule Two 80-minute blocks One 180-minute block
prerequisites None Sociology 101
percentage of sociology majors 58% 100%
gender composition 66% women 75% women
 34% men 25% men
Age composition 94% traditional 100% traditional
race/ethnic composition 63% white 75% white
 13% African American 19% African American
 5% hispanic or latino/a 6% hispanic or latino/a
 8% Asian American  
 5% Arab American  
 6% international  
Class standing 60% seniors 38% seniors
 30% juniors 31% juniors
 8% sophomores 31% sophomores
 2% first years  
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
384  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
Such differences were evident in students’ writ-
ten definitions. For example, one student scored 0 
in the pretest after writing “to think of the world in 
a sociological way” but scored 2 in the posttest by 
writing “to connect personal problems to social 
issues.” Another student wrote in the pretest “I 
think a sociological imagination would be when 
one thinks of ideas and how they reflect on soci-
ety” and in the posttest “When someone can see 
their private troubles and how they relate to public 
issues they have a sociological imagination. [It’s] 
how your biography relates to history.” A third 
went from defining the sociological imagination as 
“thinking outside of usual thoughts” to “sociologi-
cal imagination is society and individuals being 
connected.” In total, 15 students moved from 0 in 
the pretest to 1 in the posttest, 31 moved from 0 to 
2, and 5 moved from 1 to 2. Two students lowered 
their scores from the pretest to the posttest, and 28 
students did not change their score. Overall, what 
this taught us, as instructors, is that many students 
need a review of the sociological imagination, 
even if they have previously taken numerous soci-
ology courses. We think it is a worthwhile concept 
to review in each sociology course, as it is an 
important perspective for the discipline and mas-
tery is likely to be an iterative process.
We acknowledge that the definitions that students 
provided do not necessarily demonstrate evidence of 
deep learning of the sociological imagination. We 
asked them simply to provide brief definitions of 
what the sociological imagination means to them; we 
did not ask them to write essays or papers or to oth-
erwise demonstrate a full understanding of the con-
cept. However, the definitions that students provided 
before and after the exercise were different enough 
from one another that we feel comfortable in assert-
ing learning. In addition, 67 percent of students 
“strongly” or “somewhat” agreed that the discussion 
enhanced their understanding of the sociological 
imagination. Twenty-seven percent neither agreed 
nor disagreed, and 6 percent “somewhat disagreed.” 
No student “strongly” disagreed.
UNDErSTANDINg ACADEMIC 
INTEgrITY
Students began class on the first day very confi-
dent in their knowledge of their institution’s 
academic integrity policies. On a 7-point scale, in 
which 1 was labeled “not confident” and 7 was 
labeled “very confident,” 89 percent (n = 84) 
marked themselves above the midpoint, as 5, 6, or 7 
(nearly half of these students, n = 40, marked the 
highest category, 7). Seven students put themselves 
at the midpoint, and three rated their confidence at 
3. No student rated herself or himself as 1 or 2. A 
week after the exercise, however, 79 percent of 
students said that they had learned something new 
about academic integrity during the exercise, and 87 
percent of students “strongly” or “somewhat” 
agreed that the exercise increased their knowledge 
of academic integrity policies (seven students nei-
ther agreed nor disagreed, two students somewhat 
disagreed, and one student strongly disagreed).
Sixty-three students elaborated on what they 
learned, and their responses generally fell into six 
categories. The majority of students (n = 31, 48 
percent) commented about learning something 
about a particular kind of dishonest behavior. For 
example, one student wrote, “Things that I con-
sider ok are not necessarily right, for example 
splitting homework with your friend to half even 
half odd. I feel that is ok but apparently it is being 
dishonest.” Another student wrote, “I did not know 
about issues regarding selling or buying course 
materials,” and another wrote, “I had no idea that 
using a past paper for a present assignment was 
wrong!”
Other students (n = 10, 16 percent) just made 
general comments indicating that they had learned 
more about academic integrity as a whole, for 
example, “I feel like after our discussion I am more 
knowledgeable when it comes to [our institution’s] 
academic integrity policies,” or “That there are 
many forms of academic integrity not just plagia-
rism.” Nineteen percent of students (n = 12) com-
mented that they learned that there can be multiple 
interpretations about behaviors considered to be 
dishonest or that there are “gray areas.” For exam-
ple, “Some issues may be accepted by some and 
not accepted by another.” Two students remarked 
that the discussion reinforced what they already 
knew about academic integrity. As one student 
wrote, the discussion provided “some clarification 
with examples.”
These responses (and the preceding discussion) 
revealed to us, as instructors, how vague and open 
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Trautner and Borland 385
to interpretation institutional policies can be. We 
learned that we need to be very clear about our 
own interpretations and to address our policies up 
front. Because students and instructors can read 
the same policy very differently, it is not enough to 
simply reference the university policy in our syl-
labi or first days of class.
UNDErSTANDINg ThE 
rElATIONShIp BETWEEN 
ACADEMIC INTEgrITY AND ThE 
SOCIOlOgICAl IMAgINATION
A number of students demonstrated that they 
understood the relationship between academic 
integrity and the sociological imagination. Five 
students (8 percent) wrote that they learned some-
thing about faculty or university perspectives on 
academic integrity. For example, one wrote, “I did 
not realize how much academic integrity affected 
the professor as well as the student,” and another 
wrote, “I learned that there are implications for the 
faculty such as not being able to adequately assess 
learning.” Finally, three students (5 percent) wrote 
that they learned something new about the rela-
tionship between sociology and academic integ-
rity. As one student wrote, “I hadn’t thought about 
academic integrity in terms of sociology before 
and really the reasons behind the dishonesty as 
sociological.”
Other students made similar comments about 
sociology in response to our question about the 
overall effectiveness of the exercise. For example, 
one student wrote, “It was an interesting way to 
apply to sociology to something that has been lec-
tured to us so much.” In fact, 34 students (47 per-
cent of those who offered an elaboration) 
commented that the exercise was useful in broad-
ening their perspective about academic integrity in 
some way: “Academic dishonesty/integrity can 
have far reaching effects that go beyond just get-
ting a better grade. The ‘imagination’ can help you 
see those things,” “It was effective because it 
allowed us to view these policies from the outside 
and not as students,” “Effective—it takes your 
action (i.e., cheating on a test) and connects it to a 
social force bigger and broader (it affects the stu-
dents in your class, the average grade, etc.),” “It 
was effective because most people believe aca-
demic integrity is an individual level but looking at 
it with sociological imagination allows you to see 
the bigger picture,” and “It was interesting to see 
the connection between individual issues with aca-
demic integrity and issues with the university as a 
whole.”
CONClUSION
Colleges and universities have legislated en masse a 
multitude of policies and procedures regarding aca-
demic integrity for decades (Bertram Gallant 
2008:24), but students continue to violate these 
norms. Policies are not always consistent, clear, 
accessible, or detailed (Bretag et al. 2011; McCabe 
and Makowski 2001). Students are understandably 
confused about academic citation (Blum 2009) and 
other scholarly norms, and it falls to us as educators 
to teach our students about academic integrity so that 
they will understand how to avoid academic dishon-
esty and why it matters for students, faculty, their 
classes, institutions, and society more generally.
The in-class exercise we propose takes on this 
charge by addressing three goals: teaching students 
about academic integrity, reinforcing student 
understanding of the sociological imagination, and 
strengthening student skills to apply the sociologi-
cal imagination to the case of academic integrity. 
Our survey-based evaluation demonstrates that 
this approach helped students advance their learn-
ing for all three goals. They strengthened their 
understanding of academic integrity, the sociologi-
cal imagination, and the relationship between the 
two. The analysis also found that students rated the 
exercise as effective. On both campuses, students 
evaluated the exercise positively and reported that 
it enhanced their learning. Rather than just empha-
sizing how to avoid the pitfalls of plagiarism and 
warning students about penalties, the assignment 
gives instructors a platform to engage with stu-
dents in a dialogue about academic integrity and 
the sociological imagination.
Because of the universal nature of academic 
dishonesty and the prevalence of academic integrity 
policies at institutions of higher education, we think 
this kind of exercise could be used in any sociology 
instructor’s undergraduate classrooms. While such 
an approach could be used for other disciplines,9 the 
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
386  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
activity is geared toward sociology courses because 
it engages the sociological imagination. We have 
successfully incorporated the exercise in courses as 
small as 15 and as large as 75 in about the same 
manner and in both a large university and a liberal 
arts college. We tested the exercise in courses with 
mostly (or solely) sociology majors—in one class 
with mainly seniors and in another with an even 
distribution of sophomores, juniors, and seniors—
and it was equally effective. Given that the exercise 
is well suited to review and reintroduce the socio-
logical imagination, we expect that it would be just 
as appropriate for newer college students. It might 
be even more important for students (particularly 
sociology majors) to learn about academic integrity 
from a sociological perspective early in their college 
careers, so that they can avoid academic dishonesty 
as they progress through later courses.
While policies and penalties may vary from 
institution to institution, we think the general 
approach to teaching about academic integrity and 
the sociological imagination is broadly applicable, 
and the exercise is easily modified to different 
institutional contexts. In very large classes, where 
it can be harder to coax individuals to volunteer, 
instructors could modify the exercise to incorpo-
rate small groups or a short writing or to use click-
ers and closed-answer choices. Instructors can also 
use more or fewer vignettes based on the length of 
time they wish to dedicate and the particularities of 
their courses, and they can tailor the vignettes to 
their course and/or campus (including using real 
information from past cases, if this is available).
In conclusion, a solution to the widespread 
problem of academic dishonesty requires changing 
campus and societal cultures—a tall order for indi-
vidual instructors—but, in the meantime, we can 
do something about the cultures in our own class-
rooms. By incorporating the assignment early in 
the semester, the instructor can help create a class-
room climate that embraces norms of academic 
integrity situated in the context of the class. The 
dialogic nature of the exercise may make it more 
likely that students will raise additional questions 
that come up as the course progresses and that they 
will avoid the pitfalls of academic dishonesty. Our 
hope is that using this exercise can help instructors 
to eschew a “policing” role in favor of fostering 
learning and mentoring for our students.
ACKNOWlEDgMENTS
We are grateful to the students in our classes who partici-
pated in this exercise and our evaluations. We 
acknowledge Jean Kirnan, Rosa Zagari-Marinzoli, and 
Glenn Steinberg for sharing vignettes and the Center for 
Excellence in Teaching and Learning at The College of 
New Jersey for assistance. We also wish to thank Kath-
leen S. Lowney and the anonymous reviewers for their 
helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of 
this manuscript.
NOTES
Reviewers for this manuscript were, in alphabetical order, 
Nancy Berns, Morten Ender, and Matthew T. Lee.
1. We draw on Bertram Gallant’s (2008:10–11) defini-
tions of academic integrity: “the expectation of 
being honest, trustworthy, responsible, respectful, 
fair, and completing work only in the ways that are 
authorized by the institution.” We include, as the 
principle forms of academic misconduct, plagiarism 
(“using another’s words or ideas without appropriate 
attribution or without following citation conven-
tions”), fabrication (“making up data, results, 
information, or numbers, and recording and report-
ing them”), falsification (“manipulating research, 
data, or results to inaccurately portray informa-
tion”), and misrepresentation of one’s efforts or 
abilities (Bertram Gallant 2008:10).
2. h t tp : / /www.wik ihow.com/Chea t -On-a-Tes t 
(Retrieved May 2, 2012).
3. See: http://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2012/04/ 
19/at-crunch-time/ (Retrieved May 2, 2012).
4. http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/930/01 
(Retrieved May 2, 2012).
5. http://www.tcnj.edu/~liblinks/Module6/index.html 
(Retrieved May 2, 2012).
6. For schools with honor codes, it may also be appro-
priate to review this material as well.
7. Websites include Notehall.com, ShareNotes.com, 
NoteUtopia.com, NoteSurf.com, CollegeNoteShare 
.com, ClassNotez.com, and countless more.
8. Differences between the pretest and posttest definitions 
were significant at both campuses, although the relation-
ship is most strongly driven by the large class of students 
at the research university. At the liberal arts school, t = 
−2.876 (significant at .01 level), and at the research uni-
versity, t = −9.030 (significant at .000 level).
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Trautner and Borland 387
9. Kibler et al. (1988) take a similar approach by using 
much more detailed academic integrity case studies 
for use in an array of courses.
rEfErENCES
Barter, Christine and Emma Renold. 1999. “The Use of 
Vignettes in Qualitative Research.” Social Research 
Update, Issue 25, Department of Sociology, Univer-
sity of Surrey. Retrieved May 2, 2012 (http://www 
.soc.surrey.ac.uk/sru/SRU25.html).
BBC News. 2004. “‘Plagiarist’ to Sue University.” 
Retrieved May 2, 2012 (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
uk_news/education/3753065.stm).
Bertram Gallant, Tricia. 2008. Academic Integrity in the 
Twenty-First Century: A Teaching-Learning Impera-
tive. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Blum, Susan D. 2009. My Word! Plagiarism and College 
Culture. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bretag, Tracey, Saadia Mahmud, Margaret Wallace, Ruth 
Walker, Colin James, Margaret Green, Julianne East, 
Ursula McGowan, and Lee Partridge. 2011. “Core 
Elements of Exemplary Academic Integrity Policy in 
Australian Higher Education.” International Journal 
for Educational Integrity 7(2):3–12. 
Brezina, Timothy. 2000. “Are Deviants Different From 
the Rest of Us? Using Student Accounts of Academic 
Cheating to Explore a Popular Myth.” Teaching Soci-
ology 28(1):71–78.
Cizek, Gregory J. 2003. Detecting and Preventing Class-
room Cheating: Promoting Integrity in Assessment. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Cochran, John K., Peter B. Wood, Christine S. Sellers, 
Wendy Wilkerson, and Mitchell B. Chamlin. 1998. 
“Academic Dishonesty and Low Self-control: An 
Empirical Test of a General Theory of Crime.” Devi-
ant Behavior 19(3):227–55.
Cochran, John K., Mitchell B. Chamlin, Peter B. Wood, 
and Christine S. Sellers. 1999. “Shame, Embarrass-
ment, and Formal Sanction Threats: Extending the 
Deterrence/Rational Choice Model to Academic Dis-
honesty.” Sociological Inquiry 69(1):91–105.
Davis, Barbara Gross. 2009. Tools for Teaching, 2nd ed. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Eastman, Kevin L., Jacqueline K. Eastman, and Rajesh 
Iyer. 2012. “Academic Dishonesty: An Exploratory 
Study Examining Whether Insurance Students Are 
Different from Other College Students.” Risk Man-
agement and Insurance Review 11(1):209–26.
Finch, Janet. 1987. “The Vignette Technique in Survey 
Research.” Sociology 21:105–14.
Fulda, Joseph S. 2009. “Using WordPerfect to Detect Pla-
giarism on Open-book Essay Tests.” British Journal 
of Educational Technology 40(5):950–55.
Gaberson, Kathleen B. 1997. “Academic Dishonesty among 
Nursing Students.” Nursing Forum 32(3):14–20.
Howard, Rebecca Moore. 2001. “Forget about Policing 
Plagiarism. Just Teach.” The Chronicle of Higher 
Education, November 16. Retrieved May 2, 2012 
(http://chronicle.com/article/Forget-About-Policing/ 
2792).
Howard, Rebecca M. and Laura J. Davies. 2009. “Pla-
giarism in the Internet Age.” Educational Leadership 
66(6):64–67.
Jones, Dorothy L.R. 2011. “Academic Dishonesty: Are 
More Students Cheating?” Business Communication 
Quarterly 74(2):141–50.
Kibler, William L., Elizabeth M. Nuss, Brent G. Pater-
son, and Gary Pavela. 1988. Academic Integrity and 
Student Development: Legal Issues and Policy Per-
spectives. Asheville, NC: College Administrations 
Publications.
LaBeff, Emily E., Robert E. Clark, Valerie J. Haines, 
and George M. Diekhoff. 1990. “Situational Ethics 
and College Student Cheating.” Sociological Inquiry 
60(2):190–98.
Marsden, Helen, Marie Carroll, and James T. Neill. 2005. 
“Who Cheats at University? A Self-report Study of 
Dishonest Academic Behaviours in a Sample of Aus-
tralian University Students.” Australian Journal of 
Psychology 57(1):1–10.
Maruca, Lisa. 2006. “The Plagiarism Panic: Digital 
Policing in the New Intellectual Property Regime.” 
Pp. 241–61 in New Directions in Copyright Law. Vol. 
2, edited by F. Macmillan. Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar.
McCabe, Donald L. 1992. “The Influence of Situational 
Ethics on Cheating Among College Students.” Socio-
logical Inquiry 62(3):365–74.
McCabe, Donald L. and Andrew L. Makowski. 2001. 
“Resolving Allegations of Academic Dishonesty.” 
About Campus 6(1):17–21.
McCabe, Donald L., Kenneth D. Butterfield, and Linda 
K. Trevino. 2012. Cheating in College: Why Students 
Do It and What Educators Can Do about It. Balti-
more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mills, C. Wright. 1959 [2000]. The Sociological Imagina-
tion. New York: Oxford.
Moore, Barbara J. 2002. “Truth or Consequences.” About 
Campus (September-October):25–28.
Murphy, Richard. 1990. “Anorexia: The Cheating Disor-
der.” College English 52(8):898–903.
Nilson, Linda B. 2010. Teaching at Its Best: A Research-
Based Resource for College Instructors, 3rd ed. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pershing, Jana L. 2003. “To Snitch or Not to Snitch? 
Applying the Concept of Neutralization Techniques 
to the Enforcement of Occupational Misconduct.” 
Sociological Perspectives 46(2):149–78.
Power, Lori G. 2009. “University Students’ Perceptions 
of Plagiarism.” The Journal of Higher Education 
80(6):643–62.
Schneider, Alison. 1999. “Why Professors Don’t Do 
More to Stop Students Who Cheat.” The Chronicle 
of Higher Education, January 22. Retrieved May 2, 
2012 (http://chronicle.com/article/Why-Professors-
Dont-Do-Mor/25673/).
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
388  Teaching Sociology 41(4)
Schoenberg, Nancy E. and Hege Ravdal. 2000. “Using 
Vignettes in Awareness and Attitudinal Research.” 
International Journal of Social Research Methodol-
ogy 3:63–74.
Schuetz, Pamela. 2004. “Evaluation of a Brief Home-
work Assignment Designed to Reduce Citation Prob-
lems.” Teaching of Psychology 31(4):257–59.
Stamatatos, Efstathios. 2011. “Plagiarism Detection 
Using Stopword N-Grams.” Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information Science and Technology 
62(12):2512–27.
Stephens, Jason M., Michael F. Young, and Thomas 
Calabrese. 2007. “Does Moral Judgment Go Offline 
When Students Are Online? A Comparative Analysis 
of Undergraduates’ Beliefs and Behaviors Related 
to Conventional and Digital Cheating.” Ethics and 
Behavior 17(3):233–54.
Svinivki, Marilla and Wilbert J. McKeachie. 2011. McK-
eachies’ Teaching Tips: Strategies, Research, and 
Theory for College and University Teachers, 13th ed. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Sykes, Gresham M. and David Matza. 1957. “Techniques 
of Neutralization: A Theory of Delinquency.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 22(6):664–70.
University at Buffalo. 2013. “Academic Integrity.” 
Retrieved January 3, 2013 (http://undergrad-catalog 
.buffalo.edu/policies/course/integrity.shtml).
Vowell, Paul R. and Jieming Chen. 2004. “Predicting 
Academic Misconduct: A Comparative Test of Four 
Sociological Explanations.” Sociological Inquiry 
74(2):226–49.
Weidler, Blaire J., Kristi S. Multhaup, and Mark E. Faust. 
2012. “Accountability Reduces Unconscious Plagia-
rism.” Applied Cognitive Psychology 26(4):626–34.
Whitley, Bernard E. and Patricia Keith-Spiegel. 2002. 
Academic Dishonesty: An Educator’s Guide. Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Williams, Melanie Stallings and William R. Hosek. 2008. 
“Strategies for Reducing Academic Dishonesty.” 
Journal of Legal Studies Education 21(1):87–107.
Woith, Wendy, Sheryl Daun Jenkins, and Cindy Kerber. 
2012. “Perceptions of Academic Integrity among 
Nursing Students.” Nursing Forum 47(4):253–59.
AUThOr BIOgrAphIES
Mary Nell Trautner is an associate professor at the Univer-
sity at Buffalo, SUNY. Her interests include sociology of 
law, gender and the body, and work and organizations.
Elizabeth Borland is an associate professor at The College 
of New Jersey. Her interests include gender, social move-
ments, applied sociology, and community engaged learning.
 at INST POLITECNICO NACIONAL on January 30, 2014tso.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
