A semi-automatic authorship attribution technique
applied to real forensic cases involving Judgments in
Spanish
Sheila Queralt Estevez and M. Teresa Turell Julià ∗
Abstract. Recent studies in forensic authorship attribution report on newly de-
veloped techniques, although it seems that, in this quest for valid and reliable
identi￿cation markers, syntactic structure has shown to be less appealing, which
is easily explained by the fact that syntactic variables are clearly more complex,
more di￿cult to process and less frequent than variables at other linguistic levels.
This paper presents a series of experiments in forensic authorship, whose aim is
to evaluate the discriminatory potential of sequences of linguistic categories (POS
n-grams) by using real forensic legal texts written in Ecuador Spanish. The hy-
potheses tested in these experiments are that a) the most frequent tag sequences
will discriminate e￿ectively between authors and b) both bigrams and trigrams
will both show this discriminatory capacity. Experiments were carried out by
making use of two morpho-syntactically annotated corpora from two real foren-
sic cases, consisting of disputed Judgments (the N for case A = 1; the N for case
B = 1) and non-disputed texts (Judgments and other legal texts) from two author
candidates in each respective case, with ￿ve non-disputed texts for each candidate
author in each case. In both cases, a control corpus of non-disputed texts was used,
with three authors and ￿ve texts per author, and a total of ￿fteen non-disputed
texts. All texts were analysed both qualitatively and quantitavely, in the latter
case by running Linear Discriminant Analysis. Preliminary results con￿rm the
hypotheses for both bigrams and trigrams in each case.
Keywords: N-grams, forensic wri￿en text comparison, authorship a￿ribution, Spanish,
forensic real cases.
Introduction
Language re￿ects a series of linguistic traits that can be used in authorship attribution
contexts. So far there is not a single method or technique that can be used in forensic
∗IULA, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
S. Queralt and M.T. Turell 11
analyses or in expert witness consulting. In order to understand the status of authorship
attribution it is very important to bear in mind the complementary nature of forensic
linguistic evidence very much concerned with methodological reliability.
The cumulative evidence considered in forensic authorship attribution has involved
the use of several methods and techniques such as the use of reference corpora, type-
token ratios, hapax legomena (de Vel et al., 2001), vocabulary analysis (Hoey, 2005; Turell,
2004a,b; Woolls and Coulthard, 2007), sequences of linguistic categories, also called Part-
Of-Speech n-grams, in forensic analyses (Bel et al., 2012; Queralt et al., 2011; Queralt and
Turell, 2012; Spassova and Turell, 2007; Spassova and Grant, 2008; Spassova, 2009; Turell,
2010), among others.
The forensic linguist’s role in forensic text comparison is to observe those linguistic
variables and data which might be decisive for determining, among several candidates,
who the author of a particular spoken or written text is, which is the research ques-
tion addressed in the cases presented in this paper. Forensic linguists should base their
analyses on valid and reliable methods and techniques by a) undertaking experimental
research on real world texts, outside case work, b) applying the same techniques to real
forensic case texts, c) using statistical analyses to establish the signi￿cance of results,
and d) making use of corpus linguistics, and many other approaches, both qualitative
and quantitative. Finally, forensic linguists should make this information much more
comprehensible to the judge and court.
Recent studies in forensic authorship attribution report on newly developed tech-
niques, although it seems that, in this quest for valid and reliable identi￿cation markers,
syntactic structure has shown to be less appealing, which is easily explained by the fact
that syntactic variables are clearly more complex, more di￿cult to process and less fre-
quent than variables at other linguistic levels.
This paper presents a series of experiments in authorship attribution, whose aim
is to evaluate the discriminatory potential of sequences of linguistic categories (POS
n-grams) by using real forensic legal texts written in Ecuador Spanish.
Aim
The theoretical aim of this paper is to show the usefulness of the concept “idiolectal style”
(Turell, 2010) in forensic text comparison in its application to the study of non-discrete
variables such as sequences of linguistic categories. The methodological aim behind
the analysis of two sets of real forensic texts considered in this paper is to establish
among several candidates who the author of a written disputed text is in order to help
the Court in their decision. The protocol established by our lab, once determined that
there is enough linguistic evidence to proceed with the analysis, involves a qualitative
and a quantitative approach. In this paper we only focus on the quantitative approach
by using the sequences of linguistic categories and its subsequent analysis to establish
the statistical signi￿cance of the results and to ensure research validity and reliability.
The variable
The variable for our study has to do with sequences of linguistic categories. In previous
publications (Bel et al., 2012; Queralt et al., 2011; Queralt and Turell, 2012; Spassova and
Turell, 2007; Spassova and Grant, 2008; Spassova, 2009; Turell, 2010) the term Morpho-
syntactic Annotated Tag Sequences – MATS was used, but in order to be coherent with
the current literature the term Part-of-Speech n-grams (POS-ngrams) is adopted.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
12 A semi-automatic authorship attribution technique
Figure 1. Sequences of linguistic categories (POS n-gram).
The sentence: “ella es feliz siempre” (She is happy always) is tagged in Figure 1. Two
examples of POS n-grams can be observed, the bigram RS-VS3 and the trigram RS-VS3-
JQ where RS stands for singular pronoun, VS3 for third person singular verb and JQ, for
qualifying adjective.
Hypotheses
Results reported in previous experiments with real world texts and the application of
the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) methods showed the e￿cient discriminatory
potential of POS n-grams. Thus, the hypotheses formulated for both cases are that most
frequent tag sequences will discriminate e￿ectively between authors and that bigrams
and trigrams will both show this discriminatory capacity, more e￿ectively than other
sequences.
The method
This method involves several phases: ￿rstly, a pre-processing phase, in which texts
are revised for misspellings or any other possible errors. Secondly, a morpho-syntactic
tagging phase, during which the text is converted into a row of token types and tags.
Thirdly, a disambiguation stage, through which texts are disambiguated and errors are
corrected. Fourthly, a tag extraction phase – during which the information obtained,
refers to the number of POS n-grams types and tokens and on to POS n-grams frequency
values to be used in the subsequent statistical analysis. And ￿nally, once the tags have
been extracted, a last stage involves the application of LDA, in order to have the di￿erent
text sets classi￿ed by author, and have the results projected onto graphs. LDA could be
de￿ned as a multivariate statistical technique with three main purposes:
a) To describe whether the use of the n-grams under analysis (bigrams or trigrams) is
statistically signi￿cant.
b) To determine which are the n-grams that exhibit the highest potential to discriminate
between di￿erent authors.
c) To predict group membership when we have an unknown text. For example we may
have an anonymous text and we want to know who is the most probable author to have
produced this text with regards to n-grams use. In order to predict group membership,
this technique creates a discriminant function that is the result of a combination of the
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
S. Queralt and M.T. Turell 13
n-grams weighted to maximize the di￿erence between the idiolectal style of several au-
thors.
Cases and results
The cases reported in this paper implied the consideration of a Judgment whose author-
ship was being questioned and two possible author candidates in each case. Thus, the
aim of the work undertaken in this analysis was to help the court decide whether the
written style observed in the disputed Judgment showed linguistic similarities with the
non-disputed Judgments of Candidate 1 or Candidate 2 for each respective case.
Case A
Corpus
As Table 1 summarises, the data for this case consist of a disputed judgment that was
divided into 5 excerpts and 5 di￿erent judgements of two possible male authors (Candi-
date 1 and Candidate 2), written in Ecuador Spanish. For accountability and reliability
purposes a corpus of three sets of ￿ve anonymous Judgements from three judges used
in another case was considered, with a similar length and textual structure.
Table 1. Corpus Case A.
Writers Gender Genre Text infor-
mation 1600
words
Candidate 1 M Judgment 5
Candidate 2 M Judgment 5
Control 1 M Judgment 5
Control 2 M Judgment 5
Control 3 M Judgment 5
Disputed text M Judgment 5
Results
Bigrams
Figure 2 shows the LDA projection for bigrams applied to the corpus of Case A. In
this ￿gure it can be observed that the disputed excerpts are located in the same area of
Candidate 1, while the centroid of Candidate 2 occupies a di￿erent side of the graph.
Table 2 shows that the LDA classi￿cation method successfully classi￿ed 100% of the
texts by authors within their own group, while the cross-validation method con￿rmed
that the analysis was 96% correct. The ￿ve excerpts of the disputed text were attributed
to Candidate 1.
Trigrams
Figure 3 shows the LDA projection for trigrams. This ￿gure illustrates that the ex-
cerpts of the disputed text are close to the centroid of Candidate 1 while Candidate 2 is
placed far from the disputed texts set.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
14 A semi-automatic authorship attribution technique
Figure 2. Linear Discriminant Function Analysis based on bigrams – Case A.
Table 2. Classification and cross-validation results for bigrams – Case A
As shown in Table 4, 100% of the texts were classi￿ed successfully while the cross-
validation con￿rmed that the analysis was 92.0% correct. Trigrams classi￿ed four ex-
cerpts of the disputed text to Candidate 1 and one excerpt to one of the control authors.
The interpretation of these statistical results using LDA for POS n-grams revealed
that there was a quite high probability that the author of the disputed Judgment was
Candidate 1.
Case B
Corpus
As Table 4 summarises, the corpus for this second case consisted of a disputed judg-
ment fragmented into ￿ve excerpts from two possible male authors (Candidate 1 and
Candidate 2), written also in Ecuador Spanish. In order to optimize the discriminatory
potential of the variable under analysis, a set of anonymous Judgements from another
case was also used.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
S. Queralt and M.T. Turell 15
Figure 3. Linear Discriminant Function Analysis based on trigrams – Case A.
Table 3. Classification and cross-validation results for trigrams – Case A
Table 4. Corpus Case B.
Writers Gender Genre Text infor-
mation 800
words
Candidate 1 M Judgment 5
Candidate 2 M Judgment 6
Control 1 M Judgment 5
Control 2 M Judgment 5
Control 3 M Judgment 5
Disputed text M Judgment 5
Results
Bigrams
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
16 A semi-automatic authorship attribution technique
Figure 4 presents results for bigrams of the LDA applied to Case B text sets. This
￿gure shows that the disputed excerpts are closer to Candidate 2 than to Candidate 1.
Figure 4. Linear Discriminant Function Analysis based on bigrams – Case B.
As shown in Table 5, the LDA classi￿cation method classi￿ed 100% of the texts correctly
and con￿rmed that the analysis was 100% correct. However, this table illustrates that
three of the ￿ve disputed excerpts were attributed to Candidate 2, one to Candidate 1
and another one to Control author 3.
Table 5. Classification and cross-validation results for bigrams – Case B
Trigrams
In Figure 5 the LDA results for trigrams are projected. Most of the disputed excerpts
are classi￿ed near the centroid of Candidate 2.
The LDA classi￿cation method successfully classi￿ed 100% of the texts by authors
within their own group and the cross-validation method con￿rmed that the analysis
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
S. Queralt and M.T. Turell 17
Figure 5. Linear Discriminant Function Analysis based on trigrams – Case B.
was 100% correct. As Table 6 illustrates, three of the disputed excerpts were attributed
to Candidate 2 and two of the excerpts were classi￿ed near the control author centroid.
Table 6. Classification and cross-validation results for trigrams – Case B
Results help us conclude that Candidate 1 can be rejected as a possible author of the
disputed text and that there exists a moderate probability that the author of the disputed
text could be Candidate 2.
Conclusions
We hope that the application of this technique can help forensic linguists to base their
analyses on valid and reliablemethods and techniques by using, in this case, sequences of
linguistic categories in their analyses to be included in their expert witness reports, and
to make the information much more comprehensible to the judge and the court, since
80% of the information included in the expert witness’s report is usually incorporated
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
18 A semi-automatic authorship attribution technique
by the judges in their judgments and since the expert witnesses’ most important duty is
to assist the judge and give reliable forensic linguistic evidence in court.
Our view is that we need to re￿ne our linguistic methods and techniques, and make
them as valid and as reliable as possible, so that the unfortunately existing “room for ma-
neuver” is reduce and, in turn, our opinions as forensic linguists are more scienti￿cally
grounded.
References
Bel, N., Queralt, S., Spassova, M. S. and Turell, M. T. (2012). The use of sequences of
linguistic categories in forensic written text comparison revisited. In Proceedings of
the International Association of Forensic Linguists’ Tenth Biennial Conference, 192–209,
Birmingham.
de Vel, O., Anderson, A., Corney, M. and Mohay, G. (2001). Mining e-mail content for
author identi￿cation forensics. SIGMOD Record, 30(4), 55–64.
Hoey, M. (2005). Lexical priming: A new theory of words and language. London and New
York: Routledge.
Queralt, S., Spassova, M. and Turell, M. T. (2011). L’ús de les combinacions de seqüències
de categories gramaticals com a nova tècnica de comparació forense de textos escrits.
Llengua, Societat i Comunicació, 9, 59–67.
Queralt, S. and Turell, M. T. (2012). Testing the discriminatory potential of sequences
of linguistic categories (n-grams) in Spanish, Catalan and English corpora. In The Re-
gional Conference of the International Association of Forensic Linguists, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
Spassova, M. S. (2009). El potencial discriminatorio de las secuencias de categorías gramat-
icales en la atribución forense de autoría de textos en español.
Spassova, M. S. and Grant, T. D. (2008). Categorizing Spanish written texts by author
gender and origin by means of morpho-syntactic trigrams: Some observations on
method’s feasibility of application for linguistic pro￿ling. In Curriculum, Language
and the Law Inter-University Centre, University of Zagreb, Dubrovnik (Croatia).
Spassova, M. S. and Turell, M. T. (2007). The use of morpho-syntactically annotated
tag sequences as forensic markers of authorship attribution. In M. T. Turell, M. S.
Spassova and J. Cicres, Eds., Proceedings of the second european IAFL conference on
forensic linguistics, language and the law, 229–237, Barcelona: Publicacions de l’IULA.
Turell, M. T. (2004a). The disputed authorship of electronic mail: Linguistic, stylistic
and pragmatic markers in short texts. In First European IAFL Conference on Forensic
Linguistics, Language and Law, Cardi￿: Cardi￿ University.
Turell, M. T. (2004b). Textual kidnapping revisited: The case of plagarism in literary
translation. International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(1), 1–26.
Turell, M. T. (2010). The use of textual, grammatical and sociolinguistic evidence in
forensic text comparison. International Journal of Speech Language and the Law, 17(2),
211–250.
Woolls, D. and Coulthard, M. (2007). Tools for the trade. International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 5(1), 33–57.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
