Computational approaches to
plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
in real forensic cases
Maria Teresa Turell & Paolo Rosso ∗
Abstract. This paper integrates work done in the ￿elds of forensic and computa-
tional linguistics by applying computational approaches to plagiarism detection
and authorship attribution in real forensic cases. It reports on ￿ndings obtained
through the application of computational tools, which have been useful in pla-
giarism detection and analysis of real forensic cases, and computer-aided queries
of annotated corpora, which have allowed forensic linguists to test the statistical
signi￿cance of new morpho-syntactic markers of forensic authorship attribution
such as non discrete linguistic variables (i.e. Morpshosyntactically Annotated Tag
Sequences) occurring in fairly long texts.
Keywords: Forensic linguistics, computational linguistics, plagiarism detection, au-
thorship a￿ribution, real forensic cases.
Introduction
One of the many areas of study of forensic linguistics has to do with written text com-
parison used to identify unique and idiosyncratic parameters of an individual’s idiolectal
style, working with the assumption that language can reveal a writer’s socio-individual
and socio-collective factors (age, gender, occupation, education, religion, geographical
origin, ethnicity, race and language contact situation) and focusing on what the texts
say and whether two or more texts have been written by the same author (authorship)
or have been plagiarised from each other (plagiarism). Over the last two decades, foren-
sic linguists have been claiming their ability to assist the court in civil and criminal
proceedings and act as expert witnesses by meeting di￿erent evidentiary requirements
depending on the diverse legal systems (Common and Civil Law).
∗ForensicLab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra & Natural Language Engineering Lab, Universitat Politècnica
de València
20 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
However, forensic linguists nowadays face two fundamental challenges. One has to
do with the nature of written forensic texts, either long, but unique, in the sense that
there may not be any other texts to compare with - so that there is only linguistic evi-
dence within the text itself in order to establish possible plagiarism and/or come up with
a linguistic pro￿le in authorship attribution -, or very short texts (handwritten letters,
annonymous electronic or type-written documents), for which the empirical evaluation
of markers of disputed authorship is not easily allowed.
The second challenge is framed around the veri￿cation that the major part of the
forensic written text comparison conducted these days is still quite unsystematic and un-
reliable. Therefore, there is a need to subject it to scrutiny in terms of methodologically-
incorrect selections of the universe of non-disputed texts, ignorance of base rate knowl-
edge information, lack of scienti￿c design and analytical methods and, above all, in terms
of the existing speculation as to the actual reliability that should be involved in evalu-
ating whether there is more inter-writer than intra-writer variation and, furthermore,
whether or not an individual’s idiolectal style varies throughout his life span and beyond
di￿erent genres.
Notwithstanding, during the last decade, scienti￿c and reliable approaches to the
kind of text comparison involved in plagiarism detection and authorship attribution,
both in forensic and non-forensic cases, have responded to the need to rise to the chal-
lenges mentioned above. These approaches include stylometric measurements of an in-
dividual’s style (Baayen et al., 1996; Love, 2002; Feiguina and Hirst, 2007; Spassova and
Turell, 2007; Grant, 2007; Chaski, 2001); identi￿cation of idiolectal styles (Chaski, 2001;
Grant and Baker, 2001); stylistic methods (McMenamin, 2001), and vocabulary analytical
techniques (Coulthard, 2004; Turell, 2004), with consideration of core lexical elements,
hapax legomena, hapax dislegomena, lexical density and lexical richness and the use of
corpus of reference in order to establish the low/high frequency of words in disputed
text sets, by taking into account the concepts of markedness and saliency.
Several are the investigations carried out in order to deal with the above-mentioned
di￿culties and problems from a computational linguistics perspective. In Shivakumar
and Garcia-Molina (1995) a copy detection approach based on word frequency analysis
was introduced. In Kang et al. (2006) an approach based on word comparison at sentence
level which takes into account vocabulary expansion with Wordnet1 was described. A
few methods attempt to solve plagiarism detection on the basis of word n-grams com-
parisons (Lyon et al., 2004; Muhr et al., 2010) or also character n-grams (Schleimer et al.,
2003; Grozea et al., 2009). Recently, researchers have also approached the issue of cross-
language plagiarism (Potthast et al., 2011; Barrón-Cedeño et al., 2010; Gupta et al., 2012;
Franco-Salvador et al., 2013). When there may not be any suspicious text to compare
the suspicious document with, the linguistic evidence may have to be provided on the
basis of stylistic changes found in the document itself (intrinsic plagiarism) (Stein and
Meyer zu Eissen, 2007). Another method for intrinsic plagiarism detection is the one
described in Stamatatos (2009), where character n-gram pro￿les have been used. Com-
putational linguists have also considered the somewhat related issue of authorship at-
tribution, where linguistic pro￿les need to be investigated in order to try to determine
who the real author of a text is (Stamatatos et al., 2000; Koppel et al., 2009).
This article argues that forensic plagiarism detection and authorship attribution can
bene￿t from the complementary interplay between approaches used in forensic linguis-
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
M. T. Turell & P. Rosso 21
Figure 1. Overlapping vocabulary (F&Q-TM) Activities (Turell, 2008: 288)
tics (textual qualitative analysis, observation of semantic and pragmatic markers that
cannot be analysed by automatic procedures, the use of reference corpora to set up
the rarity or expectancy of the writers’ idiolectal choices) and those used in compu-
tational linguistics, automatic or semiautomatic natural language processing techniques
that would allow researchers to establish the statistical signi￿cance of results, something
which is becoming more and more necessary when acting as linguistic expert witnesses
in court. The studies presented in this article report on ￿ndings from the application of
both computational tools and computer-aided queries of annotated corpora. They have
been useful in plagiarism detection and analysis of real forensic cases, allowing forensic
linguists to test the statistical signi￿cance of new morpho-syntactic markers of forensic
authorship attribution such as non discrete linguistic variables (i.e. Morpshosyntacti-
cally Annotated Tag Sequences) occurring in fairly long texts.
In-tandem forensic and computational approaches to plagiarism
detection
Forensic linguistics makes a distinction between copying of ideas and linguistic plagia-
rism. Copying of ideas can exist without linguistic plagiarism but if the latter is detected,
the former occurs as well by the nature and de￿nition of the linguistic sign itself. This
discipline has devised amethodologywhich includes several qualitative and quantitative
tools and is used to establish a) the nature and degree of plagiarism, b) plagiarism direc-
tionality, and c) the threshold level of textual similarity between texts above which this
similarity becomes suspicious. For the purposes of this article, we will consider point c)
in particular and explain what tools are used to analyse this textual similarity.
CopyCatch2, one of the many existing concordance tools used to detect linguis-
tic plagiarism, allows researchers to calculate the threshold level of textual similarity
which becomes suspicious in a forensic case. This program incorporates several mea-
surements such as threshold of overlapping vocabulary, hapax legomena, hapax disle-
gomena, unique and exclusive vocabulary and shared-once phrases. It has a visual out-
put, with plagiarised sections marked in red, which is very useful when presenting ev-
idence in court. In order to establish this threshold level of textual similarity forensic
linguists can count on empirical evidence which suggests that “up to 35% similarity is
normal and up to 50% is not unusual, although the further above 50% the more likely it
is to indicate that the texts under consideration have not been produced independently
and that there exists a borrowing relationship between the texts under consideration".
Empirical research has also proved that this threshold level should be increased up to
70%, in the case of plagiarism between translations (Turell, 2004).
Out of the eight (8) Spanish plagiarism detection cases, in which our forensic linguis-
tics laboratory has been involved in the last 7 years, three (3) present verbatim plagiarism
and the other ￿ve (5) re￿ect partial plagiarism, with varying degrees of paraphrase and
overlapping vocabulary. The domains of occurrence of these cases are education (text
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
22 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
Table 1. Decontextualization of F&Q (Bruño) in TM (Temario Magister) (Turell, 2008:
286)
Física y Química Bruño (2002) Temario Magister (2005)
(page 194) (Unit 11, pages 8 & 9)
ACTIVITY 2 ACTIVITY 1
2. Completa en tu cuaderno 1. Completa la siguiente Tabla:
la siguiente Tabla 11.2
consultando la Tabla Periódica.
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
Física y Química Bruño (2002) Temario Magister (2005)
(page 194) (Unit 11, pages 8 & 9)
ACTIVITY 2 ACTIVITY 1
2. Complete in your exercise book the 1. Complete the following Table:
following Table 11.2 consulting the
Periodic Table.
books), tourism (guides and brochures), scienti￿c research, music (lyrics) and literature
(novels). For example, Figure 1 shows the threshold level of overlapping vocabulary
(96%) found when comparing the sections on Activities in the two text books under
analysis: the non-disputed text Física y Química Bruño (F&Q, 2002) and the disputed
text Temario Magister (TM, 2005) (Bruño vs. Magister),a percentage which indicates
that Activities in F&Q have been reproduced almost verbatim in TM.
One of the other equipment facilities supplied by CopyCatch is that the program
takes you to the Sentences Page automatically. This Sentences Page, which presents ver-
batim, or almost verbatim, phrases/sentences, facilitates the identi￿cation of the unco-
herent/uncohesive segments and the plagiarist’s strategies within the whole text, which
may lead to a) meaningless sequences due to the ‘cut & paste’ technique used, b) in-
consistency in referential style, c) decontextualisation and d) inversion in the grading of
structural elements, among others.
Table 1 illustrates one example of decontextualisation produced by the fact that one
part of the directions given in Activity 2 (page 194) in the non-disputed text (F&Q, 2002),
namely, “consultando la Tabla Periódica", has been deleted in Activity 2 (Unit 11, page
8) in the disputed text (TM, 2005).
Pl@giarism3, developed by the University of Maastricht, is another system used in
plagiarism detection. The system returns the percentage of textual similarity between
two documents (A and B), the percentage of the number of matches with document A
versus document B, the percentage of the number of matches with document B versus
document A and the total amount of matches between documents A and B. This system
performs the comparison on the basis of word trigrams. Like CopyCatch, Pl@giarism
has a visual output, with plagiarized sections marked in red. WCopyFind4, developed
by the University of Virginia, is another tool made available for plagiarism detection
(Vallés Balaguer, 2009). The system allows researchers to introduce various parameters
such as the size of word n-grams, the minimum number of matching words to be re-
ported as possible plagiarism, the maximum number of non matches between perfectly
matching portions of a sentence, etc. Apart from highlighting the substitution of words
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
M. T. Turell & P. Rosso 23
Table 2. Comparison of results: CopyCatch v. WCopyFind v. Pl@giarism
CopyCatch WCopyFind Pl@giarism
Case: Bruño v. Magister
Page 5 27 % 19 % 21 %
Page 32 79 % 92 % 92 %
Pages 33-37 95 % 96 % 96 %
Pages 40-46 94 % 86 % 83 %
Case: XXX (for anonymity) v. Signes
Activities 96 % 87 % 86 %
Cuestionario 98 % 87 % 78 %
Técnico 86 % 83 % 78 %
by synonyms, one added value of WCopyFind is the provision of a word map (a genera-
lized thesaurus). This system tells researchers the percentage of the number of matches
with document A versus document B, the percentage of the number of matches with
document B versus document A, and like CopyCatch and Pl@giarism, WCopyFind has
a visual output, with plagiarized sections marked in red.
Table 2 shows a comparison of CopyCatch, WcopyFind and Pl@giarism results re-
lated to the detection of plagiarized fragments found in the corpus sets of two real foren-
sic cases (Bruño vs. Magister and XXX v. Signes. In WCopyFind we used trigrams as
n-gram size, and ￿ve as the maximum number of non matches. Results illustrate that
the three tools have been able to detect plagiarism in these real cases. However, in most
cases, the tool CopyCatch returns the highest percentage of similarity between the texts
compared. This is because this tool runs on unigrams, once-shared words and unique
vocabulary. WCopyFind returns a higher percentage than Pl@giarism, the main reason
for this being that WcopyFind considers the possible words inserted between perfectly
matching sentence fragments, whereas Pl@giarism does not.
For real cases Bruño vs. Magister and XXX v. Signes, some linguistic evidence was
given on the basis of the comparison with other texts. However, as mentioned above,
one of the challenges forensic linguists have to face is that very often written forensic
texts are unique in the sense that there may not be any other texts against which to com-
pare them. Therefore, in order to be able to establish possible plagiarism the linguistic
evidence has to be found within the text itself (intrinsic plagiarism). YYY5 is a new tool
the aim of which is to help forensic linguists to come up with a linguistic pro￿le on the
basis of a stylistic analysis of the text in order to determine whether or not there are
fragments of di￿erent writing styles. This tool divides the text into fragments and for
each of these fragments, it calculates various vocabulary richness measurements (func-
tion K proposed by Yule (Yule, 1944), function R proposed by Honore (Honore, 1979))
and text complexity (Flesch-Kincaid Readability Test (Flesch, 1948), Gunning Fog Index
(Gunning, 1952)) as suggested in Meyer zu Eissen et al. (2007). The aim behind Stylysis
is to identify text fragments with di￿erent writing styles, which could indicate that it is
a plagiarized fragment or that it has been written by a di￿erent author. Thus, this tool
could also help in linguistic pro￿ling to attribute authorship of a text.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
24 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
Figure 2. Results obtained with the Stylysis tool in case XXX v. Signes (5)
Figure 2 shows the results for page 5 of the corpus set of case XXX v. Signes. R and K
functions show that fragment 7 exceeds the standard deviation (dashed line). This could
indicate a possible change in writing style. The Flesch-Kincaid Readability Test and the
Gunning Fog Index show that fragments 5 and 7 exceed the standard deviation. On the
basis of these measurements, fragment 7 is the only suspicious fragment. And indeed
fragment 7 proved to be a case of plagiarism. This example demonstrates the usefulness
of Stylysis in providing language evidence for intrinsic plagiarism detection.
The use of computer-aided queries of annotated corpora in forensic
authorship attribution
One computational approach used in the kind of forensic text comparison leading to
more reliable authorship attribution outcomes is the study of the syntactic characteriza-
tion of a writer’s idiolectal style through computer-aided queries of annotated corpora
that can help to establish the statistical signi￿cance of sequences of linguistic categories,
namely, Morpho-syntactic Annotated Tag Sequences (MATS), as proposed in Spassova
and Turell (2007). This approach is not new in non-forensic contexts (Baayen et al.,
1996), where these sequences are frequenly referred to as n-grams (and depending on
the number of categories combined, the terms used are bigrams, trigrams, etc.), but the
ForensicLab has been one of the ￿rst to apply this method to real forensic cases.
This method is structured around the following activities:
1. A pre-processing phase, in which texts are segmented into their basic com-
ponents: title, paragraphs, sentences, and paragraph beginnings and ends are
marked (< /s >< /p >).
2. Amorpho-syntactic tagging phase, during which the text is converted into a ￿ow
of token types and tags.
3. A disambiguation stage, through which texts are disambiguated and errors are
corrected.
4. A tag extraction phase - making use of LEGOLAS 2.0 - during which the informa-
tion obtained refers to the number of MATS types and tokens and on the MATS
frequency values to be used in the subsequent statistical analysis.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
M. T. Turell & P. Rosso 25
Figure 3. Morpho-syntactically Annotated Tag Sequences (MATS)
5. Once the tags have been extracted, a last stage involves the application of Dis-
criminant Function Analysis (DFA), in order to classify the di￿erent text sets, and
the projection of results onto graphs.
During the pre-processing and processing phases several processing and disambi-
guation tools from the IULA’s technical corpus6 were used (Morel et al., 1998). For exam-
ple, once tagged, the sentence: “el comercial de la empresa vendía los mejores hoteles”
(‘the ￿rm’s salesperson was selling the best hotels’) is projected and represented in the
way Figure 3 illustrates. Two examples of MATS are marked, namely, “el comercial”
(AMS N5-MS), which is a bigram and “el comercial de”, (AMS N5-MS P), which is a tri-
gram, and where A stands for article, M for masculine, S for singular, N5-MS for singular
masculine common noun, and P for preposition.
Part of the linguistic evidence used to report on six (6), out of nine (9), Spanish real
forensic authorship attribution cases considered was drawn by applying this method-
ological protocol. Outcoming results from all these cases have shown that the discrim-
inatory potential of MATS is higher with long text samples and with a big number of
control reference texts (Grant, 2007) and that bigrams and trigrams are more discrimi-
natory than longer sequences of linguistic categories. To test the working hypotheses
which are at play in forensic written text comparison - that is, a) that everyone has an
‘idiolectal style’, as relating to the linguistic system shared by lots of people, but used
in a distinctive and unique way by particular individuals, who have di￿erent options at
their reach in their linguistic repertoire and make selections from these options (Halli-
day, 1989), and b) that a disputed text (or several disputed texts) can be attributed to the
same author who wrote a set of non-disputed texts - sets of anonymous texts from other
real forensic cases are used, thus optimizing the discriminatory potential of MATS.
Figure 4 shows the projection for bigrams of the DFA applied to the three text sets
under analysis in the forensic case XXX v. SEHRS: the disputed e-mails (+), the non-
disputed faxes (4) and the anonymous emails from another case ( , indicated as docs
in Figure 4). In this ￿gure, it can be seen that although there is a certain distance be-
tween the disputed emails and the non-disputed faxes, the distance of all the emails from
another case and the text sets relevant to the case under analysis is even bigger, which
indicates more statistically signi￿cant di￿erentiation in the idiolectal use of MATS in
the emails from another case than the one found in the comparison of the NDTfax and
DT@ text sets.
The classi￿cation method of DFA classi￿ed with success 100% of the texts by authors
within their own group while the cross-validation method con￿rmed that the analysis
was 83.4% correct. Two of these emails belong to the non-disputed faxes set, whereas the
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
26 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
Figure 4. Discriminant Function Analysis (NDTfax and DT@) - Bigrams (Turell, 2010)
Figure 5. Discriminant Function Analysis (NDTfax andDT@) - Trigrams (Turell, 2010)
other two disputed emails are classi￿ed within its original group, and the anonymous
emails from another case are all classi￿ed within their original group. This outcome
seems to con￿rm that the probability that the author of the disputed emails could be the
author of the non-disputed faxes is quite high.
Figure 5 shows the projection of the results for trigrams. This ￿gure illustrates that
the centroids of the disputed emails (+) and the non-disputed faxes (4) are placed in
the same area of the graph, while the centroid of the emails from another case ( ) is
located in the opposite side of the graph.
However, on this occasion the DFA classi￿cation method shows that only 75% of
the texts are classi￿ed with success; only three of the disputed emails are classi￿ed as if
produced by the author of the non-disputed faxes; besides, cross-validation con￿rmed
that the analysis was only 63% correct, since two of the disputed emails are attributed
to the group of non-disputed faxes and two of the non-disputed faxes are attributed to
the group of disputed emails.
These statistical results using DFA reveal that, in spite of the reduced corpus size and
the short text length (although in e￿ect the total N for MATS is not that small - 1,589
tokens for bigrams and 660 tokens for trigrams), these structures seem to exhibit a quite
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
M. T. Turell & P. Rosso 27
high discriminatory potential and also that bigrams turn out to be more discriminatory
than trigrams, as other forensic cases have shown. This would allow us to conclude that
sequences of grammatical categories observed in a writer’s ‘idiolectal style’ can be used
quite reliably as valid markers of authorship.
Conclusions
In this article we have attempted to show that, for both computational and forensic lin-
guistics, joint work in the areas of forensic plagiarism detection and authorship attribu-
tion can be very fruitful. Present-day comparative methods used in forensic plagiarism
detection and authorship attribution exhibit limitations; so there is a need to count on
intra-evidential complementary evidence which is tested with computational (automatic
or semi-automatic) natural language processing techniques. Computational linguistics,
on the other hand, needs to be able to use linguistic data from real forensic cases - and
not just synthetic data, automatically generated or manually generated through Ama-
zon mechanical Turk (Potthast et al., 2010) - in order to establish the actual performance
features of the existing systems of automatic plagiarism detection (Barrón-Cedeño et al.,
2013). It is precisely because of the nature and length of forensic texts (usually quite
short) and corpora (small-sized), which can be a drawback when trying to establish the
statistical signi￿cance of results, that computational linguistics must come into play so
that forensic linguists are able to re￿ne their comparative methods and techniques. In
this article we have reported on the comparative evaluation of three plagiarism detec-
tion tools (CopyCatch, extensively used in forensic plagiarism detection, WCopyFind
and Pl@giarsm) that are available to forensic linguists, while we are aware that there
are other automatic plagiarism detection systems that de￿ne the state of the art and are
part of the know-how of the PAN competition on Plagiarism Detection (Potthast et al.,
2012).
One important empirical question that can be raised, but not answered in this arti-
cle, is what kind of evaluation results would be drawn when automatic detection tools
can be applied to real forensic data, once these systems are commercialized or become
public domain tools. This is only one ￿rst enriching step towards the establishment of
stronger collaboration links between forensic and computational linguists. However, it
has not been possible to compare the forensic protocols and automatic authorship attri-
bution techniques used in forensic linguistics with other existing automatic approaches
to written authorship such as those devised by computational linguistics, which will be
discussed in the context of the PAN competition on Authorship Identication7.
Acknowledgments
“I end on a very sad note. One of the authors, Maria Teresa Turell, passed away on April
24, 2013, just before this volume went to press. Maite, as everyone knew her, was a
Professor of English at Universitat Pompeu Fabra in Barcelona, where she directed the
Forensic Linguistics Laboratory. She was an important ￿gure in the ￿eld, devoted to
bringing quantitative rigor to stylistic insight, one of the themes of the workshop. More
importantly to those of us who knew Maite, her intellectual toughness was matched
with a loving and generous character that will remain with us for a long, long time to
come.” Authorship Attribution Workshop, Journal of Law and Policy 21(2). Brooklyn,
N.Y. Preface by Lawrence M. Solan, Brooklyn Law School
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
28 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
Cases cited
Case: Bruño vs. Magister.
Case: XXX v. Signes.
Case: XXX vs. SEHRS.
Notes
1http://wordnet.princeton.edu
2CopyCatchGold, CFL Development, http://c￿software.com/
3http://www.plagiarism.tk
4http://www.plagiarism.phys.virginia.edu/Wsoftware.html
5http://memex2.dsic.upv.es:8080/StylisticAnalysis/es/index.jsp
6http://brangaene.upf.es/plncorpus/index2.htm, http://brangaene.upf.es/plncorpus/faq.html
7http://pan.webis.de/
References
Baayen, R. H., van Halteren, H. and Tweedie, F. J. (1996). Outside the cave of shadows:
Using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 11(3), 121–131.
Barrón-Cedeño, A., Rosso, P., Agirre, E. and Labaka, G. (2010). Plagiarism detection
across distant language pairs. In Proc. of the 23rd International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, COLING-2010, 37–45, Beijing, China.
Barrón-Cedeño, A., Vila, M., Martí, A. and Rosso, P. (2013). Plagiarism meets paraphras-
ing: Insights for the next generation in automatic plagiarism detection. Computational
Linguistics, 39(4).
Chaski, C. E. (2001). Empirical evaluations of language-based author identi￿cation tech-
niques. Forensic Linguistics. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law,
8(1), 1–65.
Coulthard, R. M. (2004). Author identi￿cation, idiolect, and linguistic uniqueness. Ap-
plied Linguistics, 25(4), 431–447.
Feiguina, O. and Hirst, G. (2007). Authorship attribution for small texts: Literary and
forensic experiments. In International Workshop on Plagiarism Analysis, Authorship
Identi￿cation and Near-Duplicate Detection, PAN 2007: 30th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference.
Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32(3), 221–
233.
Franco-Salvador, M., Gupta, P. and Rosso, P. (2013). Cross-language plagiarism detection
using multilingual semantic network. In Proceedinfs of 35th European Conference on
Information Retrieval, ECIR-2013, Moscow, Russia.
Grant, T. (2007). Quantifying evidence in forensic authorship analysis. The International
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1), 1–25.
Grant, T. and Baker, K. (2001). Identifying reliable, valid markers of authorship: a re-
sponse to Chaski. Forensic Linguistics: The International Journal of Speech, Language
and the Law, 8(1), 66–79.
Grozea, C., Gehl, C. and Popescu, M. (2009). Encoplot: Pairwise sequences matching in
linear applied to plagiarism detection. In B. Stein, P. Rosso, E. Stamatatos, M. Koppel
and E. Agirre, Eds., SEPLN 2009 Workshop on Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and
Social Software Misuse (PAN 09), 10–18, San Sebastian, Spain.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
M. T. Turell & P. Rosso 29
Gunning, R. (1952). The technique of clear writing. McGraw-Hill Int. Book Co.
Gupta, P., Barrón-Cedeño, A. and Rosso, P. (2012). Cross-language high similarity search
using a conceptual thesaurus. In Proceedings of 3rd International Conference of CLEF
on Information Access Evaluation meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Visual An-
alytics, CLEF 2012, 67–75, Rome, Italy.
Halliday, M. (1989). Language, context and text. Aspects of language in a social semiotic
perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Honore, A. (1979). Some simple measures of richness of vocabulary. Association for
Literary and Linguistic Computing Bulletin, 7(2), 172–177.
Kang, N., Gelbukh, A. and Han, S. Y. (2006). Ppchecker: Plagiarism pattern checker in
document copy detection. Lecture notes in computer science., 4188, 661–668.
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2009). Computational methods in authorship
attribution. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
60(1), 9–26.
Love, H. (2002). Attributing authorship: An introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Lyon, C., Barrett, R. and Malcolm, J. (2004). A theoretical basis to the automated detec-
tion of copying between texts, and its practical implementation in the ferret plagia-
rism and collusion detector. In Plagiarism: Prevention, Practice and Policies Conference,
Newcastle, UK.
McMenamin, G. (2001). Style markers in authorship studies. Forensic Linguistics: The
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(2), 93–97.
Meyer zu Eissen, S., Stein, B. and Kulig, M. (2007). Plagiarism detectionwithout reference
collections. In R. Decker and H. Lenz, Eds., Advances in Data Analysis, 359–366.
Morel, J., Torner, S., Vivaldi, J. and Cabré, M. T. (1998). El corpus de l’IULA: Etiquetaris.
Serie Informes, 18 (2nd Edition). Barcelona: Publicacions de l’IULA.
Muhr, M., Kern, R., M., Z. and Granitzer, M. (2010). External and intrinsic plagiarism
detection using a cross-lingual retrieval and segmentation system. In Notebook Papers
of CLEF 2010 LABs and Workshops, University of Padova, Italy.
Potthast, M., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Stein, B. and Rosso, P. (2010). An evaluation frame-
work for plagiarism detection. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, COLING-2010, 997–1005, Beijing, China.
Potthast, M., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Stein, B. and Rosso, P. (2011). Cross-language plagia-
rism detection. Languages Resources and Evaluation. Special Issue on Plagiarism and
Authorship Analysis, 45(1).
Potthast, M., Gollub, T., Hagen, M., Graßegger, J., Kiesel, J., Michel, M., Oberländer, A.,
Tippmann, M., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Gupta, P., Rosso, P. and Stein, B. (2012). Overview
of the 4th international competition on plagiarism detection. In Notebook Papers of
CLEF 2012 LABs and Workshops, CLEF-2012, Rome, Italy.
Schleimer, S., Wilkerson, D. S. and Aiken, A. (2003). Winnowing: Local algorithms for
document ￿ngerprinting. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGMOD International Con-
ference on Management of Data, New York, NY.
Shivakumar, N. and Garcia-Molina, H. (1995). Scam: A copy detection mechanism for
digital documents. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Theory and Prac-
tice of Digital Libraries.
Spassova, M. S. and Turell, M. T. (2007). The use of morpho-syntactically annotated
tag sequences as forensic markers of authorship attribution. In M. T. Turell, M. S.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
30 Computational approaches to plagiarism detection and authorship attribution
Spassova and J. Cicres, Eds., Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on
Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law., 229–237, Barcelona.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). Intrinsic plagiarism detection using character n-gram pro￿les.
Proceedings of the SEPLN’09 Workshop on Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship and Social
Software, 38–46.
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N. and Kokkinakis, G. (2000). Automatic text categorization
in terms of genre and author. Computational Linguistics, 26(4), 461–485.
Stein, B. andMeyer zu Eissen, S. (2007). Intrinsic plagiarism analysis with meta-learning.
In Proceedings of the SIGIR 2007 InternationalWorkshop on Plagiarism Analysis, Author-
ship Identi￿cation, and Near-Duplicate Detection, PAN 2007, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Turell, M. T. (2004). Textual kidnapping revisited: the case of plagiarism in literary
translation. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(1), 1–26.
Turell, M. T. (2008). Plagiarism. In J. Gibbons and M. T. Turell, Eds., Dimensions of
Forensic Linguistics, 265–299, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Turell, M. T. (2010). The use of textual, grammatical and sociolinguistic evidence in
forensic text comparison. The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law,
17(2), 211–250.
Vallés Balaguer, E. (2009). Putting ourselves in sme’s shoes: Automatic detection of
plagiarism by the wcopy￿nd tool. In B. Stein, P. Rosso, E. Stamatatos, M. Koppel and
E. Agirre, Eds., SEPLN 2009 Workshop on Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and Social
Software Misuse (PAN 09), 34–35, San Sebastian, Spain.
Yule, G. (1944). The statistical study of literary vocabulary. Cambridge University Press.
IAFL Porto 2012 Proceedings
