Early Music, 
doi:10.1093/em/cav091
PAGE 1 OF 13© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
Carlos Vaquero
A quantitative study of seven historically informed 
performances of Bach’s bwv1007 Prelude
Among all aspects of performance practice, that of interpretative choice regarding musical 
expressivity is arguably the most interesting. In the 
field of early music, the urge to realize historically 
informed interpretations has led to new perspec-
tives about our musical legacy from scholars and 
performers alike.1 During the hundred years since 
Arnold Dolmetsch published The interpretation of 
the music of the XVIIth and XVIIIth centuries, dif-
ferent schools of early music performance practice 
have developed.2
These developments have been reflected not 
only in the form of books (for example, by Robert 
Donington3 and Antoine Geoffroy-Dechaume4) 
but in the form of performances by practitioners 
reinterpreting their aesthetic approaches on the 
basis of surviving historical treatises such as those 
of Johann Joachim Quantz,5 Carl Philipp Emanuel 
Bach6 and Leopold Mozart.7 Due to the populariza-
tion of recordings in the last half-century, the vol-
ume of material available for study of the different 
approaches to performance has increased consid-
erably. In his book The end of early music,8 Bruce 
Haynes uses recordings in order to compare and 
classify different performance aesthetics. Haynes 
also quotes cellist Anner Bylsma commenting on 
the ‘enormous’ difference of approaches to be heard 
when listening to different recordings of the same 
pieces played by Frans Brüggen during different 
moments along his career.
Thanks to the on-going developments in music 
technology and the popularization of digital tools 
these differences can not only be ‘heard’ but also 
objectively quantified. The analysis of the develop-
ment of performance practice and aesthetics from 
the perspective of cognitive and computational 
musicology is also relevant since it can potentially 
provide insight into the interrelations between 
musicology, performance practice and cognition.
In the field of performance analysis we may there-
fore aim to find out which aspects are involved in 
the categorization of performances in terms of their 
constituent expressive features or in the identifica-
tion and understanding of possible performance 
trends that change over time. For instance, can a 
performer be easily characterized by her or his typi-
cal use of expressive timing? Are sudden changes 
in tempi within the performance of a piece repre-
sentative of certain musicologically informed inter-
pretations? Is this approach communicated by the 
performance itself? Do perception and cognition 
play a role in the aesthetic choices involved in per-
formance? Much research has been done in recent 
decades in order to resolve some of these questions, 
including work by Erik Clarke,9 Alf Gabrielsson,10 
Bruno Repp11 and others.
In the 1930s music psychologist Carl Seashore 
had already published results revealing systematic 
deviations in timing on a number of sequences of 
different performances.12 One of the most recent 
contributions to the field of performance analy-
sis and modelling has been the Mazurka project. 
Starting in 2004 at the Centre for the History and 
Analysis of Recorded Music (CHARM), it col-
lected more than 2,500 recorded performances 
of 49 Chopin mazurkas for piano. The Mazurkas 
dataset continues to grow and inspire new anal-
yses, and has been used within many different 
domains of computational musicology. Extensive 
overviews on the work done in performance 
 Early Music Advance Access published October 16, 2015
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 2 OF 13 Early Music
rendering and analysis have been completed by Alf 
Gabrielsson,13 and recent compilations have been 
published by Dorotty Fabian, Renee Timmers and 
Emery Schubert14 and by Eduardo R.  Miranda, 
Alexis Kirke and Qijun Zhang.15 In addition to 
this rich literature in comparative performance, 
much research has been carried out towards auto-
matic classification of performances or perform-
ers within the field of music information retrieval. 
A  few illustrative examples in which performers 
are automatically identified based on their use 
of timing are those by Maarten Grachten and 
Gerhard Widmer,16 and Joan Serrà, Tan Özaslan 
and Josep Luis Arcos.17 Other studies such as 
the ones by Efstathios Stamatatos and Gerhard 
Widmer,18 or Rafael Ramirez, Esteban Maestre 
and Xavier Serra19 use a broader range of expres-
sive features in addition to timing (such as loud-
ness and timbre) for the automatic identification 
of performers.
In this article I present and apply three state-of-
the-art quantitative methodologies in expressive 
performance analysis to elucidate possible relations 
among musicological and cognitive interpretations. 
This will show how a particular methodology may 
serve (or constrain) the ability to compare different 
interpretations and define expressiveness. In addi-
tion, I will show how these methods might be used 
for other purposes in performance science as well 
as in pedagogy. For this, an excerpt from seven dif-
ferent performances played by three performers of 
the Prelude from J. S. Bach’s first Suite for solo cello 
in G major, bwv1007 (ex.1), are analysed and com-
pared. I manually annotated and extracted loudness 
data for each note played in all versions to present 
an interpretation of the quantitative analysis of these 
performances. However, before continuing with an 
analysis of these recordings the term ‘expressiveness’ 
needs defining.
Definitions of expressiveness in music 
performance
Expressiveness is a notion that may evolve within per-
formances and over time, presumably as a necessary 
resource to enhance a performance and the listen-
ing experience. Within the literature of performance 
analysis modelling we can find several definitions of 
expression.20 In this article I use two definitions based 
on those of Renee Timmers and Henkjan Honing:
(1) Expression as a deviation from a musical score,21 in which 
we represent the deviations from what is notated in the 
score. It implies re-scaling the score durations to the mean 
tempo of a performance relative to a common duration unit 
(for example, a semiquaver), then to measure the deviations 
from this mean. Despite being the most common approach 
found in literature there are some constraints from a cogni-
tive perspective to be noted. For example, proportionately 
equivalent deviations from different time units may be 
perceived differently: a deviation from a semibreve is per-
ceived differently than from a demisemiquaver even when 
they deviate by the same ratio (for example, half of the value 
of the notated figure). A detailed discussion on the limita-
tions of this definition can be found in Renee Timmers and 
Henkjan Honing.22
(2) Expression represented as a deviation from the norm 
defined within a performance.23 This is an intrinsic defini-
tion of expressiveness not necessarily having reference to 
a musical score, but to the cognized structure by the lis-
tener. For example, a certain inégal articulation pattern is 
suddenly changed through a performance. The listeners to 
such performances may have different hedonic reactions 
to these changes depending on factors such as their previ-
ous exposure to these expressive ‘gestures’ or their expec-
tations on being surprised or not.
Ex.1 Bach, Cello Suite no.1 in G major, bwv1007, Prelude, bars 1–11
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 3 OF 13
Measuring tools for the analysis of expressivity 
in music performance
Over the last 20  years, several quantitative meth-
odologies to develop knowledge representation 
tools have been proposed. To compare the cello 
performances I have chosen three distinct methods 
proposed by Craig Sapp,24 Bruno Gingras, Tamara 
Lagrandeur-Ponce, Bruno L Giordano and Stephen 
McAdams,25 and Eric Cheng and Elaine Chew.26
1 Timescapes
Within the Mazurka project, Craig Sapp did exten-
sive work defining quantitative methodologies and 
visualization tools.27 The scape-plot visualizations he 
suggested use normalized correlations (Pearson cor-
relations) per cell (for example, isolated notes), or 
groups of sequential cells (groups of notes), between 
a reference performance and another performance 
in order to visualize the correlations in multiple 
timescales. Each cell in the scape plot represents the 
correlation between both performances. For exam-
ple, the bottom row of illus.1 represents the corre-
lations per pairs of elements of each performance 
compared to the reference performance. Within the 
scape plot, the window size for correlations among 
groups of notes increases the closer we get to the 
upper vertex of the triangle, having at the top of 
the triangle the correlation of the whole reference 
piece with the one (or ones) being compared. When 
the visualization is plotted in black and white, the 
correlation scale will represent black as the highest 
correlation and white as the lowest. Among the plot 
shapes originally proposed by Sapp, I chose a bell-
shaped plot with a logarithmic scale in the vertical 
axis to enhance visualization in the lower part of 
the plot (illus.2). This is especially relevant when 
differences in timing occur within groups of only a 
few notes.
The possible uses of timescapes are diverse. From 
a musicologist’s perspective they provide an over-
view of similarities among performances, but they 
can also be used for forensic applications. The most 
illustrative example is the fraud discovered when 
a visualization of recordings originally credited to 
the pianist Joyce Hatto were shown to be identi-
cal to the visualizations of a number of recordings 
previously released by other performers.28 The rea-
son why this fraud was discovered through these 
visualizations is because they were not sensitive 
to the digital manipulations (time-stretches and 
re-equalizations) that were applied to the original 
recordings, and therefore the similarity shown was 
immediately evident. The visualization proposed 
by Sapp has been particularly useful for tracing 
similarities in the numerous recordings annotated 
within the Mazurka dataset. From a cognitive per-
spective the timescapes may be interpreted as a tool 
to illustrate the correlations between possible inter-
nalized representations a listener may have against 
different versions of the same piece. Additionally, 
timescapes facilitate the identification of consist-
ent deviations at different structural levels reveal-
ing aspects not only of the possible characterization 
of the performance but also on the similarities of 
structural phrasing.
In this article, timescapes will be used to repre-
sent and compare correlations between different 
performers who recorded the work more than once.
1 Scape plotting based on a hypothetical fragment of four notes (A, B, C, D) and four window lengths. From bottom to top 
each cell captures the correlation on different levels of the note sequence of the level below. Illus.2 (below) shows a bell-
shape visualization based on such a scheme.
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 4 OF 13 Early Music
2 Kendall’s Tau rank correlation coefficients, means 
and standard deviations
A complementary correlation measure to the one 
used in the visualizations proposed by Sapp is 
Kendall’s Tau. Kendall’s Tau correlation is a stand-
ard methodology used in statistics for measuring 
the association between two observed quantities; 
in our case, the loudness or timing of each note 
for a pair of performances when they do not fol-
low a normal distribution.29 This statistic is used to 
quantify the degree of association between pairs of 
expressive profiles. Unlike Pearson correlation coef-
ficients, Kendall’s Tau rank correlation measures 
concordance on the direction of the change between 
two points. This provides, using a single metric, a 
scale-independent quantification of the relationship 
between rankings of a given variable, regardless of 
its absolute value.30 By correlating pairs of perfor-
mances we can verify how a particular feature (such 
as loudness or timing) changes for both perfor-
mances; for instance, the degree of concordance in 
which two performances being compared make an 
accelerando at the same points in the score.
In this study, Kendall’s Tau rank correlations are 
used to measure different expressive features in 
order to find the consistency between each of the 
recordings and to analyse which features may be 
more representative of the differences between per-
formances. Consequently, Kendall’s correlations are 
calculated for each pair of performances on a note 
level (event) and on each of the different expressive 
features selected (timing and loudness).
The Tau coefficient is expressed within the range 
[-1,  1], with positive values representing agreement 
between the two rankings measured (for example, 
1, with identical expressive timing between two dif-
ferent performances), and negative values represent-
ing disagreement between two rankings. A  value 
of -1 represents perfect disagreement between per-
formances (for example, a crescendo in one per-
formance and decrescendo in another). A  value of 
0 represents independence between performances 
regarding use of a variable (where the differences in 
use are equally balanced between two performances).
Kendall’s Tau rank correlations, together with 
the mean and standard deviations,31 can be efficient 
measurements for analysis when the definition of 
expressivity is the deviation from the norm defined 
by the score.
3 Local Maxima Phrase Detection (LMPD)
Cheng and Chew32 proposed a methodology to ana-
lyse phrasing strategies in expressive performances. 
They suggest relating local maxima in the loudness 
or tempo curves with the occurrence of performance 
phrases (or sub-phrases). That is, the number of 
peaks (local maximum: M) and valleys (minimum: 
m) to be found on the tempo and loudness curves 
of different sections of an analysed performance. In 
addition to counting the occurrence of possible local 
maxima to compare expressive phrasing strategies 
within the analysed portion of the piece, they sug-
gest three expressive descriptors:
 •  Phrase strength (S): a measure of the clarity of 
a given phrase, which estimates the difference 
between a local maximum (Mj) and the two 
adjoining local minima (mj and mj+1) for each 
note in the score (j).
 S M m M mj j j j= −( )+ − +12 1[ ( )]
2 Timescape visualization of the correlation between two 
different performances. The global-average correlation in 
timing between both performances is indicated at the top of 
the plot, the note-level correlation is shown at the bottom of 
the plot. The colour scale from black to white represents the 
correlation with black (maximal) and white (no correlation).
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 5 OF 13
 • Phrase volatility: the standard deviation of all 
phrase-strength values within a given music 
fragment. This is done by measuring ‘the degree 
of quantity of variance from the average phrase 
strength’,33 i.e. the magnitude of variability in 
phrase strength, from the average phrase strength.
 • Phrase typicality: this quantifies the ‘popular-
ity’ of a phrase by observing the proportion of 
performances that coincide on placing a local 
maximum at the same point of the fragment 
analysed. The more performers coinciding on 
the placement of local maxima, the more com-
mon that specific ‘expressive gesture’ will be.
Dataset selection
The excerpt analysed here consists of the first 21 bars 
plus the following seven notes (343 notes in total) 
from the Prelude of Bach’s Suite in G major. There 
are two reasons for choosing this piece. The first rea-
son is that, since Pablo Casals recorded it for first 
time in 1936, this Prelude has become one of the 
most recorded pieces of the Baroque solo repertory 
and is therefore an ideal case study for demonstrat-
ing the applicability of analytical methods to music 
performance. The fact that so many recordings are 
available makes it possible to study how perform-
ers vary their interpretations across time. Within the 
field of early music many studies could be based on 
the analysis of recordings; for instance, we may be 
able to trace the aesthetical developments and the 
effect that musicological findings might have had on 
these performances. The second reason is that the 
score’s isochronous rhythmic structure facilitates 
analysis of different approaches to phrasing without 
confounding effects from heterogeneity in rhythmic 
structures annotated in the score. Furthermore, nei-
ther the selected score excerpt nor the performances 
analysed are complicated by any ornamentation.
For the purpose of this study, a dataset of record-
ings of bwv1007 played on period instruments was 
collected. The recordings analysed were by Anner 
Bylsma, Jaap ter Linden and Peter Wispelwey, with 
at least two different recordings of each performer 
(listed in Table 1). In the case of Wispelwey, who has 
published three recordings of the Bach cello suites, 
I chose the two showing the greatest difference (his 
first and third recordings), as well as a broadcast 
(unpublished) live performance. Since assessing the 
use of period instruments based on the information 
supplied with the recordings might be misleading,34 
I estimated the frequency of the first note by visually 
analysing the spectrogram frequencies distribution. 
Within this dataset, the expressive features analysed 
are timing and loudness. Below I explain how these 
features were measured.
Detection and annotation of note onsets
In order to differentiate (and isolate) notes from an 
audio source it is necessary to identify the beginning 
(onset) of each recorded note. While many automatic 
and semi-automatic methods to do this have been pro-
posed, detection of onsets of low-frequency stringed 
instruments remains an unsolved challenge, since the 
attack of each note is not always discernible.35 After 
trying several automatic approaches I decided to use 
a manual annotation approach in order to maximize 
reliable timing measurements. For manual annota-
tion I used a procedure similar to the one presented 
by Robert Ashley,36 using the graphical audio analyser 
Sonic Visualiser37 to annotate aural and visual cues 
by hand (i.e. by looking at the beginning of peaks in 
the spectral representation). After verifying that the 
number of onsets corresponded to the number of 
notes being analysed, data were exported as a time 
series of onsets for further computation and analy-
sis. The beat-per-minute representation used here is 
measured per note and smoothed over the beat level, 
in this case a crotchet. The effects of smoothing and 
possible implications for the representation of timing 
has previously been addressed by Elaine Chew.38
Loudness extraction
To extract a loudness representation I used the Short 
Time-Varying Loudness model proposed by Brian 
Glasberg and Brian Moore,39 which quantifies loud-
ness (in sones, a standard unit of loudness) for each 
note played. The motivation behind choosing this 
model was that it accounts for psychoacoustic phe-
nomena such as frequency-dependent hearing thresh-
olds and level-dependent compression and masking, 
so better reflects the perception of the listener.
Data analysis and results
In addition to illustrating the impact of definitions 
on analysis of expressiveness, I wanted to assess any 
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 6 OF 13 Early Music
consistent differences between the first and subse-
quent recordings for each performer and whether 
this could be related to their musical characteri-
zations or individuality. Note that with this set of 
recordings I  do not attempt to represent a holistic 
‘idea’ of each of the performer’s musical personal-
ity (or individualism) but rather their curated ‘idea’ 
about how the piece should be performed at the 
time of recording. Given the well-established art-
istry of the performers, the recordings are expected 
to be the result of a thoughtful compendium of 
choices made a priori and afterwards curated (in 
most cases, the recordings have been edited through 
a post-production process with the final approval 
of the performer). Therefore these recordings 
reflect, if not the individuality of a performer, the 
expressive choices together with their up-to-the-
recording-date technical ability to represent those 
choices. These recordings can thus be interpreted to 
reflect the state of artistry of performers at different 
moments of their careers.
Timescapes analysis
In order to compare pairs of performances, different 
bell-shape correlation timescapes were generated 
with the online tool available at the Mazurka web-
site.40 Rather than illustrating this approach with all 
possible combinations of timescapes (49 plots in this 
case), illus.3 shows the timing correlations per per-
former between two recordings.
The differences between the two recordings of 
Anner Bylsma seem to be more homogeneous (more 
uniformly darker), reflecting lower correlations and 
hence a clearly different approach in general timing 
of the whole performance. On the timescape gener-
ated with the recordings of Jaap ter Linden we can 
observe a clear difference after the middle section 
and greater differences in the first part (half of the 
plot) of the excerpt. The timescape plot of Peter 
Wispelwey’s recordings shows very pronounced 
contrasts (black–white), indicating clearly different 
approaches in the phrasing of specific locations in 
the score.
Mean and standard deviation analysis
Illus.4 and 5 and Table  2 depict mean and stand-
ard deviations in tempo and loudness for each 
performance. The differences in the use of tempo 
between both recordings are more pronounced in 
the cases of Bylsma and Wispelwey, with Bylsma’s 
recordings exhibiting the greatest mean difference 
between recordings. No large differences in the 
use of dynamic means or standard deviations were 
observed, with the exception of the 2012 Wispelwey 
recording, but any such differences can be affected 
by the recording techniques and volume approaches 
specific to each recording (for example, microphone 
placement or signal compression may alter the loud-
ness on the final recorded product).
Despite the small number of performances ana-
lysed we can see a certain trend in the tempo mean 
through the last decades, interrupted by the 2001 
recording of Peter Wispelwey, who opts for a simi-
lar tempo mean to Bylsma in 1979. But no intuitive 
interpretation can be done on the use of loudness 
through these decades.
Table 1 The recordings analysed in this article
Performer Recording label Catalogue number Recording date Duration Abbreviation
Anner Bylsma RCA RD 70950 1979 2′12′′ B1979
Anner Bylsma Sony Vivarte S2K 48047 1992 2′49′′ B1992
Jaap ter Linden Harmonia Mundi HMU 907216.17 1996 3′19′′ L1996
Jaap ter Linden Brilliant Classics 93132 2006 3′14′′ L2006
Peter Wispelwey Channel Classics 1090 1990 2′27′′ W1990
Peter Wispelwey unpublished – AVRO – 2001 2′30′′ W2001
Peter Wispelwey Evil Penguin EPRC 012 2012 2′06′′ W2012
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 7 OF 13
Rank correlations
Kendall Tau correlation coefficients of timing and 
loudness were obtained for each pair of perfor-
mances, and are listed in Tables 3 and 4. As can be 
seen in Table 3, all the timing correlations are positive 
and significantly different from 0. It is remarkable to 
observe that, in most correlations, the coefficient is 
higher between recordings of the same performer 
than between recordings of different performers.41 
This might raise questions as to whether the second 
recordings of the performers might be constrained 
by different elements involved in the creation of 
their first recording (for instance, motoric memory), 
cognitive approaches to their flexibility in the use of 
expressive features or other possible causes.
In the analysis of loudness we must be aware that 
the loudness ranks could also be affected by the use 
of compression during the post-processing of the 
recording. Yet we can observe that the rank corre-
lations coefficients are much lower in the loudness 
measurements than those of timing, with eight out 
of 14 pairs exhibiting a negative correlation Tau coef-
ficient. This could mean that the trajectories in loud-
ness are quite different for most of the recordings, 
probably because the performers are, in this particular 
piece, not constrained by dynamics (unnotated in the 
3 Timescape visualizations between subsequent recording pairs by (from left to right), Anner Bylsma (1979/1992), Jaap ter 
Linden (1997/2006) and Peter Wispelwey (1990/2012)
4 Tempo means and standard deviation for each performance
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 8 OF 13 Early Music
score). Rather, they have diverse phrasing approaches 
based on their interpretation of the harmonic rhythm 
implicit in the score, and they have very different 
approaches in their different performances.
The differences between the rank correlations in 
loudness and timing could also be due to the fact 
that the rhythmic structure (isochronous notation 
through the whole analysed excerpt) together with 
the implicit melodic structure of this particular 
piece allows less variability in the phrasing strategies 
expressed with timing than the ones expressed with 
loudness. These data show that performers have 
a greater diversity in the expressive directions of 
loudness than in timing. In fact, the correlations 
in loudness between first and second recordings of 
both Wispelwey and Bylsma are negative, indicating 
different approaches to the use of loudness in the 
phrasing trajectories for each of the recordings.
Local Maxima Phrase Detection (LMPD)
The LMPD methodology presented above was 
applied, and illus.6 and 7 depict phrase typicality in 
counts per bar for both timing and loudness. Illus.6 
shows much more coincidence in typicality than 
illus.7, perhaps indicating that timing as opposed to 
loudness is a more relevant feature to differentiate 
motifs and structure within this particular piece.
The fact that timing is correlated at specific points of 
the score may be indicative of the performers empha-
sizing timing in a similar way as they themselves experi-
ence the aural transmission of the harmonic context as 
well as the underlying structure in the piece. In contrast, 
illus.7 shows very little typicality, consistent with the 
rank correlation analysis that loudness is a more flexible 
(or less stable) expressive feature than timing.
5 Loudness (extracted per note) means and standard deviations for each performance
Table 2 Mean and standard deviations for the 
performances analysed
Timing (BPM) Loudness (sones)
Mean Standard 
deviation
Mean Standard 
deviation
b1979 86 12.74 84 2.12
b1992 59 11.82 84 3.26
l1996 56 10.45 81 2.96
l2006 56 10.34 82 2.23
w2001 65 10.40 82 3.40
w1990 74 19.99 84 2.59
w2012 88 23.12 69 8.51
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 9 OF 13
Table  5 shows the analysis of phrase strengths and 
phrase volatility for each of the performances. The cor-
relation between loudness and timing of the phrase vol-
atility measurements is -0.27 while the correlation of the 
phrase strengths is 0.45. However, the canonical corre-
lation between the timing and loudness columns is 0.57 
and 0.36. Also, the phrase strengths clearly differ more 
in the loudness analysis (with a standard deviation of 
6.55) than in timing (with a standard deviation of 3.56). 
Anner Bylsma’s recordings show the greatest differences 
in the number of phrase strengths regarding loudness 
between the two recordings. The phrase volatility (devi-
ation from the overall mean among all recordings) is 
much bigger in terms of timing than loudness. This is 
probably due to the performers using different phras-
ing strategies, expressed as lengths in timing, combined 
with gradual accelerandi and decelerandi. That is, the 
arc lengths in expressive timing vary more in size than 
the ones of loudness, yet the loudness is less correlated. 
This is probably closely related to the harmonic rhythm 
influencing the expressive features.42 Depending on the 
musical context, a performer may choose to empha-
size shorter or longer phrasing through timing. The 
low volatility in loudness can also be explained from a 
harmonic rhythm perspective. The scalar motive of the 
pedal progression (repeated low G, see ex.1), together 
with the metrical structure, may be emphasized with 
loudness, in this way allowing for less volatility in com-
parison with timing. However, further experimentation 
and analysis would be necessary to verify whether the 
volatility could be affected by smoothing of loudness 
during the recording process and whether this would 
reduce the resultant volatility.
Conclusion and discussion
Within musicological literature very few studies 
have dealt with the analysis and comparison of per-
formances of a piece using more than one recording 
per performer. The advances in music information 
retrieval, performance science and music cognition 
Table 3 Kendall Tau correlation matrix comparing the 
Tempo curves of all pairs of performances
b1979 b1992 l1996 l2006 w1990 w2001 w2012
b1979 1 0.43 0.25 0.34 0.39 0.31 0.37
b1992 0.43 1 0.27 0.31 0.43 0.34 0.42
l1996 0.25 0.27 1 0.43 0.39 0.37 0.41
l2006 0.34 0.31 0.43 1 0.40 0.39 0.35
w1990 0.39 0.43 0.39 0.40 1 0.49 0.47
w2001 0.31 0.34 0.37 0.39 0.49 1 0.56
w2012 0.37 0.42 0.41 0.35 0.47 0.56 1
Table 4 Kendall Tau correlation matrix comparing the 
Loudness curves of all pairs of performances
b1979 b1992 l1996 l2006 w1990 w2001 w2012
b1979 1 -0.05 0.11 0.04 0.29 0.004 -0.06
b1992 -0.05 1 0.01 0.05 0.07 -0.10 0.20
l1996 0.11 0.01 1 0.36 0.15 0.12 -0.008
l2006 0.04 0.05 0.36 1 0.08 0.07 -0.04
w1990 0.29 0.07 0.15 0.08 1 -0.05 -0.16
w2001 0.004-0.10 0.12 0.07 -0.05 1 -0.03
w2012 -0.06 0.20 -0.008 -0.04 -0.16 -0.03 1
6 Timing Phrase typicality in all bars (based on local maxima) within the corpus
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 10 OF 13 Early Music
are facilitating a growing development in the field of 
digital humanities. These developments allow new 
research questions to be addressed as well as objec-
tively quantifying some of the expressive features 
that may play a role in the development of a per-
formance school. Methodologies such as the ones 
presented above broaden research possibilities, 
while perhaps narrowing the possible semantic gap 
between the subjective anecdotes collected in previ-
ous, interview-based performance research and the 
acoustic facts demonstrated by quantitative analy-
sis. In addition, many cognitive modelling and edu-
cational tools can benefit from these approaches in 
order to improve their development. While most of 
the differences in performance discussed here may 
be heard and shared among individuals, having the 
right computational tools to analyse, quantify and 
model different performances may ultimately aid 
understanding of the cognitive processes involved 
in the acts of listening and performing.
This study, by presenting and applying three alter-
native methodologies for the analysis of expressive-
ness of loudness and timing in several recordings of an 
excerpt of an iconic Baroque composition, has shown 
that, by combining different methodologies, we can 
begin to explain the interrelations between performers 
and their subsequent recordings from a musical per-
spective, as well as to visualize and measure individual 
approaches to the expressive strategies used in relation 
to the score structure. Within this set of performances, 
it has also been observed that the timing correlation 
between pairs of performances is in fact higher when 
comparing recordings of the same performer, even 
when there is more than a decade between the record-
ings (as in the cases of both Bylsma and Wispelwey). 
Furthermore, greater differences were found in the 
correlation per pair of performances for loudness 
than in the correlations for timing. This implies that, 
at least for this particular excerpt, performers differ 
more in their use of loudness as an expressive feature. 
This finding is in line with previous research carried 
out in a similar musical context (a Bach violin partita) 
by Eric Cheng and Elaine Chew.43
We must note that, in addition to loudness and 
timing, many other features (aural and non- aural) 
play a role in the definition of expressiveness. While 
the two recordings of Jaap ter Linden may seem to 
be more consistent than the ones of Peter Wispelwey 
7 Loudness Phrase typicality (based on local maxima) within the corpus
Table 5 Phrase Volatility and Phrase Strengths for 
Timing and Loudness
Timing (BPM) Loudness (sones)
Phrase 
volatility
Number 
of phrase 
strengths
Phrase 
volatility
Number 
of phrase 
strengths
b1979 12.79 113 1.33 104
b1992 11.17 109 2.32 91
l1996 10.91 102 1.45 97
l2006 10.39 106 1.49 101
w2001 14.88 108 1.73 95
w1990 17.80 107 1.84 95
w2012 10.45 104 4.10 84
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 11 OF 13
or Anner Bylsma in the use of timing or loudness, 
they might differ much more in other expressive fea-
tures such as the development in time of articulation 
and its relation to timbre, an aspect not measured 
here. Neither has this study evaluated the percep-
tual validity of our analytical interpretation, except 
for, indirectly, the psychoacoustic model of loudness 
used. Within the timing domain, it has been shown 
that timing is intrinsically linked to tempo, and that 
observed changes in timing may at least partly reflect 
differences in tempo.44 The representation of timing 
at a certain tempo may therefore not be generally 
applicable to performances across a broader range of 
tempos. This claim may compromise the comparison 
of performances when aiming for an explanation of 
the perceptual reality. I have focused rather on ana-
lysing the phrase volatility and phrase strengths of 
the whole excerpt as a quantitative exercise, and have 
not aimed to explain what the perception of these 
differences is. It is to be expected, however, that the 
‘characterization’ of a listener’s perception of expres-
siveness might be related to the perception of features 
such as phrase strength and volatility of both timing 
and loudness. Also, it is probable that these expressive 
choices are strongly linked to listener expectations 
biased by the cultural context surrounding these per-
formances, as the greater number of performances 
coinciding in the same phrase strength and volatility 
events of a piece, the stronger the expectations of the 
listeners will be towards these specific events of the 
same piece. More empirical research is thus needed 
to validate perceptually the relevance of the pro-
posed measures of expressivity and to understand 
better possible hierarchies in performers’ choices of 
expressive features, in the relation between expres-
sivity and performance characterization, as well as in 
the possible communication process implied.
While methodologies and techniques are still 
being developed, there is as yet little uniformity in 
methodological approach beyond the use of mean 
and standard deviations.45 In future, new methodol-
ogies may serve to validate the notion of expressive-
ness defined intrinsically. For example, deviations 
from a ‘norm’ could be defined in relation to a per-
formance itself rather than in relation to the score 
which, arguably, might not be readily accessible to 
the average listener when experiencing a perfor-
mance.46 While there are already statistical tools 
that help to cluster expressive trends within a per-
formance, the fields of computational and cognitive 
musicology could contribute to an intuitive percep-
tual and musical explanation. Future work should 
assess the extent to which performing non-isochro-
nous rhythmic structures may constrain the flexibil-
ity of performance with regard to timing or loudness. 
In addition, more insight is needed regarding pos-
sible effects of aesthetics on instrumental practice. 
For instance, is there a greater variability in timing 
in the performance of the cello suites played on a 
modern cello than on a Baroque cello? Is the use of 
phrasing generally different nowadays from 30 years 
ago? Could musicians also benefit from these meth-
odologies to develop novel expressive gestures and 
approaches to their performances of this Prelude? 
While this is also feasible, a more immediately rele-
vant aim in assessing interrelations between perfor-
mances is to reveal and understand the fingerprints 
left by the legacy of music recordings.
Carlos Vaquero is a PhD candidate at the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation of the 
University of Amsterdam, affiliated with the Music Cognition Group, under the supervision of Prof 
Dr Henkjan Honing and Dr Ivan Titov. His work concerns the development and definition of quanti-
tative methods for expressive performance analysis and modelling. vaquerocarlos@gmail.com
1 J. Butt, Playing with history: 
the historical approach to musical 
performance (Cambridge, 2002).
2 J. Wentz, ‘Gustav Leonhardt, the 
Naarden circle and early music’s 
reformation’, Early Music, xlii/1 (2014), 
pp.3–12.
3 R. Donington, The interpretation of 
early music (New York, 1963).
4 A. Geoffroy-Dechaume, Les ‘Secrets’ 
de la musique ancienne (Paris, 1964).
5 Johann Joachim Quantz, Versuch 
einer Anweisung die Flöte traversiere 
zu spielen (Berlin, 1752).
6 Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Versuch 
über die wahre Art das Clavier zu 
spielen (Berlin, 1753/62).
7 Leopold Mozart, Versuch einer 
gründlichen violinschule (Augsburg, 1756).
8 B. Haynes, The end of early music 
(New York, 2007).
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
pAGE 12 OF 13 Early Music
9 E. F. Clarke, ‘Rhythm and timing 
in music’, in The psychology of music, 
ed. D. Deutsch (San Diego, 2/1999), 
pp.473–500.
10 A. Gabrielsson, ‘Performance of 
rhythm patterns’, Scandinavian Journal 
of Psychology, xv/1 (1974), pp.63–72.
11 B. H. Repp, ‘Variability of timing in 
expressive piano performance increases 
with interval duration’, Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, iv/4 (1997), 
pp.530–4.
12 G. Brock-Nannestad, ‘The 
mechanization of performance studies’, 
Early Music, xlii/4 (2014), pp.623–30.
13 A. Gabrielsson, ‘Music performance 
research at the millennium’, Psychology 
of Music, xxxi/3 (2003), pp.221–72.
14 D. Fabian, E. Schubert and 
R. Timmers, Expressiveness in music 
performance: empirical approaches 
across styles and cultures (Oxford, 2014).
15 E. R. Miranda, A. Kirke and 
Q. Zhang. Guide to computing 
for expressive music performance 
(London, 2013), pp.99–121.
16 M. Grachten and G. Widmer, 
‘Who is who in the end? Recognizing 
pianists by their final ritardandi’, in 
10th International Society for Music 
Information Retrieval Conference 
(2009), pp.51–6.
17 J. Serrà, T. H. Özaslan and J. L. 
Arcos, ‘Note onset deviations as 
musical piece signatures’, PloS One, 
viii/7 (2013), e69268.
18 E. Stamatatos and G. Widmer, 
‘Automatic identification of music 
performers with learning ensembles’, 
Artificial Intelligence, clxv/1 (2005), 
pp.37–56.
19 R. Ramirez, E. Maestre and X. Serra, 
‘Automatic performer identification 
in commercial monophonic jazz 
performances’, Pattern Recognition 
Letters, xxxi/12 (2010), pp.1514–23.
20 R. Timmers and H. Honing, 
‘On music performance, theories, 
measurement and diversity’, Cognitive 
Processing (International Quarterly of 
Cognitive Science), i/2 (2002), pp.1–19.
21 Gabrielsson, ‘Performance of 
rhythm patterns’.
22 Timmers and Honing, ‘On music 
performance’.
23 P. Desain and H. Honing, ‘Towards 
a calculus for expressive timing in 
music’, Computers in Music Research, 
iii (1991), pp.43–120.
24 C. S. Sapp, ‘Comparative analysis 
of multiple musical performances’, in 
8th International Society for Music 
Information Retrieval (Vienna, 2007), 
pp.497–500.
25 B. Gingras, P. Asselin and 
S. McAdams, ‘Individuality 
in harpsichord performance: 
disentangling performer and piece 
specific influences on interpretive 
choices’, Frontiers in Psychology, iv/895 
(2013), pp.1–16.
26 E. Cheng and E. Chew, 
‘Quantitative analysis of phrasing 
strategies in expressive performance: 
computational methods and analysis 
of performances of unaccompanied 
Bach for solo violin’, Journal of New 
Music Research, xxxvii/4 (2008), 
pp.325–38.
27 Sapp, ‘Comparative analysis’.
28 M. Singer, ‘Fantasia for piano: Joyce 
Hatto’s incredible career’, The New 
Yorker (2007), pp.66–81.
29 A complementary standard 
technique to Kendall correlations when 
the data are not normally distributed is 
Spearman correlation.
30 Stamatatos and Widmer, ‘Automatic 
identification of music performers with 
learning ensembles’.
31 The mean, or average, is calculated 
by adding all the values of the 
measured variable and then dividing 
them by the number of values. 
The standard deviation indicates 
with a number how the values 
(measurements) of a group of events 
are spread out from the mean.
32 Cheng and Chew, ‘Quantitative 
analysis of phrasing strategies’.
33 Cheng and Chew, ‘Quantitative 
analysis of phrasing strategies’.
34 D. Tidhar, S. Dixon, E. Benetos and 
T. Weyde, ‘The temperament police’, 
Early Music, xlii/4 (2014), pp.579–90.
35 N. Collins, ‘A comparison of 
sound onset detection algorithms 
with emphasis on psychoacoustically 
motivated detection functions’, in 
Proceedings of the 118th AES Convention 
(Barcelona, 2005), pp.28–31.
36 R. Ashley, ‘Do[n’t] change a hair 
for me: the art of jazz rubato’, Music 
Perception, xix/3 (2002), pp.311–32.
37 Sonic Visualiser, www.
sonicvisualiser.org/.
38 E. Chew and C. Callender, 
Mathematics and Computation in 
Music: 4th International Conference 
(Berlin 2013), pp.76–87.
39 B. R. Glasberg and B. C. J. Moore, 
‘A model of loudness applicable to 
time-varying sounds’, Journal of 
Audio Engineering Society, l/5 (2002), 
pp.331–42.
40 The Mazurka Project, http://
mazurka.org.uk/.
41 We must note that slightly different 
results could be obtained when the 
tempo per note would have a different 
smoothing function (for example, 
obtained over the semiquaver or bar 
instead that over the beat level) or no 
smoothing at all.
42 Cheng and Chew, ‘Quantitative 
analysis of phrasing strategies’.
43 Cheng and Chew, ‘Quantitative 
analysis of phrasing strategies’.
44 P. Desain and H. Honing, ‘Tempo 
curves considered harmful’, in Time 
in contemporary musical thought, 
ed. J. D. Kramer, Contemporary 
Music Review, vii/2 (1993), pp.123–38.
45 A further barrier to progress in 
the modelling and comparison of 
techniques in the field of expressive 
performance may be that many of the 
datasets used in the literature are not 
publicly available.
46 Grachten and Widmer, ‘Who is 
who in the end? Recognizing pianists 
by their final ritardandi’.
 at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Early Music PAGE 13 OF 13
Abstract
Carlos Vaquero
A quantitative study of seven 
historically informed performances of 
Bach’s bwv1007 Prelude
In the field of early music, the urge to realize his-
torically informed interpretations has led to new 
perspectives about our musical legacy from schol-
ars and performers alike. Consequently, different 
schools of early music performance practice have 
been developed through the 20th and 21st centuries. 
Analysing the development of performance practice 
and aesthetics from the perspective of cognitive and 
computational musicology can potentially provide 
insights into interrelations between musicology, 
performance practice and cognition.
In the field of performance analysis we may there-
fore aim to find out which aspects are involved in 
the categorization of performances or in the identi-
fication and understanding of possible performance 
trends that change over time. For instance, are sud-
den changes in tempo within the performance of 
a piece representative of certain musicologically 
informed interpretations? Is this approach commu-
nicated by the performance itself? Do perception 
and cognition play a role in the aesthetic choices 
involved in performance?
This article concentrates on applying three state-
of-the-art quantitative methodologies in expressive 
performance analysis to elucidate possible relations 
among musicological and cognitive interpretations. 
It is shown how a particular methodology may serve 
(or constrain) the ability to compare different inter-
pretations and define ‘expressiveness’. For this pur-
pose, an analysis and comparison is presented of 
seven performances of the Prelude from J. S. Bach’s 
Cello Suite no.1 in G major, bwv1007, played by 
three different performers.
Keywords: J. S.  Bach; performance practice; expressive 
performance analysis; historically informed perfor-
mance; cello  at A
egean U
niversity on O
ctober 22, 2015
http://em
.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
