S.K. Bandyopadhyay et al. (Eds.): ISA 2010, CCIS 76, pp. 163–178, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 
Jari Veijalainen, Alexander Semenov, and Jorma Kyppö 
Univ. of Jyväskylä, Dept. of Computer Science and Information Systems,  
P.O. Box 35 FIN-40014 Univ. of Jyväskylä 
{Jari.Veijalainen,Alexander.Semenov,Jorma.kyppo}@jyu.fi 
Abstract. There are over 300 known school shooting cases in the world and over 
ten known cases where the perpetrator(s) have been prohibited to perform the 
attack at the last moment or earlier. Interesting from our point of view is that in 
many cases the perpetrators have expressed their views in social media or on 
their web page well in advance, and often also left suicide messages in blogs and 
other forums before their attack, along the planned date and place. This has 
become more common towards the end of this decennium. In some cases this has 
made it possible to prevent the attack. In this paper we will look at the 
possibilities to find commonalities of the perpetrators, beyond the fact that they 
are all males from eleven to roughly 25 years old, and possibilities to follow their 
traces in the digital sphere in order to cut the dangerous development towards an 
attack. Should this not be possible, then an attack should be averted before it 
happens. We are especially interested in the multimedia data mining methods 
and social network mining and analysis that can be used to detect the possible 
perpetrators in time. We also present in this paper a probabilistic model that can 
be used to evaluate the success/failure rate of the detection of the possible 
perpetrators. 
Keywords: School shootings, social media, multimedia data mining. 
1   Introduction 
Various educational institutions play an important role in the developed countries. 
Almost every individual spends at least nine years at school and majority of them 
continue their studies two to ten years more in vocational schools, high schools and 
universities.  Thus, the time spent in these institutions has a big impact for the lives of 
the individuals both mentally and professionally. Success or failure at various stages 
in education can have a profound effect for the future of individuals. 
Schools have existed several hundred years, but only since the 19th century they 
have become a mass institution that offers education for the entire population. There 
have been violent incidents at schools since the 19th century, but they were almost 
solely performed by adults. Since 1970’ies a new phenomenon can be observed; such 
attacks that are performed by the students that visit the educational institution at the 
time of the attack or have recently visited it. The target of the attack can be the 
institution itself, or the social order among peers. Often it is the goal to kill as many as 
164 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
possible people randomly, but in some cases there can be also a list of people that 
should be at least killed. The attack has been in most cases performed by fire arms, 
although also explosive devices, Molotov cocktails, and knives and swords have been 
used alone or in combination with fire arms. This trend started in USA in the 1970’ies 
and has spread since then to Europe and to some extent to other countries, like Japan 
and Middle-East. 
In this paper we first shortly review the history of attacks that have been performed 
against or at schools.  After that we will present a mathematical model that predicts 
what the capture rate of the potential school shooters is during the planning phase or 
just before they are able to launch the attack. We then present an architecture for a 
system that is meant to crawl the “interesting” multimedia material in Internet and 
evaluate it from the perspective of the potential dangerous developments. Conclusions 
close the paper. 
2   Historical Notes about School Shootings 
The only global public source about school shootings seems to be Wikipedia [1, 2]. In 
USA there is an authority called National School Safety Center that collects statistics 
and publishes reports on the issues [5]. In Finland a working group has been set up in 
2009 that has produced an intermediary report on school safety issues [7] and has 
published its final report in February 2010. In Germany, three incidents have 
happened during 2009 and the German experts have collected a list of 83 actions 
against such cases [8].  
The Wikipedia page [1] reports 18 school shootings or other lethal incidences in or 
at elementary schools in various parts of the world before the year 1974 (since 18th 
century), where the perpetrators have been civilian adults, organized military forces or 
adult terrorists. The first incidence performed by a school kid is from January 17, 
1974, when a 14-years old boy named Steven Guy shot the principal and wounded 
three others with a pistol and revolver at Clara W. Barton Elementary School in 
Chicago, USA. The reason seems to have been that it was decided that he would be 
transferred to a social adjustment center. The next similar case is from January 29, 
1979, when 16 years old Brenda Ann Spencer killed 2 adults, and wounded eight 
children and one police officer. The reason for the shootings according to her “I don't 
like Mondays. This livens up the day”. In addition to her, there are currently only two 
further known female perpetrators, one in USA and one in Germany (the latter from 
May 2009, see above). 
The list of incidents is considerably longer for the secondary schools. The first 
incident of the current style seems to have happened in Vilnius on May 6, 1925, 
where two-three students have attacked the board of examiners and other students 
during final exam with revolvers and hand grenades killing 5-10 people including 
themselves. Since then there were some cases per each decennium, almost all reported 
from USA. The frequency of incidents begins to grow during 1960’ies, although 
during 1958-1966 there are no reported incidents but about six towards the end of the 
decennium. The first reported cases from Canada are from 1975. In both cases the  
 
 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 165 
perpetrators used guns and killed themselves after the shoot out. There are already ten 
cases during 1970’ies.  
During 1980’ies the number of incidents begins to grow, reaching seventeen cases 
in total. The first incident reported from France is from the year 1984. The student 
killed his teacher and subsequently himself. The first incident from Finland is from 
the year 1989, when a 14-year old student killed two fellow students and tried to kill 
the third one. He used the pistol of his father. Most cases during 1980’s are from 
USA. During 1990’ies the number of listed cases explodes to roughly 70. Most of the 
cases are from USA, but also two cases in Austria, one in Netherlands, one in UK, 
and one in Canada are recorded. In addition, there were a few military operations 
against schools in developing countries.  
Since 1999 there have been almost 100 incidents at secondary schools. During the 
last ten years there have been almost ten incidents in Germany and several in 
Netherlands and in South-Africa and at least one in Brazil and Finland (in Jokela on 
Nov. 7, 2007). Perhaps the most known is Columbine High School  incident in 
Colorado, USA, performed by two students of the school, Eric Harris and Dylan 
Klebold on April 20, 1999. Although they also committed suicide after their rampage, 
they had left a lot of planning and other literary material, as well as video material 
behind. Since the release of the material to the public space by the police in 2006, 
several books have appeared on the case [3, 4]. On March 26, 2001 In Kenya, two 
students burned down a dormitory and 67 students were killed, 19 wounded. The 
reported reason for the arson was that the results of the exam were nullified by the 
university.  The pattern seems to be in most cases similar, as concerns the way of 
performing the attack. In North-America and Europe hand guns are mostly used as 
weapons. In some rare cases also inflammable liquids like gasoline or explosive 
devices are used. In Far-East knives have almost solely been used.  
The list of incidents on university/college campuses also contains over hundred 
entries. The first is from the year 1908. The incidents are of private nature (grudge 
against a particular individual, love affairs within the college faculty etc.) until the 
case of Charles Whitman, 25, killed 14 people and wounded 32 in 1966,. After this 
the incidents perpetrated by students usually require one or at most few casualties, 
until Dec. 6, 1989 incident in Canada, Montreal. During this rampage Marc Lepine, 
25, killed 15 and injured 14.  He also committed suicide.  During nineties the highest 
death toll in this category was six in 1991 In USA and six in 1997 in Russia.   
The last ten years has meant increasing number of incidents in this category. Most 
of the cases required 1-3 victims. The worst case was the Virginia Tech massacre on 
April 16, 2007, performed by Seung-Hui Cho, 23. His shoot out left 33 dead and 25 
injured. He also committed suicide. The next worst shoot out happened on April 30, 
2009 in Baku, Azerbaijan, where Farda Gadirov, 29, shot 13 and injured 10 persons at 
the Azerbaijan State Oil Academy. He also committed suicide after his shootout. The 
third worst case has been the Kauhajoki shooting in Finland on September 23, 2008 
performed by Matti Saari, 22, who also shot himself after the rampage. The trial 
against the police officer that had granted the gun license and did not confiscate the 
weapon of Saari on the previous day, Sept. 22nd, after an interview, has been started 
on Dec. 3, 2009 [14]. According to media reports the police officer was aware of the  
 
 
166 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
two videos that Saari had posted to YouTube where he was shooting with his gun on a 
shooting range.  
There are about ten cases reported in [1] where the perpetrator or perpetrators have 
been discovered before they been able to launch the attack. Since 2006 all the cases 
are such that various Internet resources have played a role in foiling the case, because 
the perpetrators have left there clear enough signals for the planned attack.  
3   Background of the Modeling and Related Work 
Our basic view is that a baby is not predestined to become a school shooter. Rather, 
during the millions of interactions with the surrounding world his mental state, 
ideological and political views develop towards such a potential. Out of those with 
such a potential some individuals then begin to plan an attack and some of them really 
perform such an attack, before it is disclosed and prohibited. A school shooter goes 
through a particular mental process before he begins to plan an attack and finally 
performs it. During this process he very often engages in certain kind of behavioral 
patters that should be interpreted in a suitable way while assessing the violence 
potential. 
This result was established in the US report [12] that was based on 37 incidents 
with 41 perpetrators during years 1974-2000 in USA. Ten detained perpetrators were 
also interviewed. The same idea is used in Germany [11,13]. According to the 
findings of [12] 1) school shootings are a special variant among the youth violence 
that is seldom characterized by excessive alcohol or drug consumption, bad school 
results, or breaking of common norms. 2) The perpetrators are often introvert and 
solitaire, 3) the perpetrators were often depressive and had even attempted suicide 4) 
many of the perpetrators had hinted about their plans in advance 5) just before the 
attack some negative things happened to the perpetrator or a stabilizing factor was lost 
from his life. 
The German sample in [13] is rather small but covers all the school shooting cases 
in 1999-2006. In many ways the patterns are similar to those in USA. All the 
perpetrators came from stable family circumstances, six of them still lived at home. 
The families were middle class and no family problems were known in the 
neighborhood. All perpetrators except one had access to fire arms at home. Three had 
had incidents with police earlier and one was waiting for a trial.  All had threatened to 
bring weapons to school and kill somebody.  In some cases the perpetrator had 
threatened to kill certain teacher or a peer. All seem to have narcissistic treats in their 
characters and low self-esteem. All had had recently problem in their life with school 
or a grandparent had just died (in two cases).  
From our point of view interestingly, in all seven cases the perpetrators had leaked 
their intentions to attack to the environment. The last one in 2006 used Internet to do 
it, others communicated orally with their peers. The authors think, though, that 
Internet will gain fast more importance in this respect, i.e. leakage might happens 
more through Internet. This seems to be the case, but it would require more analysis 
to be more exact about this. 
 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 167 
It has been observed in majority of the cases [15] that all school shooters have at 
least some kind of a plan before they start it. All phases take time, e.g. the detailed 
planning takes time. Finally, the school shooters often leave a message to the world 
before they perform the attack and they leak their plans openly or less openly. 
Nowadays this often happens in social media forums (YouTube, Twitter, private web 
pages, blogs, etc.). Thus, there is window of opportunity to capture the perpetrator or 
to protect the target before the perpetrator is able to launch the attack. But could the 
earlier signs emitted to the inter-subjective space be interpreted correctly? 
In general, there is a lot of information about individuals in every society. Before a 
child is born, there is no information about him or her (well, perhaps in the dreams of 
the mother and father, though). After the pregnancy has been confirmed the parents 
and in many countries also authorities will create pieces of information about the 
unborn child.  After the birth information about the child further grows. In the 
technically developed states this information is often encoded into the digital sphere 
either by people themselves, other individuals or by authorities. But even in the most 
developed countries a large amount of information about individuals remains in the 
consciousness of the other people – and of the person him- or herself. A part of the 
information will exist in inter-subjective but analog form, on pieces of paper as text, 
drawings, as photographs, or entire books, etc. These kinds of pieces of information 
can be very valuable when somebody tries to estimate the potential of a person to 
attack a school, as the case in Columbine has been shown [3,4]. Unfortunately, the 
information about a student is often scattered around and nobody has a complete view 
on it [17, pp. 83-85]. This is partially deliberate and aims at protecting the privacy of 
the individuals, but partially this follows from the scattered nature of the control and 
support systems. 
The overall situation concerning the information about an individual is depicted in 
Fig. 1. All digitally encoded public information is roughly information that can be 
accessed from a usual desktop everywhere in the world, if the user just knows how to 
search for it. This mostly contains pieces of information the person him- or herself has 
created and put into a blog, electronic discussion group or other social media 
platforms, or then somebody from the social of the person network has created and 
published it. The public digital information can also contain pieces of information 
collected and released by authorities, such as car ownership, taxation details, or 
school performance. Finally, some companies might publish some information about 
their customers. The widest set of digital information contains all the public and 
private records about a person, as well as information collected by the authorities 
(complete identity, driving and gun licenses, medical records, criminal record, drug 
incidents, domicile, etc.) and companies (customer profile, pseudonyms at a site, 
purchase history, credit card #, phone #, etc.). In Europe it is currently required by a 
directive [6] that the context information of every phone call, Internet (TCP/IP) 
connection, or SMS must be stored for 6 to 24 months into a database of an operator.  
The access to this information is naturally restricted only to authorities and only to 
cases where police suspects that the person is involved in criminal activities.  
 
168 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
 
Fig. 1. Information about an individual over time 
We apply the idea that any child goes through a certain development path while 
becoming an adult. In fact, there are extremely many possible paths. The totality of 
development paths is still given by the genes of the person. For instance, the 
maximum height of the person, his or her physical appearance, the potential to be 
brilliant or less brilliant in learning and using languages or mathematics is determined 
genetically. And trivially, only women have the potential to become a biological 
mother and men the biological father. (This potential does not, however, become real 
for about 19 % of the women in the contemporary USA, according to Wikipedia).  
During the millions of interactions with the outside world, especially with the social 
environment, certain potentially possible developments are chosen and others 
possibly prohibited. A very simple example is the question what languages can the 
person speak when he or she is 20 years old. If the school did not offer studies in 
Chinese and English is spoken at home, it is extremely improbable that the kid would 
understand Chinese when he or she becomes 20. On the other hand, if Chinese was 
offered at school then he or she might be rather fluent in speaking, writing and 
reading that language, instead of German or Spanish that he or she might have also 
learned. That is to say, he or she might have the genetic and mental potential to learn 
Chinese, but it requires certain conditions in the environment to be realized. Further, 
if one studies certain languages in the school, it is usually hard afterwards to enhance 
the language skills. This is because the ability learn new languages becomes worse 
with the growing age but more importantly, people do not have time any more to 
study when they have family and work. Thus, choosing certain languages at school 
prohibits certain others to be ever learned. In many countries with common liability to 
military service all males are taught to use weapons during the military training, but 
there is no reason why not almost every female would learn how to use them. Still in 
many countries this does not happen, because female persons are not given military 
training and for cultural and other reasons women are not allowed to learn these skills 
in civil life. Thus, majority of women in the world do not have shooting skills in 
practice.  
Now the above said, are there people that would not become school shooters on 
any possible individual development path spanned by the genes, i.e. no matter how 
the life would treat him or her, the kid would not become a school shooter during his 
or her life. The answer is that with very high probability there are such kids, because 
we know that there are kids who were treated very badly, but did not organize a 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 169 
rampage. Further, female students hardly ever go on rampage. We can also pose the 
opposite question, are the people that will become school shooters no matter how 
their life would treat them? That would mean that they would be predestined by their 
genes to become school shooters. Here the answer is with extremely high probability 
no. This is because this way or reacting is given historically and different 
circumstances and external interventions can prohibit the development. The idea that 
it is question of development during childhood and adolescence has been elaborated 
e.g. in [15-18] and in many other sources. Newman’s book [18] and [15] argue that 
these kinds of reactions are culturally determined, and it is the way the young (white) 
men in suburban and rural communities have begun to solve their problems with 
regard to social status – and psychological problems that are in some cases caused by 
the family and further social situation. According to [4] a part of the perpetrators are 
psychopaths (e.g. Eric Harris, Columbine), some are deeply traumatized (Mitchell 
Johnson, Arkansas massacre), and some are psychotic (e.g. Dylan Klebold, 
Columbine). Evidently, such people have gone to the schools also earlier, but they did 
not organize a massacre. The circumstances in the society have changed in order for 
this to become an option for individuals.  
Now, the model would contain all possible developments the individual would 
have based on the genes. The concrete interactions with other people and physical 
environment then enable some of these and at the same time prohibit some of these. 
This is depicted in Fig. 2. A path in the tree models crucial possible development 
paths of an individual. The nodes model the crucial changes in external and internal 
circumstances of the individual. E.g. a divorce of the parents might be such an event, 
or relocation of the family – or beginning of a series of traumatic events, such as 
molestation or bullying. How many paths in this tree of possible developments are 
such that contain the possibility of school shooting? And if the development takes a 
certain course, does it stay on that course irrespective of the other influences from the 
environment. The larger the set of different circumstances that cannot misguide the 
development from the paths that lead to “normal life”, the more resilient is the person 
against troubles in life. And vice versa, the less circumstances and paths lead to 
“normal life”, the more there are risk potential for such an individual. At which 
phases of the individual development, and with what means, is it possible to keep the 
development on such paths that does not lead to these kinds of attacks - or any kind of 
violent attacks within the society? The problem is that – against a common belief – 
the “middle-class normality” in life would automatically lead to a development 
towards a “normal life”.  
How to determine, on which path the individual development is? If some external 
actor had all possible information about an individual, especially about his feelings 
and thoughts and the information the person is seeking in the digital sphere and 
elsewhere, this would be easy. This actor would know when the person started to feel 
bad, why is this so in his opinion, who and what he hates, when he starts to make 
plans for an attack, why, how, with whom. But in reality there is no such actor, 
although the person himself has of course the sufficient information in his 
consciousness. The path should be determined from the inter-subjective information 
emitted by a person to other people – or computer programs.  
 
170 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
  
Fig. 2. Potential development paths of an individual  
The latter can be used at least in two ways. The first is to design an expert system 
that is being used by the professionals. The expert system contains the typical 
characteristics of a path that might lead to a school shooting, especially towards the 
end of the path. These have been extracted from the past cases and general 
psychological and criminalist knowledge. The system poses questions that the user 
should answer concerning the case. The system responds with risk potential analysis. 
This approach is followed in Dyrias [9,10].  
Another approach is to evaluate the public and possibly non-public digital 
information accessible in the digital sphere and try to find individuals that might be on 
a path leading to a rampage. This can be done automatically or semi-automatically. 
What is the information that should be sought? Where? In which relation is this 
information in the digital sphere to the information known by the peers and other 
people in the local social environment? Can we draw some conclusions about the path 
youngsters are on based on the public information? These are questions that we cannot 
answer at this stage of the research. Rather, we first design a general probabilistic 
model that should be able to measure the success and failure rates of discovering the 
dangerous development. It is the matter of further study to estimate the probabilities. 
4   The Analytical Model 
Based on the above considerations we can design a model that predicts how well it is 
possible to grasp the development of a person towards a school shooter. We will use a 
probabilistic approach. The main reason is that there is not a known set of sufficient 
conditions detectable in the person’s life history that would predict with certainty an 
attack of this type. Also the set of five necessary conditions established e.g. in [18] 
can be challenged, at least as concerns the access to fire arms. The attack performed 
by Georg. R  in Ansbach [19], Germany was performed without fire arms and several 
attacks in Far-East have happened with knives. As is known now [3], in the 
Columbine attack on April 20, 1999 the main weapons were explosive devices, the 
fire arms were just a backup. Still, in USA it is probably wise to keep the access to 
fire arms on the list of necessary conditions, because the culture is so gun oriented. 
Another reason for using a probabilistic model is that it seems to be the only way 
try to measure the correctness of the reactions of the environment to various 
information. E.g. in the Kauhajoki shooting case the local police knew about the 
Normal 
life
Troubled life 
without crime 
Potential path 
to rampage 
Criminal life
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 171 
shooting videos in YouTube several days before the school shooting , but the decision 
of a senior police officer on Sept. 22nd, 2008 was that Saari (shooter) can keep his 
weapon, because the videos are harmless and because Saari seems to be “normal 
young man”. He evidently [20] ignored the text in Saari’s YouTube profile, next to 
the videos. It first speaks about forgotten war that returns, about dead children and 
how mothers screamed when war came and killed their children in fire, for revenge. It 
ends “… Whole life is war and whole life is pain; and you will fight alone in your 
personal war; War; This is war.” Beneath are his hobbies: computers, guns, sex and 
beers. Movies he likes Saw1-3, and further horror movies. Can there be a clearer hint 
that the person is in a private war and that he will use his gun in it? Still, a study 
counselor at his school stated that it was impossible to detect any problems in his 
behavior [20]. This is one of the false negative cases whose probabilities should also 
be included into the model. 
An essential assumption behind the model is that the more information the 
environment has about the person, his real thoughts and plans, the more probable it is 
that the correct interpretation of the path is possible. And vice versa. These are two 
independent events in our model. We model separately the phase of the individual’s 
development until the point where he decides to perform an attack, and the 
development after that.  We assume that it would be possible to redirect the person’s 
development towards normal or at least in the first phase with a certain probability, 
assuming that the information about him is correctly interpreted. In the other phase he 
is already on a path leading to the rampage during which the attack is being planned 
and perhaps also other peers recruited into the plot or informed (cf. the German cases 
in [14]). In this phase the environment should try to interpret the possible signals 
correctly and prevent the attack. We distinguish between analog information and 
digital information in this respect, because the digital information can be mined later 
and automatic tools can perhaps be used to determine the path. Of course, the person’s 
development can hardly be redirected by remote people, only by local community the 
person lives in. An attack plan can be disclosed by remote people, perhaps helped by 
software, but schools or other possible targets can only be protected by local people. 
The set of people we primarily target in our model (person i) are the male’s 
currently roughly 10 to 25 years old and having access to Internet. The “other people” 
that might take preventive actions or influence the development are potentially the 
entire mankind, but in practice a small group of mostly local people.  
For each of those cases we define the following probabilities: 
 
P
dana
i
 = probability that a person i discloses information in an analog form (face-
to-face, on a piece of paper, during a phone call) to other people that are relevant to 
determine that he is on a path that might lead to a rampage (up to a possible attack 
planning) 
P
ddig
i
 = probability that a person i discloses information in the digital sphere (social 
network sites, www pages, emails, text messages, chat rooms, etc) that are relevant to 
determine that he is on a path that might lead to a rampage  (up to attack planning) 
P
iana
i
 = probability that another person j or group of people correctly interprets the 
analog information and determines the dangerous path the person i is on correctly 
172 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
P
idig
i
  = probability that another person or a group of them correctly interprets the 
digital information and determines the dangerous path person i is on correctly 
P
iattack
i
 = probability that the potential perpetrator i releases the attack plan 
including the schedule and perhaps suicide message before attack in an analog form to 
other people 
P
dattack
i
 = probability that the potential perpetrator i releases the attack plan 
including the schedule and possibly a suicide message before the attack in a digital 
form either on a social network site or similar or stores it into his computer. 
[r,a] = time interval between the release of the attack plan information or exposure 
of the attack (e.g. weapons missing, perpetrator with weapon sighted) and the planned 
start of the attack. 
(t)P
avert
i
 = probability that police or other people in the community or outside it 
can avert the attack of i t seconds after they get the information that it is going to 
happen or is exposed 
P
redirect
i
 = probability that the potential perpetrator i is moved to a “normal path” 
in his life before attack by other people, after his being on the dangerous path has 
been identified by the local or remote community.  
 
It is clear that the shorter the interval [r,a], the more difficult it is to prohibit the 
attack. It is also true that t < a-r must hold for averted cases. The probability to avert a 
planned attack is shown at (1). 
r)-a(t|(t)   PPP i
avert
i
avert
ar,i,
<=                             (1) 
r)-a(tP ar,i, <  = probability that the time between the exposure of deliberate 
disclosure of the plans and the planned start of the attack of perpetrator i is t seconds. 
We also conjecture that if the person is moved from a possible development path 
that might lead to a rampage to a path leading only to “normal life”, the probability of 
a rampage organized by this person becomes zero. Thus, rampage can only follow in 
the model, if redirection attempts did not take place at all or failed. In the model, the 
latter can only be attempted, if suitable signals emitted by person i were observable 
and were interpreted correctly. Thus, we get an overall measuring function (2).  
 
) )|(t)(   |(   
)    )|(  )|(  (
  
PPPPPP
PPPPPPPP
P
dattack
i
avert
i
dattack
i
iattack
i
avert
i
iattack
i
redirect
i
redirect
i
ddig
i
idig
i
ddig
i
dana
i
iana
i
dana
i
others  toharm no
i
⋅+⋅×
×+⋅⋅+⋅
=
           (2) 
It is our goal to assess the above probabilities based on the existing cases. The 
function f is already loosely based on real cases. If the attack plan is published on a 
web site e.g. 5 minutes before the attack begins, there is no much chance the attack 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 173 
could be prevented by authorities. It is almost as probable as foiling the attack when 
the perpetrator tries to access the school and weapons are discovered at the gate or at 
the door.  
The Kauhajoki case is an example of the false negative interpretation of the 
available information (see above). It seems that it was done in order to avoid false 
positive. Matti Saari was interpreted by the senior police officer to be on a normal 
enough path and he thought that he would just make the life of Saari more difficult, if 
he confiscated the weapon. Avoiding both false positives (3) and negatives (4) should 
be the goal. Our model must be slightly enhanced to capture these.  
 
P
dnana
i
 = probability that a person i discloses information in an analog form (face-
to-face, on a piece of paper, during a phone call) to other people that are relevant to 
determine that he is on a normal path or at least not going to organize a school 
shooting 
P
dndig
i
 = probability that a person i discloses information in the digital sphere 
(social network sites, www pages, emails, text messages, chat rooms, etc) that are 
relevant to determine that he is on a normal path or at least not going to organize a 
school shooting 
P
wnana
i
 = probability that another person j or group of people wrongly interprets 
the analog information and concludes that person i is on a path  leading perhaps to a 
rampage although he is not 
P
wndig
i
 = probability that another person or a group of them wrongly interprets the 
digital information about i and concludes that person i is on path leading perhaps to 
rampage although he is not  
 
Now,  
)|( )| (  PPPPP
dndig
i
wndig
i
dnana
i
wnana
i
positive false
i
+=                               (3) 
 ( ) ( )PPPPPPP ddigiidigiddigidanaiianaidanainegaitive falsei |-1  |-1 ⋅+⋅=              (4) 
It is for further study, what is the exact relationship of the false negatives and false 
positives. Intuitively, the weaker the external signals of the potential problems in the 
development of an individual, the bigger the error towards false negative. But what 
kind of signals make the environment to err towards false positive? And what are the 
consequences for an individual in this case? Several cases have been lately reported in 
Finland, where the peers have revealed a student to police that has then taken him to 
custody and questioned him. It turned out that in one case this was a way of bullying 
the boy that did not quite fit into the class. 
In order to assess the model and find ways of increasing the probabilities of 
detecting those who are on a path to become a school shooter or who have already 
determined to launch an attack, we must evidently look at old cases. What were the 
signals that should have been noticed? While going through the past school shooting 
cases, it would be tempting to collect as much information as possible concerning the 
174 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
perpetrators, including the medical history, social networks, relationships with 
opposite sex, social status of the family, complete history of the actions in the social 
media, etc. This is unfortunately impossible in most cases, especially for the cases 
lying back tens of years. Gathering even all the available information from the 
sources mentioned in [2] is as such a big task. Further, we are especially interested in 
foiled cases, because they make it possible to assess the probabilities with which the 
attack plans fail. Unfortunately, media coverage is not extensive in these cases, and 
following the development path of an individual backwards to a point where he turned 
towards a rampage is difficult due to a lack of available public information.  
Many of the interesting pieces of information are such that we cannot capture them 
in the digital sphere at all or not without breach of privacy, but the more the people 
disclose information about themselves in the digital sphere the more we can find it 
and take action. 
5   Technologies to Increase Detection Probabilities 
The basic idea of using technology is to try to find the signals in the digital sphere that 
would help the environment to find out which path a young person is on. As it has 
turned out that the persons closest to the troubled individuals are not able to recognize 
the signs or interpret them correctly, and because latter sometimes leave clear 
information about their behavior into digital sphere, we will look into these signs. The 
first step would be implementing an ontology that captures relevant issues from the 
above studies. 
We as researchers that can only use the public information have roughly four 
problems:  
 
1) to compile an ontology that would capture the behavior patterns of possible 
perpetrators; 
2) to filter out of hundreds of millions users at various social media sites those 
persons that might be on path to a rampage; 
3) to evaluate closer the cases based on the information gathered; 
4) to report towards the local communities if a person has announced targeted 
threats or a concrete attack plan. 
 
At first it is necessary to compile the profile of potential perpetrator, including the 
keywords, video patterns and so on and make the set of the inference rules for the 
ontology system. Then, based on the ontology, system should capture the information  
from the most versatile web-sites for youth communication and add it to our storage. 
The second problem is solved by a web crawler that accesses suitable sites and 
attempts to gather “interesting contents”, i.e. such contents that contain signals about 
a person that might launch a rampage. The gathered multimedia content is stored in a 
database along the meta information that corresponds to the ontology above. 
The social network information is also gathered and stored into a social network 
analyzer. The idea is to investigate, whether the people have connections to earlier 
perpetrators or to persons that had. 
 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 175 
The third issue is basically solved by evaluating the multimedia material, such as 
videos, audio, text from blogs, etc. that is, multimedia data mining. For instance, 
finding shooting videos should be rather easy based on the sound of shots. 
Threatening contents is already a more complicated thing and requires further 
techniques. We will elaborate these issues below. 
Below is presented a basic view on the architecture of the envisioned prototype 
system, without splitting it to different tiers. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Potential architecture of the detection and evaluation system 
Information is going to be collected from the web with help of web-crawler that 
could fetch the data from public web-pages (like blogs) and protected areas (deep-
web). For example, Facebook pages are closed to unregistered persons. Crawler 
should properly handle these situations. Crawler could be written using PHP or 
Python, also it is possible to use 3rd party software, like mnoGoSearch [21] or 
ASPSeek[22]. 
Fetched information should be stored into a multimedia database[23,26], in this 
case PostgreSQL will be used. Audio stream should be extracted from video and 
stored into a separate field of the table. 
Data should be mined from multimedia database, using natural language 
processing, image and video data mining, speech recognition, mood and emotion 
detection (speech emotion detection, face emotion detection [24,31]), social network 
analysis (in case we have fetched social network to the database), face recognition 
techniques, authorship analysis. The latter can be used to find e.g. the texts of the 
same person at different online resources. 
Rules for the data-mining and web-crawling should be contained in ontology 
referred to above. It can be described using suitable ontology languages (e.g. OWL). 
We can also consider using an expert system like CLIPS [25] for making set of the 
rules for describing and controlling the mining process. 
176 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
After disclosing the information to another people in analog form it becomes 
possible that these people could disclose that information in digital form, for instance, 
in their blogs [27] (or at least their opinion about the intentions or advices to potential 
perpetrator). Natural language analysis, emotion detection and social network 
analysis could increase the probability of fetching such information. Authorship 
analysis could be useful, if the perpetrators or other people describe the event on some 
anonymous forums (or under pseudonyms). In the few cases that occurred during the 
last weeks we observed that people used the same pseudonym on different sites. That 
makes finding their traces in the digital sphere easy. Just use search engines.  
After person has released the information about his intentions on the web it is 
becoming possible to analyze it using natural language analysis or emotion detection. 
Basically, it is possible to crawl some web-sites, containing video data (YouTube, 
Facebook, …), collect the videos into multimedia database, then use multimedia data 
mining for detecting harassment videos: containing shooting, screams, school 
shooting descriptions, bomb making process and so on, and analyze the commentators 
with the help of emotion detection and natural language processing. If a video 
commentator is positive about such contents, one could argue that P(ddig,i) >0 for 
that commentator. System should evaluate the contents by various means, comparing 
to the profile (offending video contents, texts, pictures contents analysis), using expert 
systems [25], natural language processing, authorship analysis (generating writeprint) 
[30], social network analysis, sentiment and affect analysis [28,29], image and video 
analysis [32,33], speech analysis. Finally, human expert should analyze the 
automatically mined information and change the rule-set of the system.  
6   Conclusions 
This article discusses basic issues in the rather new social phenomenon of school 
shootings. We first present a short history of the phenomenon and some recent foiled 
cases, where information in the web was crucial. We argue that it is possible to use 
ICT technologies to detect potential perpetrators, at least some of them, based on the 
traces they leave on various sites in Internet. We present in the paper a basic analysis 
and categorization of the information about individuals that can be used in general to 
detect certain behavioral patterns. We also present a mathematical model that can be 
used to evaluate the probability with which the possible perpetrator would be 
identified and his attack prohibited, if he advances to that point. The real values of the 
probabilities must be evaluated from the past cases and are for further study. Finally, 
we present prototype system architecture. The idea is that we will begin to search in 
the web such material, guided by an ontology, and evaluate it based on multimedia 
data mining techniques and social network analysis. 
Further research requires a lot of work. One issue is to test the ontology against 
real cases, and modify it. Further, we will try to deduce upper bounds for the 
probabilities of finding the potential perpetrators by semiautomatic means and by 
local community actions. We will also investigate, what are the real values for the 
false positive and false negative cases. 
 Tracing Potential School Shooters in the Digital Sphere 177 
References 
1. Wikipedia, School shooting,  
  http://en.wikipedia.org/w/ 
 index.php?title=School_shooting&oldid=350266831 
2. Wikipedia, listed attacks on schools,  
  http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title= 
 List_of_school-related_attacks&oldid=350247039 
3. Cullen, D.: Columbine. Old Street Publishing Ltd., UK (2009) 
4. Langman, P.: Why Kids Kill; Inside the minds of school shooters. Palgrave-MacMillan, 
USA/UK (2009) 
5. National School Safety Center, http://www.schoolsafety.us 
6. DIRECTIVE 2006/24/EC. Official Journal of the European Union, April 13 (2006), 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ 
LexUriServ.do?Uri=CELEX:32006L0024:EN:HTML 
7. School safety working group in Finland, intermediary report (Oppilaitosten 
turvallisuustyöryhmä: väliraportti September 14 (2009),  
  http://www.intermin.fi/intermin/images.nsf/www/ 
 oppilaitosten_turvallisuus/$file/ 
 oppilaitosten_turvallisuustr_muisto_140909.pdf 
8. Spiegel online: 83 recommendations against school attacks (83 Empfehlungen gegen 
Amokläufe), 
http://www.spiegel.de/schulspiegel/wissen/0,1518,652315,00.html 
9. Dyrias (Dynamisches Risiko Analyse System). Institut Psychologie und 
Bedrohungsmanagement (2009),  
  http://www.institut-psychologie-bedrohungsmanagement.de/ 
 index.php 
10. Lea, W.: School shootings: Software for early detection (Amoklauf; Software zur 
Früherkennung). Stern Magazine (March 15, 2009),  
  http://www.stern.de/wissen/mensch/ 
 amoklauf-software-zur-frueherkennung-657867.html 
11. Elstermann, H., Buchwald, P.: School shootings and severe violence in German schools – 
state of the art (Amokläufe und schwere Gewalt an deutschen Schulen –Stand der Dinge). 
Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Fachbereich für Bildungs- und Sozialwissenschaften, 
Study Report, http://www.petra-buchwald.de/ExamensarbeitAmok.pdf 
12. Vossekuil, B., Fein, R., Reddy, M., Borum, R., Modzeleski, W.: The Final Report and 
Findings of the Safe School Initiative. U.S. Secret Service and Department of Education, 
Washington, DC 
13. Robertz, F.J.: School Shootings. On the relevance of fantasy for teenagers that killed many 
(Über die Relevanz der Phantasie für die Begehung von Mehrfachtötungen durch 
Jugendliche). Verlag für Polizeiwissenschaft, Frankfurt am Main, Germany (2004) 
14. Sanomat, H.: The trial against police officer who handled the gun license of the Kauhajoki 
shooter started (December 12, 2009) (in Finnish), http://www.hs.fi/kotimaa/ 
artikkeli/Kauhajoen+kouluampujan+aselupaa+koskevan+jutun+ 
k%C3%A4sittely+alkoi/1135251191383 
15. Preti, A.: School Shooting as a Culturally Enforced Way of Expressing Suicidal Hostile 
Intentions. The Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law 36(4), 544–
550, http://www.jaapl.org/cgi/content/abstract/36/4/544 
178 J. Veijalainen, A. Semenov, and J. Kyppö 
16. Lieberman, J.A.: School Shootings; what every parent and educator needs to know to 
protect our children. Kensington Publishing Corporation, NY (2008) 
17. Bartol, C.R., Bartol, A.M.: Juvenile delinquency and antisocial behavior: A developmental 
perspective, 3rd edn. Pearson/Prentice Hall, New Jersey (2009) 
18. Newman, K.: Rampage; The social roots school shootings; Why violence erupts in close-
knit communities – and what can be done to stop it. Basic Books, NY (2005) 
19. Welt, D.: A new turn in Ansbach, Die Wende von Ansbach (September 20, 2009),  
  http://www.welt.de/die-welt/politik/article4573857/ 
 Die-Wende-von-Ansbach.html 
20. Alueet, Y.: The trial concerning the Kauhajoki school shooting about to end tomorrow,  
  http://yle.fi/alueet/teksti/pohjanmaa/2009/12/ 
 kauhajoen_koulusurmaoikeudenkaynti_loppusuoralla_1253891.html 
21. MnoGoSearch, http://www.mnogosearch.org 
22. AspSeek, http://www.aspseek.org 
23. Donderler, M.E., Saykol, E., Arslan, U., Ulusoy, O., Gudukbay, U.: BilVideo: Design and 
Implementation of a Video Database Management System. Multimedia Tools and 
Applications 27(1), 79–104 (2005) 
24. Maglogiannis, I., Vouyioukas, D., Aggelopoulos, C.: Face detection and recognition of natural 
human emotion using Markov random fields. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 13(1),  
95–101 (2009) 
25. CLIPS: A Tool for Building Expert Systems,  
  http://clipsrules.sourceforge.net 
26. Kosch, H., Dollar, M.: Multimedia Database Systems: Where Are We Now?,  
  http://www.itec.uni-klu.ac.at/~harald/MMDBoverview.pdf 
27. Li, X., Yan, J., Fan, W., Liu, N., Yan, S., Chen, Z.: An online blog reading system by topic 
clustering and personalized ranking. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 
(TOIT) 9(3), Article 9 (2009) 
28. Dunker, P., Nowak, S., Begau, A., Lanz, C.: Content-based Mood Classification for Photos 
and Music: a generic multi-modal classification framework and evaluation approach. In: 
Proceeding of the 1st ACM international conference on Multimedia information retrieval, 
Vancouver, pp. 97–104. ACM, New York (2008) 
29. Posner, J., Russell, J.A., Peterson, B.S.: The circumplex model of affect: an integrative 
approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology. 
Development and Psychopathology 17(3), 715–734 (2005) 
30. Stamatatos, E.: A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology 60(3), 538–556 (2009) 
31. Zhao, W., Chellappa, R., Phillips, P.J., Rosenfeld, A.: Face recognition: A literature 
survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 35(4), 399–458 (2003) 
32. Chen, X., Zhang, C.: Interactive Mining and Semantic Retrieval of Videos. In: Proceedings 
of the 2007 International Workshop on Multimedia Data Mining (MDM/KDD 2007), in 
conjunction with the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & 
Data Mining, San Jose, CA, USA (2007) 
33. Aiyuan, J., Roy, G.: A nearest neighbor approach to letter recognition. In: Proceedings of 
the 44th annual southeast regional conference, Melbourne, Florida, pp. 776–777 (2006) 
