Proceedings of 3rd IRF International Conference, 10th May-2014, Goa, India, ISBN: 978-93-84209-15-5 
80 
SENTIMENT ANALYSIS FOR MOVIE REVIEWS   
 
SHRAVAN VISHWANATHAN 
 
M.Tech (CSE) Galgotias University, U.P, India 
 
 
Abstract- Sentiment analysis is becoming one of the most profound research areas for prediction and classification. In 
Sentiment mining or opinion mining, we basically try to analyse the results or predict outcomes that are based on customer 
feedback or opinion.  Especially applications involving stock prediction, movie and product review analysis. The study 
involves automated text mining which in turn includes understanding the meaning of the sentence. This can be achieved with 
the help of appropriate tokenization and thereafter classifying the outcome by comparing the tokens with a specific sentiment 
dictionary. In this article we take up the challenge of automated movie review analysis. A dataset of a movie is created from 
the movie review website ‘Rotten Tomatoes’. We classify the sentences from the dataset as positive or negative using word 
stem tokenization and there after measure the sentiment weight. 
 
Index terms- sentiment mining, opinion mining, movie review analysis, tokenization 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Automated text analysis or sentiment analysis is used 
in fields where products and services are reviewed by 
customers and critics, by means of social networking 
sites and blogs. One more application is also in the 
field of politics where politicians can come to know 
about the sentiment of the people regarding certain 
policies and rallies. It helps while decision making 
and prediction procedures. The crux behind analysing 
and understanding the customer’s feedback and 
requirements is to analyse the sentiment of public 
opinion. This technique helps companies and 
organizations to know the extent to which a product 
or service is actually accepted in the particular 
segment. This in turn would help companies re-
strategize their particular products or services or help 
policy makers re-visit their policies again.    
 
Movie review analysis is one of the most popular 
fields to analyse public sentiment. For our experiment 
we have taken a random movie dataset from the 
website ‘Rotten Tomatoes’.  
 
Our goal to study how public mood influences the 
overall movie review, we need reliable, scalable 
assessments of the public mood, appropriate for 
practical movie review analysis. Large surveys of 
public mood over representative samples of the 
population are generally expensive and time-
consuming. Some have therefore proposed indirect 
assessment of public mood or sentiment [1] [2]. The 
accuracy of these methods is however limited by the 
low degree to which the chosen indicators are 
expected to be correlated with public mood.  
 
We calculate the sentiment of each sentence using 
word stem tokenization. The sentences once split in 
the form of tokens are compared with an exhaustive 
positive, negative word dictionary. A sentiment value 
is calculated for each sentence and is classified in a 
sentiment class based on the majority of positive, 
negative or neutral words.  A sentiment can be 
positive, neutral or negative. The sentiment of the 
movie review is calculated by the auto summation of 
the sentiment values. The results are quite 
encouraging and can be nearly accurate by averaging 
all sentiments. 
 
II. TOKENIZATION 
 
Tokenization is the process of breaking a stream of 
text into meaningful words (stems), phrases or 
symbols [3] [4]. The tokens can be used further for 
parsing (syntactic analysis) or text mining. 
Tokenization is generally considered easy relative to 
other tasks in text mining and also one of the 
uninteresting phases.  However, errors made in this 
phase will propagate into later phases and cause 
problems.  
 
The first step in majority of text processing 
applications is to segment text into words. In English 
and other European languages, word tokens are 
delimited by a blank space. Thus, for such languages, 
which are called segmented languages token 
boundary identification is a somewhat trivial task 
since the majority of tokens are bound by explicit 
separators like spaces and punctuation. A simple 
program which replaces white spaces with word 
boundaries and cuts off leading and trailing quotation 
marks, parentheses and punctuation produces an 
acceptable performance. 
 
The next step is to handle abbreviations. In English 
and other European languages even though a period is 
directly attached to the previous word, it is usually a 
separate token which signals the termination of the 
sentence. However, when a period follows an 
abbreviation it is an integral part of this abbreviation 
and should be tokenized together with it. The Dr. is 
pleased. Now, if we ignore addressing the challenge 
posed by abbreviation, this line would be delimited 
into The is pleased. 
Sentiment Analysis for Movie Reviews 
Proceedings of 3rd IRF International Conference, 10th May-2014, Goa, India, ISBN: 978-93-84209-15-5 
81 
Universally accepted standards for many 
abbreviations and acronyms do not yet exist. The 
most common approach to the recognition of 
abbreviations is to maintain a list of already known 
abbreviations. Thus during tokenization a word with a 
trailing period can be looked up in such a list and, if it 
is found there, it is tokenized as a single token, else 
the period is tokenized as a separate token. 
 
The third step is segmentation of hyphenated words 
which answers the question One or two words? 
Hyphenated segments can cause ambiguity for a 
tokenizer. Sometimes a hyphen is part of a token, i.e. 
self-assessment, G-45, thirty-five and sometimes it is 
not e.g. New Delhi-based. Tokenization of 
hyphenated words is generally task dependent. For 
instance, part-of-speech taggers usually treat 
hyphenated words as a single syntactic unit and 
therefore prefer them to be tokenized as single 
tokens.  
 
III. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT 
 
We created a random dataset of the movie ‘Captain 
Philips’ (released in 2013) from the popular movie 
review website ‘Rotten Tomatoes’ (RT). The dataset 
holds only text type attribute consisting of 400 
examples. Each example is a full review for the 
movie given by a specific critic. An example of one 
of the records of the dataset is “This is acting of the 
highest order in a movie that raises the bar on what a 
true-life action thriller can do.” 
 
Initially when the sentence is fed as input to the 
process design, it is tokenized as non-letters i.e the 
text is segmented into separate meaningful words. 
This process of tokenization may also be referred as 
stemming where the affixes of the word are clipped 
from the word to make it concise with minimum 
length, having the same meaning. The clipping of 
affixes is handled by a stem porter. Next, the sentence 
termination is identified which can be achieved by the 
filter stopword function.  This function filters English 
stopwords from a document by removing every token 
which matches a word from a built-in stopword list. 
Stopwords are words that are not critically necessary 
to the sentence or opinion. Considering the example 
quoted above the possible stopwords filtered are 
‘This is’, ‘of the’, ‘in a’, ‘what a’, ‘on what’, ‘can do’. 
However, every token should represent a single 
English word only.  
 
The next stage is to compare the tokens (example set) 
with a preloaded dictionary word list. The example 
set is the set of words which are already tokenized 
from the original dataset. The set of tokens is 
compared with a list of positive word dictionary. 
Here, the comparisons are performed on the basis of 
term occurrence. This would indicate that an opinion 
would be weighted as positive, based on the number 
of positive terms found in the document.  We 
generate a new attributes at this stage called the 
‘Positive occurrence’. This attribute contains the sum 
of the number of positive terms in the text review 
compared with a positive term dictionary.   
 
The same procedure is repeated for the negative term 
occurrence in the text simultaneously. The tokens are 
again compared and matched with a negative term 
dictionary preloaded in the memory. Similarly, an 
attribute is generated named ‘Negative occurrence’ 
which consists of the sum of negative term 
occurrences in each text review. The block diagram 
of the methodology discussed is depicted as follows  
 
 
Fig. 1: Flowchart of the discussed tokenization methodology. 
 
The new calculated dataset discussed above is 
aggregated and joined accordingly. An attribute 
named ‘Sentiment value’ is generated at this stage. 
Sentiment value is calculated by subtracting the 
‘Positive occurrence’ and ‘Negative occurrence’ 
attributes (Sentiment review = Positive occurrence – 
Negative occurrence). However, the sentiment value 
is calculated by only considering the average of both  
attribute values.  
 
The value bounds or weights of the sentiment are set 
to -2.583 to 2.583. The negative value represents a 
very negative review. As the value nears 0 the review 
tends to be negative and neutral. The values greater 
than 0 tend to be positive and very positive.  The 
result for text reviews falling into multiple sentiment 
classes are depicted below. 
Sentiment Analysis for Movie Reviews 
Proceedings of 3rd IRF International Conference, 10th May-2014, Goa, India, ISBN: 978-93-84209-15-5 
82 
 
Fig. 2: Multicolour survey graph depicting the varied 
sentiment classes of different text reviews. 
 
The technique of evaluating the sentiment of a text 
through tokenization as discussed in this article gives 
a fair idea of the possible outcome or trend. In this 
case our motive was to evaluate the sentiment of 
various critics about the movie ‘Captain Philips’. 
According to the graph projected we can make out 
that the review for movie is nearly positive.  
 
Our review provides us with an accuracy of 69.3%. 
This result is acceptable in order to give an overview 
of the trend and possible outcomes. However the 
accuracy of this technique wholly depends on the 
performance of the tokenizer and the exhaustive 
positive and negative word dictionary. The efficiency 
of the tokenizer would affect the number of correct 
comparisons with an appropriate dictionary. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Sentiment analysis through text mining is one of the 
most interesting areas in opinion mining. It opens a 
whole new set of techniques and methodology for 
automated classification of sentiments by analysing 
the semantic and philosophical aspects of a particular 
string of text. We have proposed a technique of 
tokenization for classifying text into a number of 
sentiments. The average performance is fairly 
acceptable and provides us with a peripheral outlook 
of the overall trend.  In this article we have performed 
a review analysis of a movie by classifying the texts 
into sentiments and calculating the overall 
performance of the proposed methodology. Using this 
technique we can automatically predict the average 
review of a movie to be positive, negative or neutral. 
This is an initial effort to analyse the sentiments from 
a string of text. In the future we propose to design and 
model the sematic, syntactic and philosophical 
association between phrases in the same text string to 
result in higher classification and prediction accuracy 
of a sentiment. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Bollen, Johan, Huina Mao, and Alberto Pepe. "Modeling 
public mood and emotion: Twitter sentiment and socio-
economic phenomena." ICWSM. 2011. 
[2] Rahn, Wendy M. "Affect as information: The role of public 
mood in political reasoning." Elements of reason: Cognition, 
choice, and the bounds of rationality (2000): 130-50. 
[3] Harish, R., et al. "Lexical analysis-a brief study." 
[4] Stamatatos, Efstathios. "A survey of modern authorship 
attribution methods."Journal of the American Society for 
information Science and Technology 60.3 (2009): 538-556. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
