—  75  —
Authorship Attribution:  
Specifics for Slovene
An A Zw i t t e r vi t e Z
Trojina, Zavod za uporabno slovenistiko, Cesta v Kleče 16,  
SI – 1000 Ljubljana, ana.zwitter@guest.arnes.si
V prispevku je poudarjena pomembnost kakovostne analize jezikov-
nih parametrov, ki omogočajo ugotavljanje avtorstva ali profiliranje 
avtorja besedila v forenzičnem, literarnozgodovinskem ali gospodar-
skem kontekstu (anonimna grozilna pisma, ugotavljanje plagiator-
stva, literarna besedila neznanega izvora, profiliranje strank). Ker je 
tovrstne analize za slovenščino težko najti, predlagamo metodologijo 
luščenja skladenjskih, leksikalnih, semantičnih in znakovnih parame-
trov za potrebe kvantitativne obravnave avtorjevega osebnega sloga.
The paper shows the importance of a quality analysis of linguistic 
features which enable the process of authorship attribution or author 
profiling in a forensic, literary or economic context (anonymous threat 
letters, plagiarism, literary works of unknown authorship, client pro-
filing). It also highlights the lack of realized analyses for Slovene and 
outlines the methodology of detecting the syntactic, lexical, semantic 
and character features in order to quantify the author’s personal style.
Ključne besede: ugotavljanje avtorstva besedil, profiliranje avtorja, 
jezikovni parametri, jezikovne tehnologije, forenzično jezikoslovje
Key words: authorship attribution, author profiling, linguistic fea-
tures, language technologies, forensic linguistics
1 Introduction
Authorship attribution has been a hot topic of interest in criminology and liter-
ary history since the end of the 19th century. A pioneering study in authorship 
attribution using the linguistic features of texts was conducted by Thomas 
Corwin Mendenhall (1901). He analysed the length of words to identify the 
differences between different languages and different authors, and discovered 
that Shakespeare’s and Marlowe’s histograms are almost identical (Marlowe’s 
SCN IV/2 [2011], 75–85
—  76  — Slavia Centralis  1/2012
Ana Zwitter Vitez
death two weeks before the first publication of Shakespeare’s first works is 
still unexplained).
Another famous example represents the Mosteller’s and Wallace’s study 
which answers the question who wrote the disputed Federalist papers (promot-
ing the ratification of the United States Constitution) by comparing different 
statistical methods.
Nowadays, the availability of language corpora, machine learning methods 
and data mining enable the further development of methods for authorship at-
tribution. It is therefore not surprising that international research on authorship 
attribution is no longer limited to attributing the authorship of a text to one of 
the potential authors (Stamatatos et al. 2001), but has also developed subfields 
such as plagiarism detection (Meyer zu Eissen et al. 2007), author profiling 
(Koppel et al. 2002) and detection of stylistic inconsistencies in collaborative 
writing (Graham et al. 2005).
2 State of the art
One of the key aims of our research into authorship attribution is to identify style 
markers (i.e., linguistic features) that quantitatively specify the author’s style 
(Rudman 1998). Next, we offer an overview of the latest research according to 
four types of linguistic features: lexical features, character features, syntactic 
features and semantic features.
Lexical features
Lexical features of a text are normally presented using word frequency vectors 
(Sebastiani 2002). The most common words (articles, prepositions, pronouns, 
etc.) are found to be among the best lexical features to discriminate between 
authors because they are used unconsciously by the authors (Burrows 1987; Ar-
gamon and Levitan 2005; Luyckx and Daelemans 2005). However, Stamatatos 
(2009) and Eder (2010) point out that the success of the lexical features method 
is largely dependent on the length of the text. 
Character features
Character features of texts (letter and punctuation frequency) are also very 
useful in quantifying the author’s style (Grieve 2007). A more elaborate ap-
proach is to extract frequencies of n-grams on the character level. Studies by 
Peng et al. (2003), Keselj et al. (2003), Stamatatos (2006) and Diederich et al. 
(2003) have yielded good results using n-grams to quantify author’s style. A 
comparative study of lexical and character features of the same corpus (Grieve 
2007) showed that n-grams are the most effective measures of authorial style.
—  77  —
Authorship Attribution: Specifics for Slovene
Syntactic features
The method of measuring syntactic features in texts is based on the idea that 
authors tend to use similar syntactic patterns unconsciously. Therefore, syn-
tactic information is considered more reliable than lexical information when 
determining the author’s style. However, syntactic information also requires 
more advanced tools for natural language processing (e.g., POS tagger, parser). 
The syntactic features method was first used by Baayen et al. (1996). Since 
then, the method has been used in several studies, e.g., Stamatatos et al. (2000; 
2001), Luyckx and Daelemans (2005), Uzuner and Katz (2005), and Hirst and 
Feiguina (2007).
Semantic features
Semantic feature extraction from a text is based on the WordNet semantic net-
work, which enables searches for synonyms and hypernyms of words. WordNet 
has been used in several studies, one of the best known being McCarthy et al. 
(2006), where the authors also attempt to detect semantic similarities between 
words by applying latent semantic analysis by Deerwester et al. (1990) to lexi-
cal features.
The corpora used in authorship studies are almost always genre-specific, so 
that authorship is the most important discriminatory factor between the texts 
(Stamatatos 2009). Stamatatos, however, suggests that any attribution method 
should be tested on texts with at least one feature (e.g., genre, length or the 
number of candidate authors) that is different from those used in the training 
corpus, in order to determine its efficiency and limitations.
All of the studies mentioned use corpus data that include texts annotated 
with information about authors. Studies dealing with author profiling require 
more detailed author information; besides name, gender and age, the studies 
include information on education level, region and the author’s psychological 
profile (Luyckx and Daelmans 2005). Such corpora with author information 
represent a valuable national document and can be used for further research 
into authorship attribution and author profiling.
3 Authorship studies for Slovene
In Slovenia, there are only two studies using statistical methods for the pur-
poses of authorship attribution, one using word and sentence length to detect 
plagiarism (Dović 2002), and the other analysing function words as the potential 
linguistic feature for authorship attribution (Limbek 2008). This gap in research 
is preventing more extensive use of authorship attribution and author profiling 
in authorship law, criminology, literary studies and market research.
The field of authorship attribution is closely connected with the availability 
of language resources (corpora) and tools (taggers, parsers). The good news 
—  78  — Slavia Centralis  1/2012
Ana Zwitter Vitez
in this area is that we now have language resources and tools for Slovene that 
demonstrate the following potential:
Tool or resource for Slovene Potential
The billion-word corpus Gigafida, 
developed as part of the project 
Communication in Slovene
(http://demo.gigafida.net).
Source of texts for a corpus that can 
be used for the purposes of authorship 
attribution and author profiling.
The collection of electronic texts 
Slovenska leposlovna klasika – 
Slovene classic litterary works
(http://sl.wikisource.org/wiki/Glavna_stran).
Slovene litterary works in more or less 
uniformed electronic form.
Part-of-speech tagger (http://
oznacevalnik.slovenscina.eu) and Parser 
(http://razclenjevalnik.slovenscina.eu/), 
developed as part of the Communication in 
Slovene project.
Basis for statistical analysis and 
identification of the lexical, character, 
syntactic and semantic features decisive 
for a quantitative description of an author’s 
writing style.
The abovementioned facts clearly show that the important topic of authorship 
attribution is still under-researched in Slovenia, but that there is good potential 
for quality research due to the availability of language tools and resources 
for Slovene. This is why a quality authorship study identifying the linguistic 
features that reveal the author’s personal profile would make a considerable 
contribution to the progress of criminology, literary studies and market research. 
4 What can be done
Research in authorship attribution can answer questions concerning:
– which of the potential authors is the author of a text of unknown authorship, 
and 
– the profile of the author (gender, age, level of education, region, psychologi-
cal profile) of a text of unknown authorship when no potential authors are 
available.
The main hypothesis is based on the fact that by using a well designed and 
annotated corpus of texts we can distinguish linguistic features for determin-
ing the author’s style in Slovene texts. By identifying sets of linguistic features 
we can attribute the authorship of a text of an unknown author to one of the 
potential authors, or, when no potential authors are available, describe the pro-
file of the author (gender, age, level of education, region, psychometric traits).
This knowledge can be gained in the following way:
– building a reference corpus,
– determination and evaluation of lexical, character, syntactic and semantic 
features for authorship attribution, 
– design and evaluation of feature-based models for author attribution and 
author profiling.
—  79  —
Authorship Attribution: Specifics for Slovene
5 The proposed methodology
The scientific approach of the proposed research combines existing language 
resources and tools for Slovene with knowledge from the fields of corpus 
linguistics and statistical data analysis, in order to enable the identification of 
linguistic features that can be used for quantifying the author’s writing style. 
These identified features can determine whether a text of unknown authorship 
has been written by one of the potential authors, or they can establish the profile 
of the author where no potential authors are available.
In order to identify the linguistic features that determine the author’s per-
sonal profile for Slovene it seems reasonable to use the following methodology:
STAGE 1: Design and creation of a reference corpus
a) Specifications for text selection.
 – gathering the texts from various sources, including existing corpora of 
Slovene, websites and individuals
 – collection of metatextual information, such as the genre and year of the 
text, as well as the gender, age and level of education of the author(s).
b) Psychometric data about the authors.
 – use of the International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) questionnaire (the 
300-question version has been translated into Slovene by Dr Janek Musek) 
in order to obtain the psychometric traits of agreeableness, extraversion, 
neuroticism, conscientiousness and openness (the Big Five).
 – distribution of the questionnaire to a selection of authors of the collected 
texts
 – calculation of scale scores for each of the five traits.
c) Collection of texts and data preparation.
 – validation, normalisation, cleaning and annotation of the collected texts 
(with metatextual information, including scale scores for psychometric 
traits)
 – tagging and parsing of the collected texts
 – compilation of training corpora and test corpora for authorship attribution, 
as well as a reference corpus for author profiling
 – selection of texts and subcorpora for the evaluation stages. 
STAGE 2: Design of the authorship attribution models
This stage will identify the best linguistic feature, or combination of linguistic 
features, for authorship attribution in Slovene, as well as the most appropriate 
statistical method. Analyses should be performed on corpora containing texts 
from different genres (for example, newspaper texts, literary texts and texts 
with a clear conative function).
—  80  — Slavia Centralis  1/2012
Ana Zwitter Vitez
d) Authorship attribution method for newspaper texts
 – measuring of different linguistic features, from lexical features (e.g., vo-
cabulary richness, word frequencies) and character features (e.g., character 
n-grams), to syntactic features (e.g., chunks) and semantic features (e.g., 
synonyms)
 – use of different statistical methods, such as Naive Bayes, support vector 
machine (SVM), etc.
 – checking of the results with manual language analysis
 – formation of subgroups or lists of relevant linguistic parameters.
 The result will be the identification of the best (combination of) linguistic 
features that can be used in authorship attribution for newspaper texts.
e) Authorship attribution method for literary texts
 – repetition of the procedure from d) on a corpus of literary texts.
 –  identification of the combination of linguistic features that produces the 
best results in attributing authorship to literary texts
 – comparison of linguistic features for literary texts with the linguistic fea-
tures for newspaper texts
f) Authorship attribution method for texts with a clear conative function
 – repetition of the procedures described in d) and e) on a corpus of texts 
with a clear conative function (Jakobson 1960). Examples of such texts 
are letters from readers, threat letters, etc.
 – identification of the linguistic parameters for authorship attribution in 
conative texts
 – comparison of linguistic features for literary and newspaper texts with the 
linguistic features for conative texts.
STAGE 3: Identification of the best linguistic features for author profiling
In this stage, the reference corpus will be statistically analysed to extract the 
distinguishing classifiers for different profile categories; namely, gender, age, 
region (geographic origin), education level and psychometric traits. The prob-
lem addressed here is determining the profile of an author of an unknown text 
when no candidate authors, or their texts, are available.
g) Linguistic features for author profiling in newspaper texts
 – determination of distinguishing linguistic features for each author char-
acteristic (gender, age, level of education, region, psychometric traits) in 
the corpus of newspaper texts.
 – grouping of the different features into feature groups (e.g., lexical, char-
acter).
h) Linguistic features for author profiling in literary texts
 – repetition of procedure g) on a corpus of literary texts
 – identifying the optimal linguistic features for author profiling on literary 
texts
—  81  —
Authorship Attribution: Specifics for Slovene
 – comparison of the results to that of g).
i) Linguistic features for author profiling in texts with a clear conative function
 – repetition of procedure g) on a corpus of conative texts
 – identifying the optimal linguistic features for author profiling on conative 
texts (threat letters)
 – comparison of the results to that of g).
STAGE 4: Evaluation 
j) Evaluation of the models for authorship attribution
 – determining the success rate of the model to correctly attribute the author-
ship of an unknown text.
 To evaluate the model, the best method is to use several corpora that differ 
from the training corpora used in Stage 2 in one characteristic; for example, 
in the number of texts per author, in the number of candidate authors and in 
the different length of the texts. In this way, we can evaluate how successful 
the models are in attributing authorship to unknown texts when at least one 
variable is different to the one used in the model design.
k) Evaluation of the models for author profiling 
 – determining the success rate of the model in determining the author’s pro-
file, based on characteristics such as gender, age, region, level of education 
and psychometric traits.
 It seems wise to use texts from the same genres used in Stage 3, but with 
different characteristics (e.g., different length).
6 The results and the possible applications of authorship attribution
The results of the proposed research in authorship attribution will be as follows:
 –  a reference database containing texts that include information on authors 
(gender, age, level of education, region and psychometric traits),
 – a description of methods and optimal linguistic features for authorship at-
tribution in different genres,
 – a description of methods and optimal linguistic features for author profiling 
(determining gender, age, level of education, region and psychological traits) 
in different genres.
7 The possible applications of authorship attribution
The need for more research on an author’s distinguishing linguistic features in 
a text can be justified by the fact that in Slovenia (and internationally) public 
figures and individuals are increasingly exposed to threat letters in traditional 
—  82  — Slavia Centralis  1/2012
Ana Zwitter Vitez
or internet form. In the last few years, examples of such public figures include 
J. Janša, K. Kresal, R. Žerjav, Z. Jelinčič, B. Magajna and R. Batelli.
Due to the accessibility of texts on the web, plagiarism represents a serious 
problem of intellectual property. This phenomenon was clearly exposed in 
recent Slovenian political scandals concerning J. Janša’s 15th anniversary inde-
pendence speech, M. Cvikl’s BA dissertation and the parliament representative 
B. Marinič’s German test.
In literary studies, a serious study could have solved authorship problems 
such as those related to the Slovene poem Oj Triglav, moj dom (1894), the 
drama Ekshibicionist (2001), written under the pseudonym O. J. Traven, the 
pornographic novel Čudoviti Klon (2006), published under the pseudonym Eva 
Pacher, and others.
The recruitment process (human resources) often regards people as the capi-
tal and potential of companies (cf. Schuler R. E., Jackson S. E. eds. [1999]): 
“The conversation leads to the matter of choosing the right people. What is the 
right profile for a certain company? How to recognise it?” The availability of 
linguistic features, decisive for establishing an author’s personal profile, can 
also contribute towards choosing the right candidate for the job. 
Finally, in all fields of the economy knowing the buyer’s profile is very 
important nowadays. For this reason, companies are building databases of 
clients with different shopping habits and basing their strategies for satisfying 
customers on them (Shaw et al. 2001). With a methodology allowing client pro-
filing on the basis of linguistic features it will be possible to provide different 
companies with an opportunity to enhance their databases with the linguistic 
profiles of clients. 
8 Conclusion
The paper shows the importance of a quality analysis of linguistic features in 
order to enable the quantification an author’s personal style. It also highlights 
the lack of realised analyses for Slovene, as well as outlining the methodology 
and the possible applications of the proposed work.
Two scenarios seem to be probable: the research will be funded either publicly 
or commercially. If the first scenario is realised, authorship attribution stud-
ies for Slovene will be developed for the purposes of detecting the authors of 
anonymous threats, plagiarism and literary works, whereas if such research is 
funded by private companies the studies will mostly contribute to the domain 
of determining the client’s profile. Ethical standards certainly suggest that it is 
preferable for public agencies to take the lead in such research, but the state’s 
administration will have to make the final decision in this regard1.
 1 The first Slovenian project concerning authorship attribution and author profiling has been 
proposed by Trojina, Institute for applied Slovene studies. At the current moment, we are 
waiting for the results of the Slovenian Research Agency’s annual call for proposals.
—  83  —
Authorship Attribution: Specifics for Slovene
REFERENCES
Web pages 
Corpus Gigafida (http://demo.gigafida.net, 25.05.11)
Slovenska leposlovna klasika (http://sl.wikisource.org/wiki/Glavna_stran, 25.5.11).
Slovenian part-of-speech tagger (http://oznacevalnik.slovenscina.eu, 25.5.11)
Slovenian parser (http://razclenjevalnik.slovenscina.eu/, 25.5.11)
Publications
Shlomo ARGAMON, Shlomo LEVITAN, 2005: Measuring the usefulness of function 
words for authorship attribution. Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the Associa-
tion for Computers and the Humanities and the Association for Literary and Linguistic 
Computing.
Arald BAAYEN, Hans VAN HALTEREN, Fiona TWEEDIE, 1996: Outside the cave 
of shadows: Using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 11/3, 121–131.
John F. BURROWS, 1987: Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austen’s Novels 
and an Experiment in Method. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Scott DEERWESTER et al., 1990: Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science 41(6), 391–407.
Joachim DIEDERICH et al., 2003: Authorship attribution with support vector machines. 
Applied Intelligence 19/1–2, 109–123.
Marijan DOVIĆ, 2002: Podbevšek in Cvelbar: Poskus empirične preverbe namigov o 
plagiatorstvu. Slavistična revija 50, 233–249.
Maciej EDER, 2010: Does Size Matter? Authorship Attribution, Small Samples, Big 
Problem. London: Proceedings of the Digital Humanities Conference 2010.
Neil GRAHAM et al., 2005: Segmenting documents by stylistic character. Journal of 
Natural Language Engineering, 11(4), 397–415.
Jack GRIEVE, 2007: Quantitative authorship attribution: An evaluation of techniques. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 22(3), 251–270.
Graeme HIRST, Ol’ga FEIGUINA, 2007: Bigrams of syntactic labels for authorship 
discrimination of short texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing 22/4, 405–417.
Moshe KOPPEL et al., 2002: Automatically categorizing written texts by author gender. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(4), 401–412.
Marko LIMBEK, 2008: Usage of Multivariate Analysis in Authorship Attribution: Did 
Janez Mencinger Write the Story “Poštena Bohinčeka”? Metodološki zvezki, 5/1, 81–93.
Kim LUYCKX, Walter DAELEMANS, 2005: Shallow text analysis and machine learn-
ing for authorship attribution. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Meeting of Computational 
Linguistics in the Netherlands.
—  84  — Slavia Centralis  1/2012
Ana Zwitter Vitez
Philip MCCARTHY et al. 2006: Analyzing writing styles with coh-metrix. Proceed-
ings of the Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society International Conference, 
764–769.
Sven MEYER ZU EISSEN et al., 2007: Plagiarism detection without reference collec-
tions. Advances in Data Analysis, 359–366.
Frederick MOSTELLER, David L. WALLACE, 1964: Inference and Disputed Author-
ship: the Federalist Papers, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. 
Fuchun PENG et al., 2003: Language independent authorship attribution using character 
level language models. Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 267–274.
Joseph RUDMAN, 1998: The state of authorship attribution studies: Some problems and 
solutions. Computers and the Humanities, 31, 351–365.
Fabrizio SEBASTIANI, 2002: Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM 
Computing Surveys, 34(1).
Michael SHAW et al. (2001). Knowledge management and data mining for marketing. 
Decision Support Systems, 31 (1), 127–137.
Efstathios STAMATATOS et al. 2000: Automatic text categorization in terms of genre 
and author. Computational Linguistics, 26(4), 471–495.
Efstathios STAMATATOS et al., 2001: Computer-based authorship attribution without 
lexical measures. Computers and the Humanities, 35(2), 193–214.
Efstathios STAMATATOS et al., 2006: Ensemble-based author identification using 
character n-grams. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Text-based Infor-
mation Retrieval, 41–46.
Efstathios STAMATATOS 2009: A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(3), 538–556.
Ozlem UZUNER, Boris KATZ, 2005: A comparative study of language models for 
book and author recognition. Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Conference on 
Natural Language Processing, 969–980.
UGOTAVLJANJE AVTORSTVA BESEDIL ZA SLOVENŠČINO
Področje ugotavljanja avtorstva besedil v zadnjih dveh desetletjih doživlja silovit raz-
mah, saj se javne in nejavne osebnosti pogosto srečujejo s pojavom internetnih groženj 
in grozilnih pisem v tradicionalni obliki, poleg tega pa je zaradi lahke dostopnosti 
besedil na spletu vse bolj prisoten pojav plagiatorstva. Kljub izredno razvitim študijam 
v mednarodnem merilu to pomembno področje za v Sloveniji ostaja precej neraziskano, 
vendar obstajajo dobre možnosti za kakovostne raziskave zaradi dobro razvitih jezikov-
nih orodij in virov za slovenščino.
Ugotavljanje avtorstva besedil temelji na odkrivanju tistih jezikovnih parametrov, na 
podlagi katerih lahko besedilo neznanega izvora pripišemo določenemu avtorju ali eni 
od lastnosti avtorjevega profila (spol, starost, izobrazba, regija). Te jezikovne parametre 
—  85  —
Authorship Attribution: Specifics for Slovene
lahko izluščimo z naslednjo metodologijo: (1) izdelava referenčne baze označenih 
besedil, (2) ugotavljanje leksikalnih, znakovnih, skladenjskih in semantičnih lastnosti 
posameznih kategorij za ugotavljanje avtorstva besedila in profila avtorja, (3) izdelava 
in evalvacija modela za ugotavljanje osebnega profila avtorja.
Končni rezultat take raziskave so izluščeni jezikovni parametri za slovenščino, na 
podlagi katerih je mogoče ugotoviti, kateri od potencialnih avtorjev je tvoril besedilo 
neznanega izvora, ali določiti osebni profil neznanega avtorja besedila (spol, starost, 
izobrazbo, regionalno pripadnost in psihometrične lastnosti). Rezultati raziskave lahko 
znatno izboljšajo kakovost kriminalističnega preiskovanja, prava avtorskih pravic, pro-
učevanja literarne zgodovine in profiliranja strank za potrebe tržnih analiz. 
