Russ Linguist
DOI 10.1007/s11185-015-9155-4
A stylometric approach to the study of differences
between standard variants of Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian,
or: is the Hobbit in Serbian more Hobbit or more
Serbian?
Стилометрический подход к изучению различий между
литературными вариантами боснийско-хорватско-сербского
языка, или: сербский Хоббит—больше хоббит или больше
серб?
Ruprecht von Waldenfels1 · Maciej Eder2,3
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
Abstract The article uses a stylometric approach to study differences between standard vari-
ants of the pluricentric standard language Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian in a corpus of originals
and translations from other languages. Three experiments are reported. The first two serve
to show that choice of the Croatian vs. Serbian variant is not the most important factor shap-
ing frequency profiles of translations; rather, author-specific and other stylistic factors have
a stronger impact. For the third experiment, a classifier is trained and its factors are analyzed
to pinpoint variant-specific differences in the frequencies of word forms that are used in both
variants. Our results show that a stylometric approach is useful in an empirical investigation
of recurrent differences between different varieties and standard variants of BCS.
Аннотация В статье применяется стилометрический подход к изучению различий
между литературными вариантами полицентричного боснийско-хорватско-сербского
языка на базе корпуса оригинальных текстов и параллельных переводов. Излагают-
ся результаты трех экспериментов. Первые два эксперимента показывают, что выбор
между хорватским или сербским вариантом не является наиболее существенным фак-
тором, определяющим частотные профили словоформ в переводах; в большей мере
We would like to thank Ljiljana Reinkowski and Stefan Savić for discussing the word lists with us.
Funding by the Swiss National Science Foundation, Project 151230 ‘Convergence and divergence of
Slavic from a usage based, parallel corpus driven perspective’ is gratefully acknowledged.
B R. von Waldenfels
ruprecht.waldenfels@gmail.com
M. Eder
maciejeder@gmail.com
1 Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures, University of California, Berkeley, USA
2 Institute of Polish Language, Polish Academy of Sciences, Cracow, Poland
3 Pedagogical University of Cracow, Cracow, Poland
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
оказывает воздействие личность автора и другие стилистические факторы. В третьем
эксперименте анализируется работа статистического классификатора текстов. Дан-
ный анализ позволяет выявить словоформы, которые выступают во всех вариантах, но
являются, в силу разной частотности, диагностическими для их различения. Результа-
ты экспериментов показывают, что стилометрический подход может быть полезен для
эмпирического изучения систематических различий между вариантами боснийско-
хорватско-сербского языка.
1 Introduction
The dominant native language in Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and Montenegro was
known as Serbo-Croatian before the Yugoslav Wars of 1992–1995, and has since lost this
denomination.1 However, it has not lost its linguistic essence, namely a closely bound set of
neoštokavian varieties that are based on a largely convergent grammatical, lexical, stylistic
and orthographic basis. In this respect, we follow Gröschel in his 2009 extensive and knowl-
edgeable discussion of this question, as well as Bunčić (2008), Kordić (2009), and others
in regarding Standard Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and possibly other varieties, as different
standard variants of a single pluricentric standard language.
The disputed degree of differentiation between the different variants of this standard lan-
guage (which we call in the following BCS—Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian) and their complex
history make BCS an interesting topic for the multivariate study of factors for lectal variation
as conducted in standard stylometric approaches. The R package Stylo (Eder, Kestemont and
Rybicki 2013) is commonly used to derive profiles of text-specific frequencies of word forms
in order to study the impact of genre, register, authors’ style, or other factors on textual char-
acteristics. In the present paper we use this package to conduct a study of standard variants
in BCS.
Our investigations are based on the assumption that variation is everywhere, and of a
multifactorial nature. Genre, register, gender, topic, and individual style all have an impact
on such profiles to different degrees (Koppel, Schler and Argamon 2009; Eder 2015). While
it is clear that, say, choice of register will often be more important than gender, or, of course,
the choice of the language (as in French vs. German) will overcome all other factors, in
respect to variants of polycentric standard languages, the relative ranking of variant choice is
not obvious. In the present paper, we thus ask the following in respect to BCS: is the choice
of standard variant a decisive factor that is always more important than author’s style, genre,
or other factors influencing the profile of a given text, or is it one among many? The second,
equally relevant issue is of a more qualitative nature: how can we use stylometric profiles to
investigate differences between the standard variants of BCS that go beyond variant-specific
vocabulary and obvious differences such as the divergent reflexes of historical *ě?
In the present paper, we address these issues by investigating translations into different
variants of BCS in three experiments. In our first experiment, we compared the profiles of
translations of the same belletristic texts into different variants of BCS. Our findings suggest
that questions of authorship, even across the translation process, have a stronger impact on
stylometric profiles than the choice of standard variant. In other words, we find that in terms
of its stylistic profile, a translation into Serbian is more similar to a translation of the same
book into Croatian than it is to the other Serbian texts in our corpus. In the second experiment,
1And it may thus be said to have lost its identity as a common standard language in the eyes of its speakers;
see Voß (2009) for a speaker-centric view of this issue.
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
we disregarded this factor and compared texts translated either into Croatian or into Serbian,
and do not include multiple translations. Here we found that Croatian and Serbian texts are
clearly distinguishable in terms of their profiles, that is, Serbian texts are most similar to the
other Serbian, Croatian texts to the other Croatian texts.
Interestingly, this distinction persists to a certain degree even if we normalize factors
that mark the obvious differences in standard variants by unifying the diverging reflexes of
the historical vowel ě (‘ekavica’ and ‘ijekavica’), slightly different orthographic norms and
filtering out divergent vocabulary. We thus find evidence for a more general, stylistic identity
of the standard variants that go beyond trivial shibboleths.
These two experiments provide evidence that, first, text-specific stylistic characteristics
outweigh variant-specific characteristics; and, second, variant-specific characteristics are de-
tectable even in the absence of trivially differentiating traits.
In our third experiment, we sought to gain insight into which factors are responsible for
the differentiation of the standard variants as represented by our texts. For this, we pooled
the texts used in the first and second experiment and trained a classifier to distinguish texts
labelled Serbian from those labelled Croatian.We then qualitatively examine the features that
the classifier uses for this distinction. This approach was successful in isolating both expected
and unexpected features, thus showing that it can add to our understanding of standard variant
variation in BCS.
2 The corpus
2.1 Text classification
In this paper, we use the terms Croatian and Serbian to broadly differentiate two main stan-
dard variants of BCS. In general, however, it has to be noted that the restriction to two variants
is a simplification, since at least two more variants (Bosnian and Montenegrinian) are being
promoted by corpus-building activity and the delimitation between different variants is not
clean-cut (see Brozović 1992 for the pre-war Yugoslav conception). For the identification of
the Serbian and Coratian variants, we follow the assignment to variants as it is done in the
two corpora we take the texts from, ASPAC and ParaSol (see Sect. 2.2). This assignment
is based on script, linguistic characteristics such as the use of ekavica / ijekavica, place of
publishing, and / or biography of the author, since typically no identification of the language
variant is explicitly stated. This attribution is not unproblematic; for example, the language
of Ivo Andrić is consistently labelled Serbian, even though it involves ijekavica in his earlier
works, that is (i)je instead of e (as in ekavica) as a reflex of historical *ě.
2.2 Corpus composition
Our corpus contains 96 belletristic texts or partial texts, of which 43 (45 %) are labelled
Croatian, and 53 (55 %) are labelled Serbian, from the Amsterdam Slavic Parallel Aligned
Corpus, ASPAC (Barentsen 2008), and ParaSol, a Parallel Corpus of Slavic and Other Lan-
guages (von Waldenfels 2012). The corpus includes parts of texts in the sense that in these
corpora, larger works are sometimes divided into chapters or books; we did not change that.
The resulting corpus is a convenience sample that merits some general conclusions and
serves to show the potential of stylometric approaches to the study of standard variants of
BCS. It should be applied to a much larger range of texts and genres for more complex results.
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
In this paper, we report work based on three different setups. For the first experiment, we
chose 52 translations of 21 original texts, each of which are represented in at least one Serbian
and one Croatian translation; for the second experiment, we randomly selected a balanced
subset of 41 texts (20 Serbian, 21 Croatian) by different authors, original or translated, but
with only one version per language variant included. For the third and last experiment, we
used the full corpus of 96 texts, aiming to maximize our coverage of diversity. The list of
texts and their makeup for individual experiments is given in the Appendix.
3 Stylometric measurements
Stylometry, or the statistical study of stylistic patterns in written texts, has for decades been
used for inferring the authorship of anonymous or disputed texts. It relies on the assumption
that each author has his / her unique writing habits, which are unconscious and thus beyond
any authorial control. Quite counterintuitive is the fact that such an authorial fingerprint
can be traced in the linguistic units rarely associated with style, which include the usage of
letter pairs, letter triplets, co-occurrence of certain syllables, or even parts of speech (Sta-
matatos 2009). The most classical solution, however, introduced by Mosteller and Wallace
in their seminal study on the authorship of the Federalist Papers (Mosteller and Wallace
2007[1964]), is to measure the usage of a few dozen function words (synsemantic words).
Since these function words are at the same time the most frequent tokens in a corpus—no
matter which language is taken into consideration—relying on top frequency lexemes be-
came a robust, time-proven, and relatively easy extractable type of style-markers.
Particular stylistic profiles as represented by the frequencies of the most frequent words
(MFWs) are compared using a variety of multidimensional methods. The reason for their
value in author attribution is the fact that they aggregate the impact of many MFWs of indi-
vidually weak discriminating strength (Nerbonne 2007, XVII). Multidimensional methods
can be divided into two groups: explanatory (or unsupervised) techniques, supplemented
by simple visualizations such as dendrograms or scatterplots, and machine-learning (or su-
pervised) techniques, claimed to be very accurate yet counterintuitive. The former include
Principal Components Analysis, Factor Analysis, Cluster Analysis, Multidimensional Scal-
ing, Discriminant Analysis, while the latter are Support Vector Machines, Nearest Shrunken
Centroids, and Burrows’s Delta (cf. Burrows 2002; Hoover 2004a, 2004b; Jockers, Witten
and Criddle 2008; etc.).
Explanatory or unsupervised methods aim at letting the data ‘speak for themselves’ in
their entirety. An algorithm is used to accommodate the combined differences between the
samples into a single coherent picture; the assumption is that in this way, relevant groupings
and / or separations are likely to emerge. Many of these techniques rely on the concept of
distance. The complex set of individual frequency differences is transformed into a compact
measure of similarity between the samples using one of several mathematical measures. In
the present study, we apply the Classic Delta distance, as well as Eder’s Simple distance, both
considered to be effective for inflected languages (Jannidis et al. 2015).
Machine-learning, or supervised methods, consist of a two-step analysis. In the first step,
the goal is to divide the input dataset into two subsets: a training set containing samples
representative for each class (e.g. a selection of texts belonging to the class ‘Serbian’ and in
‘Croatian’), and a test set containing all the remaining samples. The differences between the
profiles of the samples in the training set are used to produce a classifier, i.e., a set of rules
for discriminating stylistic profiles. In the second step, this classifier is used to assign other
samples to the classes established in the first step, thus evaluating its accuracy. The entire
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
procedure is repeated several times with different texts in the training and the test set in order
to neutralize any local anomalies in the training data. The rules in the resulting classifier can
then be investigated from a qualitative perspective.
In the present study we have combined both approaches, namely we have applied Cluster
Analysis visualized using dendrograms so as to gain an explanatory insight into the data, and
independently Nearest Shrunken Centroids to perform cross-validated supervised classifica-
tions.
4 Experiment one: how similar are translations of the same texts
in different standard variants?
In our first experiment, we used 53 translations of 21 original texts or text parts in English,
Russian, Italian, French, German and Polish. We use a bootstrap consensus tree stylometric
approach, in the case of which the goal is to produce, for the sake of reliability, a large number
of virtual dendrograms with slightly modified input parameters, combined into a consensus
tree (Eder 2013) of the clusters resulting from using from 100 to 1000 most frequent word
forms to cluster the texts according to similarity in word frequencies. Figure 1 gives the
consensus tree.
The consensus tree shows several sub-groupings of texts. Crucially, Serbian and Croatian
texts are not clustered together; it is only below the level of the work that the standard variant
becomes significant. Grouping according to the standard variant is seen only in those cases in
which we have multiple Serbian or Croatian texts, as with Bulgakov, Eco, Lem, de Exupéry,
Carroll and Tolkien. Thus, since the Croatian and the Serbian translations of Ring and Hobbit
cluster with each other, rather than with other Croatian and Serbian texts, we may say in
answer to the title question that these translations are, in respect to their stylometric profiles,
more Tolkien than Croatian or Serbian.
Above the level of author, we see somemore structure, which reflects other factors that are
difficult to interpret; for example, we might speculate why Twain, Rowling, Mile and Tolkien
are found along the same branch. Since this clustering is contingent on many parameters of
our model, the specific ordering should not be taken to be definite. However, the clear and
rather unexpected outcome of this experiment is that the language variant plays a compara-
tively minor role in the factors governing variation in our corpus. Even though many word
form frequencies necessarily differ strongly between the variants (we need to think only of
the many forms affected by the contrast of ekavica and ijekavica), frequency differences that
are specific to style and contents of original works and authors have a stronger effect on the
overall profile of the translations.
How strong, then, is the impact of standard variant choice in the absence of author influ-
ence? To answer this question, we turn to our second experiment.
5 Experiment two: how similar are translations of different texts into
different standard variants?
In the second experiment, we chose one text for each author in the corpus, randomly selecting
either the Serbian or the Croatian text. We thus arrive at a sample of Serbian and Croatian
texts in which each text has a different author, and Serbian and Croatian were roughly equally
represented (21 vs. 20 texts), and in which, consequently, the factor of authorial style or text-
specific content was excluded. Clustering these texts clearly reveals the choice of standard
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Fig. 1 A consensus tree on the
clusterings of multiply translated
texts based on the frequencies of
the 100 to 1000 most frequent
word forms
variant to be decisive—Serbian and Croatian texts are distinguished to 100 %, and by a
large margin (see Fig. 2). While experiment one showed that the language variant signal is
clearly less strong than the authorial signal, this second experiment showed that its impact
is in turn greater than questions of general register, style, chronology, or others, in as far
as they are represented in this corpus; no such factor motivates the move into a different
cluster. This said, it has to be noted that our corpus is a convenience sample, which does
not include highly marked registers such as internet communication, technical manuals or
legal texts; quite possible, in respect to these, genre might also be stronger than language
variant.
Such a result is not unexpected—the frequency of many word forms in Serbian and Croa-
tian are cardinally different, trivially because they contain different reflexes of the historical
ě in standard spelling. Thus, we expect a Serbian text to have no instances of prije ‘before’,
but a large number of pre ‘id.’, since these forms differ in the modern reflex of the vowel
as written in the Serbian and Croatian standard. Contrasts such as these, and that of other
variant-specific lexemes, have an immediate effect on frequency profiles, and thus, it is not
surprising that an algorithm is just as easily able to distinguish Serbian from Croatian as a
casual observer who looks for such word forms (see Tiedemann and Ljubešić 2012 for an
automatic discrimination approach based on such word forms).
However, we are interested in the question of just how much of this difference is really
due to obvious variant-specific items, and how much is more gradual and subtle and due to
differences in the frequency of items that are present in both variants. We therefore took our
experiment one step further and eliminated trivially differentiating characteristics. To do this,
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
Fig. 2 41 texts labelled Croatian and Serbian from different authors, clustered using Eder’s simple on the
1000 most frequent words
we (a) normalized the texts, so that obvious spelling contrasts such as that of prije and pre
were neutralized, and (b) filtered out differences in lexical items between the texts.
We did this in two ways. First, we normalized the difference between the variants in two
steps. In a first step, we only normalized the contrast of ekavica and jekavica by replacing all
combinations of je or ije by e. In a second, further, step, we normalized two more contrasts:
(a) a difference in spelling norms with Serbian prescribing the combination of infinitive and
auxiliary in the future tense to be written together, and Croatian keeping them apart, cf. uradit
ću to vs. uradiću to ‘I will do that’, and (b) the use of Serbian šta vs. Croatian što ‘what’ as
an interrogative pronoun (in other uses, both variants use što). To neutralize this, we deleted
a space and the last letter if a word ends on t and is directly followed by ću, ćeš, će, ćemu or
ćete, and changed all instances of šta to što by simple regular expression replacement.
Note that with this approach, mistakes are inevitable, i.e., all combinations of ije are re-
placed, not only those actually pertaining to reflexes of *ě. However, this is not crucial, since
it is not our aim to simulate etymologically correct ekanje or the correct Serbian spelling of
the future tense, but rather, to neutralize the differences between the standard variants. This
aim is reached, since the replacements are done in all texts, regardless of the variant used,
and the same mistakes are introduced in all texts, leaving only differences in the frequency
of these items, rather than differences in their form.
The second approach we employed to minimize the categorical differences between the
variants is to filter out tell-tale vocabulary by culling. In non-technical use, culling refers
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Fig. 3 Clustering of 41 texts as in Fig. 2, here after normalization and culling
to “the reduction of the size of an animal population”,2 while in the context of stylometry,
culling refers to a technique in which words found only in a certain percentage of texts are
taken out of the profile (Hoover 2004a, 2004b). For the purposes of this study, we culled the
text by 70 %, thus disregarding such word forms that are in evidence in less than 70 % of the
texts. This effectively removes word forms that are specific to only one variant; for example,
both Croatian organizirati ‘to organize’ and its Serbian equivalent organizovati ‘id.’ will be
excluded as both are used in less than 70 % of the texts. Note that this also removes word
forms that are represented in both Serbian and Croatian texts, but are missing in over 30 %
of texts for other reasons such as style or subject matter.
As expected, the employment of these two techniques greatly lessens the impact of lan-
guage variant choice. A clustering of the same 41 texts does not lead to two clean variant
specific clusters anymore without normalization and culling, as Fig. 3 shows. Rather, three
clusters are differentiated, with only one of them consisting exclusively of texts in one variant;
the other two are predominantly Serbian or Croatian, but do also involve the other variant.
Generally speaking, this means that if both normalization and culling is employed, the stan-
dard variant signal is greatly weakened. It does not, however, completely disappear; rather,
other factors become relatively more important. For example, on the right we see that one of
only two Serbian texts in the third cluster is the Serbian translation of a diary that attaches
2Collins English Dictionary at http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/culling (22 December
2014).
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
to the Croatian translation of a different diary—here, genre obviously has a stronger impact
than language variant. In other cases, the factors that structure the groupings are not obvious.
For the purpose of the present study no further investigation of these clusters is in order,
since to this aim, a more balanced corpus would be needed.
We draw two conclusions from experiment two. First, we see that in the absence of mul-
tiple texts by the same author, the standard variant specific signal in the stylometric profiles
clearly becomes the dominant factor for categorization; texts are divided between two clear
clusters. Second, we see that a large part of the difference between the variants is, as expected,
due to simple ekanje vs. ijekanie, orthographic representation of the future tense forms, as
well as lexical items used only in one or the other variant. If we discard these characteris-
tics, other stylistic factors, yet unexplored, come to the fore. Even in this case, however, we
also see a certain residual 18—there thus are systematic differences in the word frequencies
that continue to be important even if trivial and categorical contrasts between Serbian and
Croatian are discarded. In the last section, we take a closer look at these differences.
6 Experiment three: what distinguishes Serbian and Croatian?
The strength of the present approach is that it can reveal non-categorical differences that re-
side in differences in frequency, rather than in categorical differences. Since Biber (1995) it
has been well established that it is the sum of such non-categorical differences that is char-
acteristic of linguistic varieties or genres. These categories are thus hidden from approaches
that focus on exclusive variants.
In our final experiment, we used machine learning techniques to gain insight into the
word frequencies that distinguish Serbian and Croatian as represented in our corpus. In this
way, we used the stylometric approach to conduct a qualitative, empirical investigation into
the differences between the standards. We asked the question: what word frequencies are
the most indicative of the difference? How well do they approximate the distinction? And
finally: how well can we distinguish between the variants if these single strong distinctions
are removed from the data set, that is, only many subtle differences are taken into account?
For this final experiment, we used the combination of texts used in the first and second
experiment, aiming for a maximal number of texts. We used 96 texts, of which 43 (45 %) are
labelled Croatian, and 53 (55 %) are labelled Serbian.
In the setup for this experiment, we divided the data into two parts: a training set of 40,
and a test set of 56 texts. We then trained Nearest Shrunken Centroids, a classifier well suited
to stylometric data,3 to learn the difference between the two variants using the frequencies
in the training set. The classifier then assigned each text in the test set to either the Serbian
or Croatian variant and compared this hypothetical classification to the actual variant used,
thus arriving at a certain success rate. Next, the procedure of n-fold cross-validation was
applied—the above setup was repeated many times with different divisions of the data into
training and test sets, and the average success rate was recorded. We varied the setup in
respect to the number of the most frequent word used, and compared the outcome for (a) the
unchanged texts, (b) texts in which we have normalized (i)je and e, and (c) texts in which we
have normalized (i)je and e, šta and što and words ending in -ti before texts, as described in
Sect. 5 above. In all three cases, we ran experiments with and without a culling of 70 %, so
that we arrived at six different setups. We trained the classifiers for different numbers of word
3As Jockers, Witten and Criddle (2008) show, Nearest Shrunken Centroids yields consistently better results
than other classifiers, including Support Vector Machines, which we tried for this task but give clearly inferior
results.
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Fig. 4 Classification accuracy
for unchanged texts (short
dashes), texts that were
normalized for ekavica / ijekavica
only (long dashes) and texts
normalized in respect to
ekavica / ijekavica, šta / što, and
future tense spelling (full line).
Crosses as opposed to circles
designate settings with 70 %
culling
forms, always starting with the most frequent word forms and processing successively more
word forms along the frequency lists, and measured the average success rates. The results
are summarized in Fig. 4.
As Fig. 4 shows, performance increases to almost 99 % as the range of words used in-
creases to about 500. Culling, as expected, consistently decreases performance, as those
words used in only one variant are removed. Overall, the best categorization is actually
achieved by normalized text, rather than unchanged text. This is unexpected, since normal-
ization of ekavica and ijekavica decreases the categorical differences between the texts: for
example, instead of containing either prije or pre, lijep or lep ‘nice’, all texts now show nor-
malized pre, lep and so forth. The better performance of normalized text can be explained
by the fact that we have reduced noise and the differences in frequency of elements such as
poslje / posle ‘after’ irrespective of ekavica / ijekavica become accessible to the algorithm.
Overall, we see a very good classification of around 95% even if ekavica and ijekavica are
normalized and language variant specific items are culled out. In order to better understand
this outcome, we now turn to a qualitative analysis.
Table 1 gives the list of the 50 most strongly distinguishing word forms using the NSC
classifier on the unculled texts, ekanje / ijekanje normalized. Word forms removed in the
culled lists are given in italics, što and šta, normalized in a further step, are marked with
an asterisk. Before the word form, we find its rank in respect to its differentiating power, and
its frequency rank in the whole corpus. The word form is followed by its differentiating rank
after culling as well as by two numerical values that show the negative and positive associa-
tion with Serbian and Croatian texts as found in the corpus. This table of word forms shows
both expected and rather unexpected word forms. We will shortly discuss the first 20 items.
The first items of the list are well in line with general knowledge about the differences
between the variants. Positions 1 and 5 involve the contrast of Croatian tko vs. Serbian ko
‘who’ which is salient and generally well know, as testified to by its inclusion in the English
and German Wikipedia entries concerning contrasts between the standard languages. The
items nitko vs. niko ‘nobody’ in positions 3 and 4 and netko vs. neko ‘somebody’ (positions
7 and 15) reflect morphological corollaries of kto / ko.
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
Table 1 List of the 50 most strongly differentiating word forms for normalized ekanie / jekanie. Italic forms
are represented in less than 70 % of the texts and thus culled out
Position Freq. class Item After culling HR SR
1 276 tko ‘who’ 1.12 −0.91
2 51 šta* ‘what’ −1.12 0.91
3 463 nitko ‘nobody’ 1.11 −0.90
4 304 niko ‘nobody’ −0.96 0.78
5 170 ko ‘who, how’ 3 −0.91 0.74
6 3 da ‘yes’, compl. 1 −0.88 0.71
7 455 netko ‘some-body’ 0.85 −0.69
8 526 uopće ‘generally, at all’ 0.84 −0.68
9 24 sa ‘with’ 2 −0.84 0.68
10 241 video ‘he saw’ −0.79 0.64
11 279 vidio ‘he saw’ 0.78 −0.63
12 380 uopšte ‘generally, at all’ −0.77 0.62
13 415 htio ‘he wanted’ 0.74 −0.60
14 357 hteo ‘he wanted’ −0.73 0.59
15 173 neko ‘nobody’ 4 −0.66 0.54
16 13 što* ‘what’ 0.64 −0.52
17 952 sedio ‘he sat’ 0.62 −0.50
18 800 dio ‘part’ 0.61 −0.50
19 243 nakon ‘after’ 0.61 −0.49
20 604 sedeo ‘he sat’ −0.60 0.48
21 1113 točno ‘exactly’ 0.55 −0.45
22 1019 bit ‘to be/being’ 0.55 −0.44
23 682 tačno ‘exactly’ −0.54 0.43
24 371 zapravo ‘actually’ 6 0.53 −0.43
25 513 deo ‘part’ −0.53 0.43
26 976 verojatno ‘probably’ 0.52 −0.42
27 1357 stol ‘table’ 0.50 −0.41
28 115 posle ‘after’ 5 −0.50 0.40
29 1047 također ‘also’ 0.49 −0.40
30 553 ponovno ‘again’ 0.49 −0.39
31 354 najzad ‘finally’ −0.47 0.38
32 502 takođe ‘also’ −0.47 0.38
33 505 napokon ‘finally’ 0.45 −0.37
34 1269 uspio ‘he succeeded’ 0.45 −0.37
35 1032 zrak ‘air’ 0.45 −0.37
36 237 osim ‘except’ 10 0.44 −0.36
37 17 s ‘with’ 7 0.44 −0.35
38 1022 ceo ‘whole’ −0.43 0.35
39 1291 celi ‘whole’ 0.43 −0.35
40 300 koga ‘who’ (acc. / gen.) 13 −0.41 0.33
41 22 kako ‘how’ 8 0.41 −0.33
42 739 posve ‘completely’ 0.41 −0.33
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Table 1 (Continued)
Position Freq. class Item After culling HR SR
43 205 pored ‘beside’ 11 −0.40 0.33
44 823 želeo ‘he wanted’ −0.40 0.33
45 1187 ravno ‘exactly’ 0.40 −0.32
46 346 kome ‘whom’ (dat. / loc.) 14 −0.40 0.32
47 634 učiniti ‘do, make’ 17 0.39 −0.31
48 25 on ‘he’ 9 −0.38 0.31
49 1055 ujutro ‘in the morning’ 0.37 −0.30
50 1219 kamo ‘where to’ 0.36 −0.29
An inspection of the frequencies of these items in individual texts shows that, as expected, tko,
nitko and netko are used in none of the Serbian texts and all of the Croatian texts. Contrary to
expectation, however, niko, although supposedly only Serbian, is also found in a low number
in some of the Croatian texts (although not in enough of them to avoid being culled out).
Niko seems to be used in these texts predominantly in direct speech, which points to the
presence of the ‘Serbian’ variant in a non-standard register of Croatian, something we will
see repeatedly below.
Since ko is also used as a colloquial variant of kao ‘like, how’ and neko as nom. / acc.neuter
of netko, the frequencies of these items reflect different homonyms and are difficult to inter-
pret. They are represented inmore than 70% of the texts and not culled out, as are nitko / niko,
tko, and netko.
The second best predictor is šta. It is very frequent with a frequency rank of 51, i.e.,
only 50 words are more frequent in the corpus, and it is strongly associated with Serbian
(0.9) and strongly dissociated with Croatian (−1.1). This contrast is well known and cited
in the English and German Wikipedia entries for the comparison of Croatian and Serbian.
According to this source, šta is associated only with Bosnian and Serbian interrogative use, as
opposed to relative use. However, šta is in fact registered on the Hrvatski Jezični Portal and in
our data it is clearly not restricted only to Serbian texts. Rather, we find it merely used much
less frequently in the Croatian than in the Serbian texts; and, as with neko, inspection of the
corpus shows that šta seems to bemostly used in the spoken register. Rather than a categorical
difference in the sense of presence or absence, we thus again seem to see a difference in
stylistic association and register make up, which lead to different overall frequencies.
The sixth item in our list concerns the most well known grammatical difference between
the standard variants, namely the tendency for the Eastern variants of BCS to use da-clauses
where Western variants tend to use infinitives, cf. mogu da rade vs. mogu raditi ‘I can do’.
As expected, da is closely associated with Serbian in our corpus, which shows that this is not
only a salient, but also a statistically frequent contrast.
The ninth item, however, is not quite as expected as da. The preposition sa ‘with’ is
strongly associated with Serbian in our corpus, which is due to the orthographic rule that
in the Croatian standard, as Alexander (2006, p. 54) puts it, “this preposition appears as sa
only when the following word begins with s, z, š or ž ; otherwise s is used. In Bosnian sa
is used more frequently than in Croatian, but less frequently than in Serbian.” It is inter-
esting that this difference does not figure in any of the popular lists of differences found in
Wikipedia entries or in other places on the web, and several of the educated speakers we have
asked about this were not conscious of the difference; obviously, this is a frequent, but not
very salient difference. Stevanović (1965) notes it and stresses that there is no clear border
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
line, as Croatian writers also overuse sa. It should be noted that the two versions of Ostrovskij
in the corpus that are almost identical save for the contrast of ekavica and ijekavica do reflect
this difference; this shows that the translators or editors were conscious of the difference in
the writing of s(a) as well. In any case, comments by educated speakers suggest, as above,
that this difference is a symptom of a different configuration of registers in the two standards,
since sa is used in colloquial Croatian before other phonemes as well—it is simply not writ-
ten in the standard variety. Note that with k(a) ‘to, towards’ there is a second preposition
further down the list (position 81 not shown here) where an epenthetic a is inserted more
consistently in Serbian than in Croatian, too; and again, the use or non-use of the epenthetic
vowel is felt to be relevant in respect to style and register in general. In this case, this tendency
is mentioned only by Alexander (2006, p. 98), but not by Stevanović (1965); both features
are absent from, e.g., Brodnjak (1993).
The items in positions 8 and 10 to 14, 17, 18 and 20 are straightforward. Video (pos. 10) vs.
vidio (pos. 11) ‘he saw’, htio (pos. 13) vs. hteo (pos. 14) ‘he wanted’, s(j)edio (pos. 17, with
normalized root) vs. sedeo (pos. 20) ‘he sat’, are masculine simple past forms that reflect the
effects of ekavica and ijekavica on the paradigms of verbs with thematic *ě; dio (pos. 18) vs.
deo (pos. 25) ‘part’ is a parallel case.Uopće (pos. 8) and uopšte (pos. 12) ‘generally, basically’
are well known shibboleths based on the different reflex of *tj in Church Slavonic, which
has been coopted into Serbian. All these and also the other competing singular masculine
past tense forms that reflect ekavica / ijekavica were removed during culling, since they are
categorically associated with different variants and thus represented in less than 70 % of all
cases.
The item 16, što ‘what’, is the counterpart to šta and thus comparatively more frequent
in Croatian than in Serbian. If we employ the second step of normalization and replace all
šta with što, this overuse of što largely disappears, and što is no longer on the list of items
with differentiating frequencies. This is an interesting case from a methodological point of
view, since it illustrates how we can study the deeper reasons for frequency differences—in
this case we show that the overuse of što is primarily associated with the competition with
šta (and not, for example, some syntactic construction) by showing that it disappears when
we eliminate this competition.
The remaining item in position 19, nakon ‘after’, is more interesting. It is fairly frequent
(only 242 words are more frequent) and strongly associated with Croatian in our corpus.
However, our informants were not aware of a standard variant dependent contrast. In fact,
closer inspection shows that it is used not only in 40 out of 43 Croatian, but also in 19 out of
53 Serbian texts, thus showing a clear tendency to be used in Croatian, but not exclusively
(note that it does not meet the threshold of 70 % anyway and was culled out in the next step).
Our Serbian informant deemed it stylistically marked, while our Croatian informant thought
it was completely neutral, which, again, suggests that we are dealing with a different config-
uration of registers which constitute the difference between the two standard varieties. Note
that Alexander (2006) does not mention this difference, while Brozović (1993, p. 629) cites
nakon as one of several counterparts to Serbian posle (pos. 28) ‘after’ which is shown to have
different meanings “u [jezično] dobrim hrvatskim tekstovima” ‘in linguistically good Croat-
ian texts’ as opposed to “u ekavskim tekstovima” ‘in ekavian texts’. The evaluative adjective
points to an essentially prescriptive statement, and it thus seems reasonable to expect that
actual Croatian usage is rather complex in this respect.
We thus have reason to link the association of nakon with Croatian to the relative overuse
of posl(ij)e in Serbian in position 28; this item, too, is frequent in both variants and was
deemed neutral by our informants.4 To test this hypothesis, we conducted a query in the
4Note, however, that posle is included in Brodnjak (1993).
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Table 2 Results of a query for
posl(ij)e toga and nakon toga in
Croatian and Serbian texts in the
corpus
posl(ij)e toga nakon toga
Croatian 75 (25 files) 196 (33 files)
Serbian 388 (47 files) 31 (8 files)
Table 3 Wordforms relevant for categorization after normalization (ekavica / ijekavica, šta / što, future tense
orthography) and 70 % culling
Relev.
pos.
Freq.
rank
Item HR SR Relev.
pos.
Freq.
rank
Item HR SR
1 3 da ‘yes’, compl. −0.87 0.70 21 390 este ‘is’ −0.21 0.17
2 24 sa ‘with’ −0.81 0.66 22 335 sto ‘hundred’ −0.21 0.17
3 169 ko ‘who’ −0.79 0.64 23 184 reći ‘say’ 0.21 −0.17
4 172 neko ‘nobody’ −0.56 0.45 24 284 ju ‘her’ 0.20 −0.16
5 113 posle ‘after’ −0.44 0.35 25 191 bude ‘will’ −0.20 0.16
6 355 zapravo ‘actually’ 0.43 −0.35 26 312 izgleda ‘appears’ −0.20 0.16
7 17 s ‘with’ 0.42 −0.34 27 208 trebalo ‘was necessary’ −0.20 0.16
8 22 kako ‘how’ 0.39 −0.31 28 80 kada ‘when’ −0.19 0.15
9 25 on ‘he’ −0.37 0.30 29 395 est ‘is’ 0.19 −0.15
10 233 osim ‘except’ 0.35 −0.29 30 273 činilo ‘it did’ 0.17 −0.14
11 203 pored ‘beside’ −0.35 0.28 31 139 treba ‘necessary’ −0.17 0.14
12 294 poče ‘began’ −0.31 0.25 32 490 vide ‘see / saw’ −0.17 0.14
13 291 koga ‘who’ (acc. / gen.) −0.31 0.25 33 276 kaže ‘says / said’ −0.17 0.14
14 334 kome ‘who’ (dat. / loc.) −0.30 0.25 34 151 odgovori ‘answer(ed)’ −0.16 0.13
15 192 gotovo ‘almost’ 0.29 −0.24 35 152 neki ‘some’ −0.16 0.13
16 258 stvar ‘thing’ −0.27 0.22 36 495 skoro ‘almost’ −0.16 0.13
17 587 učiniti ‘do’ 0.26 −0.21 37 688 vratiti ‘return’ 0.16 −0.13
18 196 pošto ‘since, because’ −0.26 0.21 38 146 stvari ‘things’ −0.16 0.13
19 422 dogodilo ‘it happened’ 0.25 −0.21 39 552 izgledalo ‘it appeared’ −0.15 0.13
20 177 ponovo ‘again’ −0.25 0.20 40 238 edno ‘one’ −0.15 0.12
96 texts for nakon toga and posl(ij)e toga ‘after that’, two clearly synonymous collocations.
The results of this query are shown in Table 2 and show a sharp5 contrast in frequency,
corroborating this hypothesis. We thus conclude that the competition of synonymous nakon
and posle is a non-discrete factor in the differentiation of the two standard variants.
Table 3 gives an overview of the 40 most relevant word forms after normalization and
culling. As we can see, they cover a wide frequency spectrum. These word forms, which
are all used both in Serbian and Croatian, reflect a mixture of what might be called stylistic
preferences; many of them lend themselves to plausible explanations. Among them we find
orthographic tendencies such as the writing of epenthetic sa in s(a) and k(a); grammatical
tendencies such as the avoidance of the infinitive in eastern varieties, which is seen in the
overuse of da and probably the reason for a number of frequent infinitives and 3rd person
forms such as reči, kaže, vratiti. We see some better known contrasts, such as the overuse
5A chi square test based on the token numbers indicates a significance of p < .0001 and a large effect size at
Cramer’s V = .67.
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
of kome in Serbian, probably due to an association with komu, which has a Croatian con-
notation, the overuse of ju in Croatian and treba and trebalo in Serbian, the contrasting 3rd
person singular form of biti ‘to be’ jest / jeste (here as est / este due to normalization) or the
preference for učiniti in Croatian which is commented on by Brodnjak (1993, p. XI) as one
of many probabilistic differences between the two standards.
Such probabilistic differences are the most complex to analyze, but, we feel, also the most
interesting, as they are testimony to a complex and intriguing relationship between the two
variants that remain to be studied in a wider variationist setting. We find a number of such
items, namely zapravo ‘actually’ (Table 3, position 6), which is associated with Croatian and
which we hypothesize to be in opposition to more Serbian u stvari ‘indeed’ (pos. 38), or osim
and pored ‘except, besides’ in position 10 and 11, which are partly equivalent according to
our queries (note that Brodnjak 1993 lists only pokraj ‘along, beside’ as a counterpart of
pored). Many of these are noted in Brodnjak (1993) if they are characteristic of Serbian,
but it is clear that a corpus based approach has the potential to greatly refine our knowledge
of these contrasts. As cases in point, the conjunctions / interrogatives kako (pos. 8) ‘how’,
pošto (pos. 18) ‘why’ and kada (pos. 28) ‘when’ are not listed in Brodnjak, although they
show strong asymmetries in their frequency which probably concern a network of subtle
differences in their semantic and stylistic characteristics.
7 Conclusions and directions for further research
Let us shortly review the limitations in the design of this preliminary study. First, we posit
only two variants of BCS. This is a gross simplification; traditionally, several more sub-
variants are assumed, and, to the best of our knowledge, much is still to be understood in
respect to variation in BCS across standard varieties, local varieties, registers and text types.
Second, we have completely ignored the diachronic dimension—the translations and origi-
nals in our corpus cover a time span of half a century, and a thorough investigation of the
standards in BCS would need to include this dimension in view of the many changes that
have taken place.
However, neither an inventory of standard variants nor an account of the impact of chang-
ing ideologies on the use of the standard varieties of BCS was the aim of this study. Rather,
we have tried to show that an empirical, corpus based approach to this issue can make inter-
esting and important contributions to the study of standard language variation in BCS.
In two experiments we have shown that the level of standard variant choice is a strong,
but clearly not the unequivocally most important factor shaping word frequency profiles, as
one might have expected. Rather, in the case of our corpus of translations, an author specific
signal was more important, followed only in second place by standard variant choice. How
this finding can be generalized and applied to other registers and genres and whether the
difference between the variants is more or less pronounced in them is a question that should
be addressed in future research.
Furthermore, we have shown that a stylometric approach can be used to investigate differ-
ences between the standard variants from a qualitative perspective. Crucially, our approach
successfully uncovers known contrasts on an empirical and statistically reliable basis, rather
than on the basis of intuition and anecdotal evidence. This in turn lends credibility to less
obvious contrasts that appear in the list and need to be studied in more detail, which is left
for future research on a larger and more diverse corpus. An important extension of this ap-
proach would be to addmorphosyntactic annotation, so that colligational and collostructional
patterns could be explored.
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Altogether, empirical, corpus based research into variation in BCS is called for. We be-
lieve that an adequate assessment of the differences of the standard variants of BCS neces-
sitates an approach that takes a wide view, open not only to uncovering different geographic
factors, but also striving to take into account a breadth of variational factors across time,
register, genre and style, which all contribute to the fascinating diversity of this pluricentric
language and region.
Appendix—list of texts
Experiment 1 (52 texts, multiple translations):
HR_Adams_Guide, SR_Adams_Guide, HR_Brown_Code, SR_Brown_Code, HR_Bulga-
kov_Master1, SR_Bulgakov_Master1, SR_Bulgakov_Master1_a, HR_Bulgakov_Master2,
SR_Bulgakov_Master2, SR_Bulgakov_Master2_a, HR_Carroll_AliceWonderland, HR_
Carroll_AliceWonderland_a, SR_Carroll_AliceWonderland, SR_Carroll_AliceWonderland
_a, HR_Eco_Rosa_a, HR_Eco_Rosa_b, SR_Eco_Rosa, HR_Exupery_Prince_a, HR_Exu-
pery_Prince_b, HR_Exupery_Prince_c, SR_Exupery_Prince, SR_Exupery_Prince_a, SR_
Exupery_Prince_b, HR_Fielding_Diary, SR_Fielding_Diary, HR_Frank_Frank, SR_Frank_
Frank, HR_Hemingway_OldManSea, SR_Hemingway_OldManSea, HR_Lem_Sol, SR_
Lem_Sol, SR_Lem_Sol_a, HR_Milne_P, SR_Milne_P, HR_Orwell_1984, SR_Orwell_1984,
HR_Ostrovskij_KZS_1, HR_Ostrovskij_KZS_2, SR_Ostrovskij_KZS_1, SR_Ostrovskij_
KZS_2, HR_Rowling_HP1, SR_Rowling_HP1, HR_Sueskind_Parfum, SR_Sueskind_Par-
fum, HR_Tolkien_Hob, SR_Tolkien_Hob, HR_Tolkien_Ring_1, SR_Tolkien_Ring_1, HR_
Twain_TS, SR_Twain_TS, HR_Verne_Verne_80, SR_Verne_Verne_80
Experiment 2 (41 texts, different authors):
HR_Brown_Code, HR_Bulgakov_Master2, HR_Carroll_AliceWonderland_a, HR_Collodi_
Pin, HR_Exupery_Prince_a, HR_Frank_Frank, HR_Golding_LF, HR_Kaestner_Emil, HR_
Kafka_Verw, HR_Krleza_Fil, HR_Kundera_Lehkost, HR_Milne_P, HR_Nabokov_Lolita,
HR_Poe_Cat, HR_Schmidt_Minoes, HR_Schnitzler_Casanova, HR_Stasiuk_Dziewiec,
HR_Sueskind_Parfum, HR_Tolkien_Ring_1, HR_Wells_War, SR_Adams_Guide, SR_An-
dric_Drina, SR_Coelho_Alch, SR_Eco_Rosa, SR_Fielding_Diary, SR_Gombrowicz_Fer-
dydurke, SR_Hashek_Shv1, SR_Hemingway_OldManSea, SR_IlfPetrov_12, SR_Jerome_
3M, SR_Lagerlof_NilsHolg, SR_Lem_Sol, SR_Lindgren_Karls_1, SR_Orwell_1984, SR_
Ostrovskij_KZS_2, SR_Pavic_Haz, SR_Prus_Lalka1, SR_Pushkin_KD, SR_Rowling_HP1,
SR_Twain_TS, SR_Verne_Verne_80
Full list of files:
HR_Adams_Guide Douglas Adams: Vodič kroz galaksiju za autostopere; pri-
jevod Helio Zaradić
SR_Adams_Guide DAGLAS ADAMS AUTOSTOPERSKI VODIČ KROZ
GALAKSIJU
SR_Andric_Cork Ivo Andrić: ĆORKAN I ŠVABICA
SR_Andric_Drina Ivo Andrić: Na Drini ćuprija
SR_Andric_Jel Ivo Andrić: JELENA, ŽENA KOJE NEMA
SR_Andric_PA Ivo Andrić: PROKLETA AVLIJA
SR_Andric_Put Ivo Andrić: PUT ALIJE ÐERZELEZA
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
SR_Andric_Slon Ivo Andrić: PRIČA O VEZIROVOM SLONU
SR_Andric_Zhep Ivo Andrić: MOST NA ZEPI
SR_Brown_Angels Den Braun, ANÐELI I DEMONI; Sa engleskog preveo
Nemanja Jovanov
HR_Brown_Code Dan Brown: Da Vincijev kod; S engleskoga prevela:
Suzana Sesvečan
SR_Brown_Code Den Braun: Da Vinčijev kod; Sa engleskog prevela Nina
Ivanović
SR_Bulgakov_Master1_a Mihail Afanasjevič Bulgakov: Majstor i Margarita; Preveo
Zlata Kocić
SR_Bulgakov_Master1 Mihail Afanasjevič Bulgakov: Majstor i Margarita; Preveo
Milan Čopić
HR_Bulgakov_Master1/2 Mihail Bulgakov: Majstor i Margarita; S ruskog prevela
Vida Flaker
HR_Carroll_AliceWonderland Lewis Carroll: Alica u zemlji čudesa; Prevela Mira Jurkić-
Šurkić
HR_Carroll_AliceWonderland_a Lewis Carroll: Alica u Zemlji čudesa; S engleskog preveo
Antun Šoljan (Zagreb 2004)
SR_Carroll_AliceWonderland Luis Kerol: Alisa u zemlji čuda; Preveo s engleskog: Luka
Semenović
SR_Carroll_AliceWonderland_a Luis Kerol: Alisa u zemlji čuda; Prevodilac—Mirjana
Milenković
SR_Coelho_Alch Paulo Koeljo: Alhemičar; Prevod s portugalskog Radoje
Tatić
HR_Collodi_Pin C. Collodi: Pinokio—Čudnovati doživlaji jednog lutka;
Vjekoslav Kaleb
HR_Eco_Rosa_a Umberto Eco: Ime ruže; Prev. Morana Čale
HR_Eco_Rosa_b UMBERTO ECO: Ime ruže; Prevela Lia Paić
SR_Eco_Rosa Umberto Eko: Ime ruže; Milana Piletić
HR_Exupery_Prince_a Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: Mali princ; Priejvod Ivan
Kušan
HR_Exupery_Prince_b Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: Mali princ; S francuskoga pre-
vela Mia Pervan. Zagreb 1995
HR_Exupery_Prince_c Antonie de Saint-Exupéry: Mali princ; S francuskog pre-
veo Goran Rukavina. Split 2000
SR_Exupery_Prince Antoan de Sent-Egziperi (Antoan de Saint-Exupery): Mali
Princ; [CHUPCKO]
SR_Exupery_Prince_a Antoan de Sent-Egziperi: Mali princ; Prevela Vesna Veni-
jamin Blagojević
SR_Exupery_Prince_b Antoan de Sent-Egziperi: Mali princ; Prevela Bojana
Vukšić
HR_Fielding_Diary Helen Fielding: Dbevnik Bridget Jones; prevela s en-
leskoga Duška Gerić Koren
SR_Fielding_Diary Helen Filding: Dnevnik Bridžet Džouns; Prevela Milica
Kecojević
HR_Frank_Frank ANNE FRANK: DNEVNIK ANNE FRANK; prevela
snjemačkog Ana Šegvić
SR_Frank_Frank Ana Frank: Dnevnik Ane Frank od 12. juna 1942 do 1.
avgusta 1944; Prevod Zagorka Lilić i Ema Časar
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
HR_Golding_LF William Golding: Gospodar muha; S engleskog preveo
Zlatko Crnković
SR_Gombrowicz_Ferdydurke Vitold Gombrovič: Ferdidurke. Preveo s poljskog Uglješa
Radnović. Beograd: Nolit, 1981
SR_Hashek_Shv1 JaroslavHašek: DOŽIVLJAJIDOBROGVOJNIKAŠVEJ-
KAU PRVOMSVETSKOMRATU; Preveo STANISLAV
VINAVER
SR_Hashek_Shv2 JaroslavHašek: DOŽIVLJAJIDOBROGVOJNIKAŠVEJ-
KAU PRVOMSVETSKOMRATU; Preveo STANISLAV
VINAVER
SR_Hashek_Shv3 JaroslavHašek: DOŽIVLJAJIDOBROGVOJNIKAŠVEJ-
KAU PRVOMSVETSKOMRATU; Preveo STANISLAV
VINAVER
HR_Hemingway_OldManSea Ernest Hemingway: Starac i more; preveo Zlatko Crnković
SR_Hemingway_OldManSea ERNEST HEMINGVEJ: STARAC I MORE; S engleskog
preveo Karlo Ostojić
SR_IlfPetrov_12 Ilja Iljf i Jevgenij Petrov: Dvanaest stolica; Preveo s ruskog
Nikola Nikolić
SR_Jerome_3M Džerom K. Džerom: Tri čoveka u čamcu—psa da i ne
spominjemo; Preveo Vojin V. Ančić
HR_Kaestner_Emil Erich Kästner: Emil i detektivi; preveo s njemačkoga Gus-
tav Krklec
HR_Kafka_Verw Franz Kafka: Preobrazba; preveo Zlatko Crnković
HR_Krleza_Fil Miroslav Krleža: Povratak Filipa Latinovicza [CD-ROM
Klasici hrvatske književnosti]
HR_Kundera_Lehkost Milan Kundera: Nepodnošljiva lakoća postojanja. Preveo
Nikola Kršić, priredio Mile Pešorda
SR_Lagerlof_NilsHolg Selma Lagerlef: Čudnovato putovanje Nilsa Holgersona;
Prevele Jelena Krsmanović i Dušica Guteša
SR_Lem_Fiasko Stanislav Lem: Fijasko, prevela Emilija Bogdanović
SR_Lem_GlosPana Stanislav Lem: Glas gospodara. Preveo Petar Vujičić. 1978
HR_Lem_Sol Stanisław Lem: Solaris; s poljskog preveo Mladen Martić
SR_Lem_Sol Stanislav Lem: Solaris; preveo Predrag Obućina. Beograd:
Kojot, 2003
SR_Lem_Solaris_a Stanislav Lem: Solaris. Prevod Petar Vujičić
SR_Lindgren_Karls_1 Astrid Lindgren: Bata i Karlson s krova; Sa švedskog pre-
vela Slavica Agatonović
HR_Lindgren_Pip1 Astrid Lindgren: Pipi Duga Čarapa; Preveo sa švedskoga
Mirko Rumac
SR_Milne_HC A.A. Miln: Kuća na puovom uglu; Luka Semenović
HR_Milne_P Alan Alexander Milne: Medo Winnie zvani Pooh; Pri-
jevod: Marina Leustek. Zagreb 2005
SR_Milne_P A.A.Miln: Vini zvani Pu;Mlado pokolenje, Beograd 1966
SR_Mulisch_Mul Hari Muliš: Atentat. Roman
HR_Nabokov_Lolita Vladimir Nabokov: Lolita; Preveo s autorovog ruskog pri-
jevoda i usporedio s engleskim originalomZlatkoCrnković
HR_Orwell_1984 George Orwell: 1984 (Novela); s engleskoga preveo Antun
Šoljan
SR_Orwell_1984 George Orwell: 1984; Translator: Vlada Stojiljković
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
HR_Orwell_AnimalFarm GEORGE ORWELL: Životinjska farma (Bajka); Preveo
VLADIMIR ROKSANDIĆ
HR_Ostrovskij_KZS_1 Nikolaj Ostrovskij: Kako se kalio čelik; Kako se kalio če-
lik / Nikolaj Ostrovski, preveo s ruskog Derviš Imamović
SR_Ostrovskij_KZS_1 Nikolaj Ostrovski: Kako se kalio čelik
SR_Pavic_Haz Milorad Pavić: Hazarski rečnik Roman-leksikon u 100.000
reči (Muški primerak)
HR_Poe_Cat Edgar Allan Poe: CRNI MAČAK; Preveo Leo Držić
HR_Poe_Morgue UMORSTVA U ULICI MORGUE; Preveo Leo Držić
HR_Poe_Pit Edgar Allan Poe: JAMA I NJIHALO; Preveo Leo Držić
SR_Prus_Lalka Boleslav Prus: Lutka; preveo dr Krešimir Georgijević.
(Three parts)
SR_Pushkin_KD A.S. Puškin: Kapetanova kći; Prevod s ruskog: Božidar
Kovačević
HR_Rowling_HP1 J.K. Rowling: Harry Potter i kamen mudraca. Prijeveo
Zlatko Crnković
SR_Rowling_HP1 Džoan K. Rouling: Hari Poter i kamen mudrosti; Preveli
sa engleskog Vesna i Draško Roganović (Narodna knjiga,
Beograd 2000)
HR_Schmidt_Minoes Annie M. G. Schmidt: MIMA; S nizozemskog preveo
Radovan Lučić
HR_Schnitzler_Casanova Arthur Schnitzler: Casanovin povratak; S njemačkog pre-
vela Sandra Brkljačić
HR_Stasiuk_Dziewiec Andrzej Stasiuk, Devet. Prijevela Ivana Maslač. Zaprešić:
Fraktura 2003
HR_Sueskind_Parfum Patrick Süskind: Parfem; Nedeljka Paravić
SR_Sueskind_Parfum Patrik Ziskind, Parfem: hronologija jednog zločina, Preveo
Zlatko Krasni. Novi Sad: Solaris, 2008
HR_Tolkien_Hob J.R.R. Tolkien: Hobit; U prijevodu Zlatka Crnkovića
SR_Tolkien_Hob Džon R.R. Tolkin: Hobit ili tamo i natrag; S engleskog pre-
veli: Meri i Milan Milišić (Novi Sad 2001)
HR_Tolkien_Ring_1 J.R.R. Tolkien: Gospodar prstenova. Dio prvi—Prstenova
družina; Preveo s engleskog Zlatko Crnković
SR_Tolkien_Ring_1 Dž.R.R. Tolkien: Gospodar prstenova; Preveo s engleskog
Zoran Stanojević
HR_Twain_TS Mark Twain: Pustolovine Toma Sawyera; Prijevod: Ivan
Kušan
SR_Twain_TS Mark Tven: Tom Sojer; preveo sa engleskog Stanislav
Vinaver
HR_Verne_Verne_80 Jules Verne: Put oko svijeta u osamdeset dana; prevod:
Petar Mordešić (1961)
SR_Verne_Verne_80 Put oko sveta za 80 dana; Prevod: Radovan Zavšić (1963)
HR_Wells_Time Herbert George Wells: Vremenski stroj; S engleskog pre-
veo Predrag Raos
HR_Wells_War Herbert George Wells: Rat svjetova; S engleskog preveo
Predrag Raos
R. von Waldenfels, M. Eder
Internet sources
Hrvatski Jezični Portal: Dictionary database by Novi Libera and Srce computing centre. Za-
greb. Available at http://hjp.novi-liber.hr/ (15 January 2015).
ParaSol: Waldenfels, R. and Meyer, R. (2006–2014). Parasol, a parallel corpus of Slavic and
other language. Available at www.parasolcorpus.org (15 January 2015).
Wikipedia contributors. Unterschiede zwischen den serbokroatischen Standardvarietäten.
Wikipedia. Die freie Enzyklopädie. Last changes 22 February 2014.
Wikipedia contributors. Usporedba standardnog srpskog, hrvatskog, bosanskog i crnogors-
kog jezika. Wikipedia [Serbo-Croatian Version]. Last changes 9 September 2014.
Wikipedia contributors. Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian. Wikipedia.
The Free Encyclopedia. Last changes 29 November 2014.
References
Alexander, R. (2006). Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian. A grammar with sociolinguistic commentary. London.
Barentsen, A. (2008). Vyraženie posledovatel’nosti dejstvij pri povtorjaemosti v prošlom v sovremennyx sla-
vjanskix jazykax. In P. Houtzagers, J. Kalsbeek, & J. Schaeken (Eds.), Dutch contributions to the Four-
teenth International Congress of Slavists, Ohrid, September 10–16, 2008. Linguistics (Studies in Slavic
and General Linguistics, 34, pp. 1–36). Amsterdam, New York.
Biber, D. (1995). Dimensions of register variation. A cross-linguistic comparison. Cambridge.
Brodnjak, V. (1993). Razlikovni rječnik srpskog i hrvatskog jezika. Zagreb.
Brozović, D. (1992). Serbo-Croatian as a pluricentric language. In M. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages.
Differing norms in different nations (Contributions to the Sociology of Language, 62, pp. 347–380).
Berlin, New York.
Brozović, D. (1993). Pogovor. In V. Brodnjak (Ed.), Razlikovni rječnik srpskog i hrvatskog jezika (pp. 628–
630). Zagreb.
Bunčić, D. (2008). Die (Re-)Nationalisierung der serbokroatischen Standards. In S. Kempgen, K. Gutschmidt,
U. Jekutsch, & L. Udolph (Eds.), Deutsche Beiträge zum 14. Internationalen Slavistenkongress. Ohrid
2008 (Die Welt der Slaven. Sammelbände – Sborniki, 32, pp. 89–102). München.
Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’: a measure of stylistic difference and a guide to likely authorship. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267–287.
Eder, M. (2013). Computational stylistics and Biblical translation: How reliable can a dendrogram be? In
T. Piotrowski & Ł. Grabowski (Eds.), The translator and the computer (pp. 155–170). Wrocław.
Eder, M. (2015). Visualization in stylometry: cluster analysis using networks. Digital Scholarship in the Hu-
manities, 30. doi:10.1093/llc/fqv061.
Eder, M., Kestemont, M., & Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: a suite of tools. In Digital Humanities
2013. Book of Abstracts (pp. 487–489). Lincoln.
Gröschel, B. (2009). Das Serbokroatische zwischen Linguistik und Politik. Mit einer Bibliographie zum postju-
goslavischen Sprachenstreit. München.
Hoover, D. (2004a). Testing Burrows’ Delta. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19(4), 453–475.
Hoover, D. (2004b). Delta prime. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19(4), 477–495.
Jannidis, F., Pielström, S., Schöch, C., & Vitt, T. (2015). Improving Burrows’ Delta. An empirical evalua-
tion of text distance measures. In Digital Humanities 2015. Book of Abstracts. Graz. Retrieved from:
http://dh2015.org/abstracts (20 November 2015).
Jockers, M. L., Witten, D. M., & Criddle, C. S. (2008). Reassessing authorship in the Book of Mormon using
delta and nearest shrunken centroid classification. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(4), 465–491.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Argamon, S. (2009). Computational methods in authorship attribution. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1), 9–26.
Kordić, S. (2009). Plurizentrische Sprachen, Ausbausprachen, Abstandsprachen und die Serbokroatistik.
Zeitschrift für Balkanologie, 45(2), 210–215.
Mosteller, F., & Wallace, D. L. (2007[1964]). Inference and disputed authorship: The Federalist (reprinted
with a new introduction by John Nerbonne). Stanford.
Nerbonne, J. (2007). The exact analysis of text. In F. Mosteller & D. L. Wallace (Eds.), Inference and disputed
authorship: The Federalist (reprinted with a new introduction by John Nerbonne, pp. XI–XX). Stanford.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 60(3), 538–556.
Stevanović, M. (1965). Neke leksičko-stilske razlike, a ne jezičke varijante. Naš jezik, 14, 195–226.
Stylometry of standard variation in BCS
Tiedemann, J., & Ljubešić, N. (2012). Efficient discrimination between closely related languages. In M. Kay
& C. Boitet (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers (COLING 2012). Mumbai, 8–15 December 2012 (pp. 2619–2634). Retrieved from:
https://aclweb.org/anthology/C/C12/ (20 November 2015).
Voß, C. (2009). Review of: B. Gröschel (2009). Das Serbokroatische zwischen Linguistik und Politik. Mit einer
Bibliographie zum postjugoslavischen Sprachenstreit. München. Südost-Forschungen, 68, 778–781.
von Waldenfels, R. (2012). ParaSol: introduction to a Slavic parallel corpus. Prace Filologiczne, LXIII, 293–
302.
