Text Surface Features for Genre Request in Information Retrieval  
 
Wenxin Xiong 
National Research Center for Foreign Language Education 
Beijing Foreign Studies University 
Beijing, 100089, China 
e-mail: xiongwenxin@bfsu.edu.cn 
 
Abstract—Traditional information retrieval focuses on topic 
relevance by computing the similarity between query and 
texts using content-based Bag of Words (BOW) strategy. 
This approach can not handle the terms expressing genre 
request in user’s query, which maynot occur in target texts 
with the same form or other derivative forms. We propose a 
post text classification on the results returned by search 
engines to meet the request expressed by genre vocabulary in 
queries. Some statistics of text surface features for genre 
detection, i.e. average sentence length, number of specific 
part of speech and punctuations are examined. An 
experiment on identifying narrative texts and commentaries 
about a news event by using the above-mentioned variables 
has been conducted, and yielded an encouraging result. 
Keywords- text surface features; genre; query; information 
retrieval 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The different functions of words in queries submitted 
by users are overlooked by most researchers. In the state-
of-art vector space model, each segmentation component 
in a query is treated uniformly or weighted by some 
strategies as a vector in the space [1] [2] [3] [4]. After 
filtering stop word, the remaining words in user's queries 
and words of target texts are utilized for computing the 
topic-related similarity by counting their occurrences. 
Actually even in these remaining content-bearing query 
words, there are different implementations in target texts 
[5]. Some words are related to the topic, others are 
concerned with genre of target texts or their expression 
styles. Consider the following queries taken from TREC or 
863IR test bed. 
• Retrieval the analysis of the media or experts on 
the causes of juvenile delinquency, such as social 
reasons, family reasons and school education 
reasons, the targets illustrated with concrete 
juvenile crime cases are related, but just a simple 
crime record  is not related. 
• The scientific reports about the prevention of 
SARS, the treatment of SARS patients, and the 
study of effective cure methods, are related. News 
and other activities reports related to SARS but 
without medical knowledge are not related. 
• The Madrid train bombing in March 11, 2004, is a 
critical terrorism event, which shocked Europe 
and the world. All reports or comments about the 
breaking event are related. 
From the above sample queries, words like “news”, 
“reports”, and “comments” are indicators narrowing the 
target texts down to the specific ones restricted by genre 
stated by those query words. These query words are 
different from other content words such as “Madrid”, 
“SARS”, which may be found in the target texts in the 
same form or derivative forms, by means of the so-called 
relevance feedback technique.  
It is, therefore, not applicable for “Bag of words 
(BOW)” strategy to deal with genre words indicating the 
expression style, rather than concrete words in target texts 
[6]. To satisfy personalized information retrieval requests 
specific to expression style, an adaptive method should be 
introduced after the results returned by traditional search 
engines, which is a text classification task for detecting the 
genre of the returned results. The paper is structured as 
follows; some related works on genre recognition using 
some text surface features is surveyed in section 2.  An 
experiment of discriminating news from commentary by 
means of some statistics is elaborated in section 3. Some 
lessons learned from the experiment are shared in section 
4. A conclusion is drawn in section 5. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Information retrieval focuses on topic relevance. 
Terms, also know as content words, are used to compute 
the similarity between queries and target texts.  
In library community, librarians classify books into 
different categories, according to their genres, for example, 
novel, prose or textbook, etc. Due to the small-sized 
database and well-formed library catalogue system, it is 
relatively easy to handle for trained librarians. But facing 
the flood of heterogeneous electronic texts on the Internet, 
users with less training are hard to get to useful genre 
specific texts and information.. 
Indeed, there exists an orthogonal relation between 
expression style and information content [7]. The different 
topics may share the same or similar expression strategy. 
For example, in a paper discussing the production of new 
drugs and a thesis on natural language processing, they 
almost follow the same writing style "presenting the 
problem, analyzing the problem, and proposed solutions to 
the problem", because both of them are scientific papers. 
In another case, although news reports and dissertations on 
the same topic of prevention and treatment of SARS, may 
share more topic-related word clusters, their expression 
styles are less similar. Therefore, it is believed that text 
expression has the peculiarity of domain transferring [8]. 
Some discriminatory features used in genre recognition 
have been proposed in previous studies. Due to 
overwhelming computational complexity of deep parsing 
in natural language and real-time requirement on 
information retrieval, some text surface features with less 
processing are favored in industrial circle. For example, 
word length, average sentence length, and word counts, the 
frequency of function words, the frequency of punctuation 
are proposed in previous works[9] [10] [11] [12]. To strike 
a balance between complexity and accuracy, works 
978-0-7695-3888-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/KAM.2009.263
287
2009 Second International Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling
6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aegean University. Downloaded on July 27,2010 at 15:23:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
drawing on surface linguistic cues can reach the same 
result comparable to that of deeper analysis required by 
more knowledge processing. To find more valuable ones 
among plenty of possible useful variables, discriminate 
analysis is introduced to lead to the reduction of 
dimensions of variables [13]. 
III. EXPERIMENT 
We analyzed two different genre types, i.e. news 
reports and the comments on the news event, trying to 
capture the most discriminatory features between them. 
The test corpus data were news texts collected from the 
Internet. 
A. Corpus 
The corpus of news reports and commentaries about a 
news story were obtained from the Internet. 
Commercially-operated portal websites always have larger 
population, more authority, greater circulation and better 
quality than websites run by individual owners; therefore, 
we chose one of the pioneering Internet Content Provider, 
SINA Chinese news as our corpus source. 
The staffs in news center of SINA classify the 
incoming news into different text types according to topic 
and potential user interest, such as entertainment, finance 
and sports, etc. They occasionally set up special issues for 
breaking news or hot topic, with news and commentaries 
collected from other mainstream network and print media, 
and discussion forums are made available in the mean 
time. 
In this experiment, we chose a social event issue 
entitled with “Poor father wrote to rich men to save his 
daughter” 1  as our corpus theme, to show how genre 
difference between news and commentary can be 
accounted by some text surface statistics without deep 
parsing. 
B. Text Processing 
After pinning down the topic of news, the text 
processing went through the following stages. 
1) Download the web pages 
The layout of a special issue’s entry page can be 
partitioned into two parts, entitled with “latest news” and 
“commentary” respectively, displaying different kinds of 
data. We have downloaded all the externally-linked HTML 
files in different areas, and saved them as 13 news and 25 
commentary texts.  
2) Convert to plain text 
All HTML files downloaded in step 1 contain plenty of 
HTML tags, which just control the display effects in a 
browser, with less semantic content as in XML, even 
worse in making noise for many text processing task. They 
are of little help for the purpose of genre classification. 
Therefore, we removed all HTML tags to get raw texts in 
this stage. 
3)  Sentence splitting 
The result of step 2 are plain text files, and should be 
split into sentences for further sentence-based or word-
based statistical processing. In our case, a sentence is 
                                                           
1 The entry web page of this special issue on social events can be 
accessed at http://news.sina.com.cn/z/qfgfhxx/index.shtml. 
heuristically defined as those with the end stop and some 
special delimiter tags at the end of a string, such as “.!?”, 
etc. 
4) Words segmentation 
We used General Word Processing System (GWPS2) 
developed by Center for Language and Information 
Processing, Beijing Language and Culture University, as 
our Chinese word segmentation tool. It generates result 
with white spaces between different words, encoded in 
Unicode. A character conversation program between 
Unicode to Chinese GB2312 is developed to fulfill this. 
5)  Part of speech (POS) tagging 
Part of speech tagging is done with ICTCLAS3, which 
is developed by Institute of Computer Technology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences. It has some notable 
functions, such as word segmentation, POS tagging, and 
recognition of unknown words. In this experiment, we 
adopted the tag set proposed by Institute of Computational 
Linguistics, Peking University. 
C. Feature Selection 
Genre detection can be regarded as a problem of 
classification. By observing some language variables, we 
can place a target text into a proper predefined category. 
The category can be any one of the library catalogue rules, 
or be any cluster result. In our experiment, the binary 
value is one of the two tags of “news” or “commenary”, 
supplied by editors of the special issue. 
We designed an experiment to test whether three most 
commonly-used variables are helpful for genre 
recognition of target texts, i.e., text surface statistics; parts 
of speech (pos) tag statistics and punctuation statistics. 
1) Text surface statistics 
Text surface features are those readily identifiable 
linguistic features without syntactic or semantic parsing, 
such as average sentence length, word number per 
sentence. It is demonstrated that the surface information is 
perfect indicator for text classification in Western 
languages. In our case, the word number in a sentence is 
26.5 in commentary texts and 17.8 in news story-telling 
texts. The maximum and minimum count are 21.2, 13.9 
respectively in news texts; the correspondent values in 
commentary texts are 35.6 and 17.88. It is a bell curve, 
which seems to fit normal distribution. 
TABLE 1 INDEPENDENT SAMPLES TEST FOR TEXT SURFACE STATISTICS 
Independent Samples Test
.710 .405 -6.844 36 .000 -8.7799 1.28292 11.38175 -6.17798
-8.004 31.743 .000 -8.7799 1.09690 11.01488 -6.54485
Equal variances assum
Equal variances not
assumed
words per sen
F Sig.
Levene's Test for
Equality of Variances
t df Sig. (2-tailed)
Mean
Difference
Std. Error
Difference Lower Upper
95% Confidence
Interval of the
Difference
t-test for Equality of Means
 
 
To avoid possible sampling error, we used One-
Sample Kolmogorov-Sirnov Test to test whether the two 
samples (news and commentary) are representative enough. 
The significant coefficients of word number per sentence 
in news and commentary texts are 0.992 and 0.773, greater 
                                                           
2http://clip.blcu.edu.cn, won the Second Prize for Natural Science 
Research Granted by National Ministry of Education, China (2005)  
3http://www.nlp.org.cn/, an Open Resource Platform for Chinese Natural 
Language Processing, the first version (Sept, 2002) 
288
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aegean University. Downloaded on July 27,2010 at 15:23:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
than the significant value of 0.05, see Table 1. This 
suggests that they conform to normal distribution. 
2) POS tag 
The distribution of POS tags in the two text types is 
similar with little difference, as shown in Figure 1. In the 
news texts, Person names, Time and Place names are used 
more frequently than that in commentary texts. It may be 
attributed to well-known 5W principle in journalistic 
writing, such as when, where, who, what, and how in the 
narrative of news events. While in commentaries, more 
attention is directed to the induction, summary and the 
author’s opinion to the news story, with little interest in 
repeating the trivial details. Commentary can be regarded 
as in a typical persuasive expression style. Function words 
are used more frequently than in narrative texts, i.e., 
particles, prepositions and conjunctions.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Pos tag percentage arrangement in different genre texts 
This conforms to our intuition. To select the 
predominant variables among all possible POS tags, we 
used Stepwise Discriminant Analysis to for this aim. 
TABLE 2 POS CLASSIFICATION FUNCTION COEFFICIENTS 
Classification Function Coefficients
522.601 1135.242
4138.489 8731.486
-15597.0 -28019.2
-302.755 -1072.942
12995.40 27367.27
-1590.514 -3447.040
1551.775 2856.182
-1188.398 -3288.526
-40.613 -125.991
c
dg
g
ng
nt
nx
u
y
(Constant)
narrative comment
V1
Fisher's linear discriminant functions  
 
As shown in Table 2, conjunction (c), adverb (dg), 
noun (n), name entity (nt, nx), particle (u) play important  
roles in determining of different genre types. In addition, 
the Fisher’s linear discriminatory function based on the 
data in Table 2 also shows that this classification can reach 
an achievement of 100% in original and cross-validated 
test. Although the sample size is relatively small, it at least 
reveals the importance of POS tags in recognizing 
different genre types. 
3) Punctuation 
Punctuation has been proved a good indicator for text 
classification in Western languages. In Chinese journalistic 
writing, it seems to be the same case. For example, to 
highlight on-the-spot interviews, or follow the objective 
and impartial description principle, direct speeches from 
the interviewers are often found in the news reports. The 
commentary texts are dominated by author’s subjective 
opinions towards the news event. The commented news 
event is always paraphrased in author’s succinct style.  
The main distinctive features to tell direct speech from 
indirect speech are quotation marks. But, since not all 
quoted strings are direct speeches, some other emphasized 
objects, words with special meaning, may also receive the 
same quotation form in Chinese language4. 
In our experiment, with the ratio of end stop mark( ), 
pause mark( ), comma( ), question mark( ), quotation 
mark(“”), exclamation mark( ) and colon( ) in whole 
corpus as observing variables, Wilks’ Lambda test shows 
the values of colon and exclamation mark are relatively 
small. The significant level in 0.00 proves they are useful 
in genre recognition, for more details see Table 3.  
TABLE 3 TESTS OF EQUALITY OF GROUP MEANS IN PUNCTUATION 
 Wilks’ lambda F df1 df2 Sig. 
Pause mark .956 1.673 1 36 .204 
Stop mark .994 .231  1 36 .634 
Quotation 
mark .993 .265  1 36 .610 
Exclamation .645 19.826 1 36 .000 
Comma .809 8.506 1 36 .006 
Colon .397 54.682 1 36 .000 
Question mark .969 1.171 1 36 .286 
TABLE 4 CLASSIFICATION RESULTS USING PUNCTUATION VARIABLE 
Classification Results a
10 2 12
0 26 26
83.3 16.7 100.0
.0 100.0 100.0
CAT
narrative
comment
narrative
comment
Count
%
Original
narrative comment
Predicted Group
Membership
Total
94.7% of original grouped cases correctly classified.a. 
 
 
Document Frequency (DF) and Term Frequency (TF) 
of colon and exclamation are 11 and 9(N=12), 29 and 120, 
respectively in news texts; while in commentary texts, 
their DF are 5 and 14(N=26), TF are 6 and 30. It shows 
there are some remarkable differences between the two 
text types. 
To achieve the effect of live report, more direct 
speeches are found in news report than in other texts. As 
we have noted above, the classic form of direct speech is 
realized by colons, which is helpful to the differentiation of 
news and commentary texts. Exclamation is another 
typical feature for narrative rather than reasoning in our 
experiment. Therefore, it also helps with the discrimination 
of news and commentary.  
By utilizing these simple statistics, the classification 
result is showed in Table 4, which is encouraging. 
                                                           
4 For more information, refer to “Use of punctuation marks”, National 
Standard/Recommend 15834-1995 
289
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aegean University. Downloaded on July 27,2010 at 15:23:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The mainstream web information retrieval does not 
boost to fully support genre retrieval. What we can do is to 
refine the results returned by a search engine by adding a 
procedure of text genre classification, see Figure 2 for the 
architecture of post text genre classification for the 
improvement of search results. From the above-mentioned 
example, we can utilize some simple features to for this 
end. It is helpful to bypass complex syntactic, semantic or 
pragmatic analyses, and works only on the grounds of 
some text surface features and get a better classification 
result as well. Such method minimizes the complexity of 
computation and cost of time, and therefore meets the real 
time request for information retrieval.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture of genre request processing for IR 
There are still some open problems while adopting a 
relatively simpler method. The following issues should be 
taken into consideration. 
A. Refinement of POS tag 
Due to the limits of tag sets and POS tagger, some 
possible useful POS information is not used in our 
recognition.  
For example, name entities often appear in both news 
and commentary texts. In a narrative news report, it may 
involve unfamiliar place names, such as a village or a road, 
where the event happened, or some unknown persons who 
were involved. Those name entities almost cannot be listed 
in the lexicon for its limited repeatability. While in 
commentary texts, opinions towards a specific event are 
more important than the repetition of event description. 
The so-called 5W principle in journalism writing is not as 
typically applicable as in commentaries. Therefore, the 
granularity of name entities should be refined for further 
genre differentiation task. In our case, the more the name 
entities recognized by the new-word guesser and not listed 
in the bibliographical and geographical, not big name, the 
more possible it is likely to be commentaries.  
B. Density of word types and tokens  
Although there are many occurrences of name entities 
both in news and commentary texts, news tends to have 
more word tokens rather than word types, because it may 
involve different participants in describing news events. 
While in commentaries, it has remarkable frequency of the 
same name entities. In other word, it has less word types 
rather than word tokens. This means that repetition of 
some name entities is characteristic of commentary texts, 
differing from introducing all participants in story-telling 
description with different word tokens. The density of 
word types or word tokens may be of help to 
differentiating news and commentaries. 
V. Conclusion 
To deal with genre request in information retrieval 
properly, we propose an approach to introducing genre 
detection using some text surface statistics and some count 
information about specific POS tags and punctuations, 
after fetching results returned by search engines. The 
preliminary experiment conducted on Chinese news and 
commentary texts yields an encouraging result. With 
resolution of refined POS tagging and a proper processing 
on density of word token/type, the result can be improved. 
Acknowledgement 
The research reported herein is supported by the MOE 
Project of Key Research Institute of Humanities and Social 
Sciences at Universities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Salton, A. Wong, and C.S. Yang. “A vector space model for 
Information Retrieval”. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 18(11):613-620, November 1975. 
[2] G. Salton and Buckley, C. "Term-weighting approaches in 
automatic text retrieval". Information Processing & Management 
24 (5): 513–523. 1988. 
[3] W. Greiff. "A theory of term weighting based on exploratory data 
analysis", Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, August 24-28 1998, pp. 11-19. ACM Press, 1998. 
[4] R. Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto. B. et al. Modern Information 
Retrieval. ACM press. 1999 
[5] W. Xiong, “Query Analysis for Information Retrieval”, PhD 
Dissertation. Beijing: Beijing Language and Culture University. 
2006. 
[6] C. Poudat and G. Cleuziou, “Genre and Domain Processing in an 
Information Retrieval Perspective”, Proceedings of 3rd 
International Conference on Web Engineering, 2003, pp.399-402 
[7] S. Eissen and B. Stein, “Genre Classification of Web Pages”. KI 
2004: Advances in Artificial Intelligence. Berlin/ 
Heidelberg:Springer, 2004, pp.256-269 
[8] A. Finn, N. Kushmerick and B. Smyt, “Genre Classification and 
Domain Transfer for Information Filtering”. Proceedings of annual 
European Conference on Information Retrieval, 24th European 
Colloquium on Information Retrieval Research, 2002.  
[9] P. Grzybek, E. Stadlober and E., Kelih. “Quantitative Text 
Typology. The Impact of Word Length”. In: Weihs, C.; W., Gaul 
(Eds.): Classification - The Ubiquitous Challenge. 
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer. (53-64). 2005. 
[10] E. Kelih, P. Grzybek and A. Gordana et al. “Quantitative Text 
Typology. The Impact of Sentence Length”. In: Spiliopoulou, M., 
K., Rudolf, N., Andreas et al (eds.): From Data and Information 
Analysis to Knowledge Engineering. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer. 
(382-389). 2006. 
[11] B. Kessler, G. Nunberg and H. Schutze, “Automatic Detection of 
Text Genre”. Proceedings of 35th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL97/EACL 97). 1997. 
[12] E. Stamatatos, N., Fakotakis and G., Kokkinakis, “Text Genre 
Detection Using Common Word Frequencies”. Proceedings of the 
18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 00). 2000. 
[13] J. Karlgren and D., Cutting, “Recognizing Text Genres with 
Simple Metrics Using Discriminant Analysis”. Proceedings of the 
15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 94). 1994. 
 
290
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aegean University. Downloaded on July 27,2010 at 15:23:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
