   
  
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   Int. J. Biometrics, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2008 81    
 
Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 
Roman V. Yampolskiy* 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering and IGERT in GIS 
University at Buffalo 
2145 Monroe Ave. #4 
Rochester, NY 14618, USA 
E-mail: rvy@buffalo.edu 
*Corresponding author 
Venu Govindaraju 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CUBS 
University at Buffalo 
520 Lee Entrance, Suite 202 
Buffalo, NY 14228, USA 
E-mail: govind@buffalo.edu 
Abstract: This study is a survey and classification of the state-of-the-art in 
behavioural biometrics which is based on skills, style, preference, knowledge, 
motor-skills or strategy used by people while accomplishing different everyday 
tasks such as driving an automobile, talking on the phone or using a computer. 
The authors examine current research in the field and analyse the types of 
features used to describe different types of behaviour. After comparing 
accuracy rates for verification of users using different behavioural biometric 
approaches, researchers address privacy issues which arise or might arise in the 
future with the use of behavioural biometrics. 
Keywords: behavioural biometrics; features; motor-skill; privacy; user 
verification. 
Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Yampolskiy, R.V. and 
Govindaraju, V. (2008) ‘Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification’, 
Int. J. Biometrics, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp.81-113. 
Biographical notes: Roman V. Yampolskiy holds an MS in Computer Science 
degree from Rochester Institute of Technology (2002) and is a PhD candidate 
in the department of Computer Science and Engineering at the University at 
Buffalo. His studies are supported by the National Science Foundation IGERT 
fellowship. Roman’s main areas of interest are artificial intelligence, 
behavioural biometrics and intrusion detection. Roman has a number of 
publications describing his research in neural networks, genetic algorithms, 
pattern recognition, and behavioural profiling. 
Venu Govindaraju is a Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the 
University at Buffalo (SUNY Buffalo). He received his B-Tech (honours) from 
the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur, India in 1986, and his PhD 
from UB in 1992. He has co-authored more than 230 scientific papers. He has 
been the PI/Co-PI of projects funded by government and industry for over 
$50M in the last 15 years. He is the Founding Director of the Centre for 
Unified Biometrics and Sensors (CUBS) and the Associate Director of the 
Centre for Document Analysis and Recognition (CEDAR). 
 
   Copyright © 2008 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd. 
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   82 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
1 Introduction 
With the proliferation of computers and of the internet in our every day lives, the need for 
reliable computer security steadily increases. Biometric technologies provide user 
friendly and reliable control methodology for access to computer systems, networks and 
workplaces (Angle et al., 2005; Dugelay et al., 2002; Lee and Park, 2003). The majority 
of research is aimed at studying well-established physical biometrics such as fingerprint 
(Cappelli et al,, 2006) or iris scans (Jain et al., 2004d). Behavioural biometrics systems 
are usually less established, and only those which are in large part based on muscle 
control such as keystrokes, gait or signature are well analysed (Bolle et al., 2003; Delac 
and Grgic, 2004; Jain et al., 2004c; Ruggles, 2007; Solayappan and Latifi, 2006; Uludag 
et al., 2004). 
Behavioural biometrics provides a number of advantages over traditional biometric 
technologies. They can be collected non-obtrusively or even without the knowledge of 
the user. Collection of behavioural data often does not require any special hardware and 
is so very cost effective. While most behavioural biometrics are not unique enough to 
provide reliable human identification, they have been shown to provide sufficiently high 
accuracy identity verification. 
In accomplishing their everyday tasks, human beings employ different strategies, use 
different styles and apply unique skills and knowledge. One of the defining 
characteristics of a behavioural biometric is the incorporation of time dimension as a part 
of the behavioural signature. The measured behaviour has a beginning, duration, and an 
end (BioPrivacy Initiative, 2005). Behavioural biometrics researchers attempt to quantify 
behavioural traits exhibited by users and use resulting feature profiles to successfully 
verify identity (Brömme, 2003). In this section, authors present an overview of most 
established behavioural biometrics. 
Behavioural biometrics can be classified into five categories based on the type of 
information about the user being collected. Category one is made up of authorship based 
biometrics, which is based on examining a piece of text or a drawing produced by a 
person. Verification is accomplished by observing style peculiarities typical to the author 
of the work being examined, such as the used vocabulary, punctuation or brush strokes. 
Category two consists of human computer interaction (HCI)-based biometrics 
(Yampolskiy, 2007a). In their everyday interaction with computers, human beings 
employ different strategies, use different styles, and apply unique abilities and 
knowledge. Researchers attempt to quantify such traits and use resulting feature profiles 
to successfully verify identity. HCI-based biometrics can be further subdivided into 
additional categories. The first category consists of human interaction with input devices 
such as keyboards, computer mice, and haptics which can register inherent, distinctive 
and consistent muscle actions (Caslon Analytics, 2005). The second category consists of 
HCI-based behavioural biometrics which measures advanced human behaviour such as 
strategy, knowledge or skill exhibited by the user during interaction with different 
software. 
The third category is closely related to the second and is the set of the indirect  
HCI-based biometrics which are the events that can be obtained by monitoring user’s 
HCI behaviour indirectly via observable low-level actions of computer software 
(Yampolskiy, 2007b). These include system call traces (Denning, 1987), audit logs (Ilgun 
et al., 1995), program execution traces (Ghosh et al., 1999), registry access (Apap et al., 
2001), storage activity (Pennington et al., 2002), call-stack data analysis (Feng et al., 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 83    
 
2003), and system calls (Garg et al., 2006; Pusara and Brodley, 2004). Such low-level 
events are produced unintentionally by the user during interaction with different software. 
Same HCI-based biometrics is sometimes known to different researchers under 
different names. IDS based on system calls or audit logs are often classified as utilising 
program execution traces and those based on call-stack data as based on system calls. The 
confusion is probably related to the fact that a lot of interdependency exists between 
different indirect behavioural biometrics and they are frequently used in combinations to 
improve accuracy of the system being developed. For example, system calls and program 
counter data may be combined in the same behavioural signature or audit logs may 
contain information about system calls. Also one can’t forget that a human being is 
indirectly behind each one of those reflections of behaviour and so a large degree of 
correlation is to be expected. 
The fourth and probably the best researched category of behavioural biometrics relies 
on motor-skills of the users to accomplish verification (Yampolskiy, 2007c). Motor-skill 
is an ability of a human being to utilise muscles. Muscle movements rely upon the proper 
functioning of the brain, skeleton, joints, and nervous system and so, motor skills 
indirectly reflect the quality of functioning of such systems, making person verification 
possible. Most motor skills are learned, not inherited, with disabilities having potential to 
affect the development of motor skills. Authors adopt definition for motor-skill based 
behavioural biometrics, a.k.a. ‘kinetics’, as those biometrics which are based on innate, 
unique and stable muscle actions of the user while performing a particular task (Caslon 
Analytics, 2005). 
The fifth and final category consists of purely behavioural biometrics. Purely 
behavioural biometrics measures human behaviour not directly concentrating on 
measurements of body parts or intrinsic, inimitable and lasting muscle actions such as the 
way an individual walks, types, or even grips a tool (Caslon Analytics, 2005). Human 
beings utilise different strategies, skills and knowledge during performance of mentally 
demanding tasks. Purely behavioural biometrics quantifies such behavioural traits and 
makes successful identity verification a possibility. 
2 Behavioural biometrics 
Table 1 shows behavioural biometrics covered in this paper classified according to the 
five categories outlined above. Many of the reviewed biometrics are cross listed in 
multiple categories due to their dependence on multiple behavioural attributes. In 
addition, enrolment time and verification time (D=days, H=hours, M=minutes, and 
S=seconds) of the listed biometrics is provided as well as any hardware required for the 
collection of the biometric data. Out of all the listed behavioural biometrics, only two are 
believed to be useful, not just for person verification but also for reliable large scale 
person identification, i.e., signature/handwriting and speech. Other behavioural 
biometrics may be used for identification purposes but are not reliable enough to be 
employed in that capacity in the real world applications. 
Presented next are short overviews of the most researched behavioural biometrics 
listed in alphabetical order. 
 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   84 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Table 1 Classification and properties of behavioural biometrics 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 85    
 
1 Audit logs. Most modern operating systems keep some records of user activity and 
program interaction. While such audit trails can be of some interest to behavioural 
intrusion detection researchers, specialised audit trails specifically designed for 
security enforcement can be potentially much more powerful. A typical audit log 
may contain such information as CPU and I/O usage, number of connections from 
each location, whether a directory was accessed, a file created, another user ID 
changed, audit record was modified, amount of activity for the system, network and 
host (Lunt, 1993). Experimentally, it has been shown that collecting audit events is a 
less intrusive technique than recording system calls (Wespi et al., 2000). Because an 
enormous amount of auditing data can be generated overwhelming an intrusion 
detection system, it has been suggested that a random sampling might be a 
reasonable approach to auditing data (Anderson, 1980). Additional data might be 
helpful in distinguishing suspicious activity from normal behaviour. For example, 
facts about changes in user status, new users being added, terminated users, users on 
vocations, or changed job assignments might be needed to reduce the number of 
false positives produced by the IDS (Lunt, 1993). Since so much potentially valuable 
information can be captured by the audit logs, a large number of researchers are 
attracted to this form of indirect HCI-based biometrics (Denning, 1987; Ilgun et al., 
1995; Ko et al., 1994; Lee et al., 1999; Li et al., 2002; Michael, 2003; Michael and 
Gosh, 2000; Seleznyov and Puuronen, 1999; Ye, 2000). 
2 Biometric sketch. Al-Zubi et al. (2003) and Brömme and Al-Zubi (2003) proposed a 
biometrics sketch authentication method based on sketch recognition and a user’s 
personal knowledge about the drawings content. The system directs a user to create a 
simple sketch for example of three circles and each user is free to do so in any way 
he pleases. Because a large number of different combinations exist for combining 
multiple simple structural shapes, sketches of different users are sufficiently unique 
to provide accurate authentication. The approach measures user’s knowledge about 
the sketch, which is only available to the previously authenticated user. Such features 
as the sketches location and relative position of different primitives are taken as the 
profile of the sketch. Similar approaches are tried by Varenhorst (2004) with a 
system called ‘passdoodles’ and also by Jermyn et al. (1999) with a system called 
‘draw-a-secret’. Finally a ‘v-go password’ requests a user to perform simulation of 
simple actions such as mixing a cocktail using a graphical interface, with the 
assumption that all users have a personal approach to bartending (Renaud, 2003). 
3 Blinking. Westeyn et al. (2005) and Westeyn and Starner (2004) have developed a 
system for identifying users by analysing voluntary song-based blink patterns. 
During the enrolment phase user looks at the system’s camera and blinks to the beat 
of a song he has previously chosen producing a so-called ‘blinkprint’. During 
verification phase, the user’s blinking is compared to the database of the stored 
blinked patterns to determine which song is being blinked and as a result user 
identification is possible. In addition to the blink pattern itself supplementary 
features can also be extracted such as: time between blinks, how long the eye is held 
closed at each blink, and other physical characteristics the eye undergoes while 
blinking. Based on those additional features, it was shown to be feasible to 
distinguish users blinking the same exact pattern and not just a secretly-selected 
song. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   86 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
4 Call-stack. Feng et al. (2003) developed a method for performing anomaly detection 
using call-stack information. The program counter indicates the current execution 
point of a program. Since each instruction of a program corresponds to a unique 
program counter, this information is useful for intrusion detection. The idea is to 
extract return addresses from the call-stack and generate an abstract execution path 
between two program execution points. This path is analysed to decide whether this 
path is valid based on what has been learned during the normal execution of the 
program. Return addresses are a particularly good source of information on 
suspicious behaviour. The approach has been shown capable of detecting some 
attacks that could not be detected by other approaches, while retaining a comparable 
false positive rate (Feng et al., 2003). Additional research into call-stack–based 
intruder detection has been performed by Giffin et al. (2004) and Liu and Bridges 
(2005). 
5 Calling behaviour. With the proliferation of the mobile cellular phone networks, 
communication companies are faced with the increasing amount of fraudulent calling 
activity. In order to automatically detect theft of service, many companies are turning 
to behavioural user profiling with the hopes of detecting unusual calling patterns and 
be able to stop fraud at an earliest possible time. Typical systems work by generating 
a user-calling profile which consist of use indicators such as date and time of the 
call, duration, caller ID, called number, cost of call, number of calls to a local 
destination, number of calls to mobile destinations, number of calls to international 
destinations and the total statistics about the calls for the day (Hilas and Sahalos, 
2005). Grosser et al. (2005) have shown that neural networks can be successfully 
applied to such a feature vector for the purpose of fraud detection. Cahill et al. 
(2000) have addressed ways to improve the selection of the threshold values which 
are compared with account summaries to see if fraud has taken place. Fawcett and 
Provost (1997) developed a rule-learning program to uncover indicators of 
fraudulent behaviour from a large database of customer transactions. 
6 Car driving style. People tend to operate vehicles in very different ways, some 
drivers are safe and slow while others are much more aggressive and often speed and 
tailgate. As a result, driving behaviour can be successfully treated as a behavioural 
biometric. Erdogan et al. (2005a; 2005b) and Erzin et al. (2006) have shown that by 
analysing pressure readings from accelerator pedal and brake pedal in kilogram force 
per square centimetre, vehicle speed in revolutions per minute, and steering angle 
within the range of –720 to +720 degrees, it is possible to achieve genuine versus 
impostor driver authentication. Gaussian mixture modelling was used to process the 
resulting feature vectors, after some initial smoothing and sub-sampling of the 
driving signal. Similar results were obtained by Igarashi et al. (2004) on the same set 
of multimodal data. Liu and Salvucci (2001), in their work on prediction of driver 
behaviour, have demonstrated that inclusion of the driver’s visual scanning 
behaviour can further enhance accuracy of the driver behaviour model. Once fully 
developed, driver recognition can be used for car personalisation, theft prevention, as 
well as for detection of drunk or sleepy drivers. With so many potential benefits from 
this technology, research in driver behaviour modelling is not solely limited to the 
biometrics community (Kuge et al., 1998; Oliver and Pentland, 2000). 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 87    
 
7 Command line lexicon. A popular approach to the construction of behaviour based 
intrusion detection systems is based on profiling the set of commands utilised by the 
user in the process of interaction with the operating system. A frequent target of such 
research is UNIX operating system, probably due to it having mostly command line 
nature. Users differ greatly in their level of familiarity with the command set and all 
the possible arguments which can be applied to individual commands. Regardless of 
how well a user knows the set of available commands; most are fairly consistent in 
their choice of commands used to accomplish a particular task. 
 A user profile typically consists of a list of used commands together with 
corresponding frequency counts, and lists of arguments to the commands. Data 
collection process is often time consuming since as many as 15,000 individual 
commands need to be collected for the system to achieve a high degree of accuracy 
(Maxion and Townsend, 2002; Schonlau et al., 2001). Additional information about 
the secession may also be included in the profile such as the login host and login 
time, which help to improve accuracy of the user profile as it is likely that users 
perform different actions on different hosts (Dao and Vemuri, 2000). Overall, this 
line of research is extremely popular (Lane and Brodley, 1997a; 1997b; Marin et al., 
2001; Yeung and Ding, 2002), but recently, a shift has been made towards user 
profiling in a graphical environment such as Windows as most users prefer 
convenience of a graphical user interface (GUI). Typical features extracted from the 
user’s interaction with a Windows-based machine include time between windows, 
time between new windows, number of windows simultaneously open, and number 
of words in a window title (Goldring, 2003; Kaufman et al., 2003). 
8 Credit card use. Data mining techniques are frequently used in detection of credit 
card fraud. Looking out for statistical outliers such as unusual transactions, payments 
to far-away geographical locations, or simultaneous use of a card at multiple 
locations can all be signs of a stolen account. Outliers are considerably different 
from the remainder of the data points and can be detected by using discordancy tests. 
Approaches for fraud related outlier detection are based on distance, density, 
projection, and distribution analysis methods. A generalised approach to finding 
outliers is to assume a known statistical distribution for the data and to evaluate the 
deviation of samples from the distribution. Brause et al. (1999) have used symbolic 
and analogue number data to detect credit card fraud. Such transaction information 
as account number, transaction type, credit card type, merchant ID, merchant 
address, etc. were used in their rule-based model. They have also shown that 
analogue data alone can’t serve as a satisfying source for detection of fraudulent 
transactions. 
9 Dynamic facial features. Pamudurthy et al. (2005) proposed a dynamic approach to 
face recognition based on dynamic instead of static facial features. They track the 
motion of skin pores on the face during a facial expression and obtain a vector  
field that characterises the deformation of the face. In the training process, two  
high-resolution images of an individual, one with a neutral expression and the other 
with a facial expression, like a subtle smile, are taken to obtain the deformation field 
(Mainguet, 2006). 
 Smile recognition research in particular is a subfield of dynamic facial feature 
recognition currently gaining in prominence (Ito et al., 2005). The existing systems 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   88 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
rely on probing the characteristic pattern of muscles beneath the skin of the user’s 
face. Two images of a person in quick progression are taken, with subjects smiling 
for the camera in the second sample. An analysis is later performed of how the skin 
around the subject’s mouth moves between the two images. This movement is 
controlled by the pattern of muscles under the skin, and is not affected by the 
presence of make-up or the degree to which the subject smiles (Mainguet, 2006). 
10 E-mail behaviour. E-mail sending behaviour is not the same for all individuals. Some 
people work at night and send dozens of e-mails to many different addresses; others 
only check mail in the morning and only correspond with one or two people. All this 
peculiarities can be used to create a behavioural profile which can serve as a 
behavioural biometric for an individual. Length of the e-mails, time of the day the 
mail is sent, how frequently inbox is emptied and of course the recipients’ addresses 
among other variables can all be combined to create a baseline feature vector for the 
person’s e-mail behaviour. Some work in using e-mail behaviour modelling was 
done by Stolfo et al. (2003a; 2003b). They have investigated the possibility of 
detecting virus propagation via e-mail by observing abnormalities in the e-mail 
sending behaviour, such as unusual clique of recipients for the same e-mail. For 
example, sending the same e-mail to your girlfriend and your boss is not an everyday 
occurrence. 
 Vel et al. (2001) have applied authorship identification techniques to determine the 
likely author of an e-mail message. Alongside the typical features used in text 
authorship identification, authors also used some e-mail specific structural features 
such as: use of a greeting, farewell acknowledgment, signature, number of 
attachments, position of re-quoted text within the message body, HTML tag 
frequency distribution, and total number of HTML tags. Overall, almost 200 features 
are used in the experiment, but some frequently cited features used in text authorship 
determination are not appropriate in the domain of e-mail messages due to the 
shorter average size of such communications. 
11 Gait/stride. Gait is one of the best researched muscle control-based biometrics 
(Benabdelkader et al., 2002; Kale et al., 2004; Nixon and Carter, 2004), it is a 
complex spatio-temporal motor-control behaviour which allows biometric 
recognition of individuals at a distance usually from captured video. Gait is subject 
to significant variations based on changes in person’s body weight, waddling during 
pregnancy, injuries of extremities or of the brain, or due to intoxication (Jain et al., 
1999). Typical features include amount of arm swing, rhythm of the walker, bounce, 
length of steps, vertical distance between head and foot, distance between head and 
pelvis, and maximum distance between the left and right foot (Kalyanaraman, 2006). 
12 Game strategy. Yampolskiy (2006) and Yampolskiy and Govindajaru, (2006b; 2007) 
proposed a system for verification of online poker players based on a behavioural 
profile which represents a statistical model of player’s strategy. The profile consists 
of frequency measures indicating range of cards considered by the player at all stages 
of the game. It also measures how aggressive the player is via such variables as 
percentages of re-raised hands. The profile is actually human-readable, meaning, that 
a poker expert can analyse and understand strategy employed by the player from 
observing his or her behavioural profile (Poker-edge, 2006). For example, just by 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 89    
 
knowing the percentage of hands, a particular player chooses to play pre-flop it is 
possible to determine which cards are being played with high degree of accuracy. 
 Ramon and Jacobs (2002) have demonstrated possibility of identifying go-players 
based on their style of game play. They analysed a number of go-specific features 
such as type of opening moves, how early such moves are made, and total number of 
liberties in the formed groups. They also speculate that the decision tree approach 
they have developed can be applied to other games such as chess or checkers. 
 Jansen et al. (2000) report on their research in chess strategy inference from game 
records. In particular, they were able to surmise good estimates of the weights used 
in the evaluation function of computer chess players and later applied same 
techniques to human grandmasters. Their approach is aimed at predicting future 
moves made by the players, but the opponent model created with some additional 
processing can be utilised for opponent identification or at least verification. This can 
be achieved by comparing new moves made by the player with predicted ones from 
models for different players and using the achieved accuracy scores as an indication 
of which profile models with which player. 
13 GUI interaction. Expanding on the idea of monitoring user’s keyboard and mouse 
activity Garg et al. (2006) developed a system for collecting graphical user interface 
(GUI) interaction-based data. Collected data allows for generation of advanced 
behavioural profiles of the system’s users. Such comprehensive data may provide 
additional information not available form typically analysed command line data. 
With proliferation of GUI based systems, a shift towards security systems based on 
GUI interaction data, as opposed to command line data, is a natural progression. 
Ideally, the collected data would include high-level detailed information about the 
GUI related actions of the user such as: left click on the start menu, double click on 
explorer.exe, close notepad.exe window, etc. Software generated by Garg et al. 
records all possible low-level user activities on the system in real time, including: 
system background processes, user run commands, keyboard activity, and mouse 
clicks. All collected information is time stamped and pre-processed to reduce the 
amount of data actually used for intrusion detection purposes (Garg et al., 2006). 
14 Handgrip. Developed mostly for gun control applications, grip-pattern recognition 
approach assumes that users hold the gun in a sufficiently unique way to permit user 
verification to take place. By incorporating a hardware sensor array in the gun’s butt, 
Kauffman et al. (2003) and Veldhuis et al. (2004) were able to get resistance 
measurements in as many as 44 x 44 points which are used in creation of a feature 
vector. Obtained pressure points are taken as pixels in the pressure pattern image 
used as input for verification algorithm based on a likelihood-ratio classifier for 
Gaussian probability densities (Kauffman et al., 2003). Experiments showed that 
more experienced gun-users tended to be more accurately verified as compared to 
first time subjects. 
15 Haptic. Haptic systems are computer input/output devices which can provide us with 
information about direction, pressure, force, angle, speed, and position of user’s 
interactions (Orozco et al., 2005; 2006). Because so much information is available 
about the user’s performance, a high degree of accuracy can be expected from a 
haptic-based biometrics system. Orozco et al. (2005; 2006) have created a simple 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   90 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
haptic application built on an elastic membrane surface in which the user is required 
to navigate a stylus through the maze. The maze has gummy walls and a stretchy 
floor. The application collects data about the ability of the user to navigate the maze, 
such as reaction time to release from sticky wall, the route, the velocity, and the 
pressure applied to the floor. The individual user profiles are made up of such 
information as 3D world location of the pen, average speed, mean velocity, mean 
standard deviation, navigation style, angular turns, and rounded turns. 
 In a separate experiment Trujillo et al. (2005) implement a virtual mobile phone 
application where the user interacts through a haptic pen to simulate making a phone 
call via a touch pad. The keystroke duration, pen’s position, and exerted force are 
used as the raw features collected for user profiling. 
16 Keystroke dynamics. Typing patterns are characteristic to each person, some  
people are experienced typists utilising the touch-typing method, and others utilise 
the hunt-and-peck approach which uses only two fingers. Those differences make 
verification of people based on their typing patterns a proven possibility; some 
reports suggest identification is also possible (Ilonen, 2006). For verification, a small 
typing sample such as the input of user’s password is sufficient, but for recognition, 
a large amount of keystroke data is needed and identification is based on 
comparisons with the profiles of all other existing users already in the system. 
 Keystroke features are based on time durations between the keystrokes, inter-key 
strokes and dwell times, which is the time a key is pressed down, overall typing 
speed, frequency of errors (use of backspace), use of numpad, order in which user 
presses shift key to get capital letters and possibly the force with which keys are hit 
for specially equipped keyboards (Ilonen, 2006; Jain et al., 1999). Keystroke 
dynamics is probably the most researched type of HCI-based biometric (Bergadano 
et al., 2002; Monrose and Rubin, 2000), with novel research taking place in different 
languages (Gunetti et al., 2005), for long text samples, (Bartolacci et al., 2005; 
Curtin et al., 2006) and for e-mail authorship identification (Gupta et al., 2004). 
 In a similar fashion Bella and Palmer (2006) have studied finger movements of 
skilled piano players. They have recorded finger motion from skilled pianists while 
playing a musical keyboard. Pianists’ finger motion and speed with which keys are 
struck was analysed using functional data analysis methods. Movement velocity and 
acceleration were consistent for the participants and in multiple musical contexts. 
Accurate pianists’ classification was achieved by training a neural network classifier 
using velocity/acceleration trajectories preceding key presses. 
17 Lip movement. This approach originally based on the visual speech reading 
technology attempts to generate a model representing lip dynamics produced by a 
person during speech. User verification is based on how close the generated  
model fits observed lip movement. Such models are typically constructed around 
spatio-temporal lip features. First, the lip region needs to be isolated from the video 
feed, and then significant features of lip contours are extracted typically from edges 
and gradients. Lip features include the mouth opening or closing, skin around the 
lips, mouth width, upper/lower lip width, lip opening height/width, and distance 
between horizontal lip line and upper lip (Broun et al., 2002; Shipilova, 2006). 
Typically, lip dynamics are utilised as a part of a multimodal biometric system, 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 91    
 
usually combined with speaker recognition-based authentication (Jourlin et al., 1997; 
Luettin et al., 1996; Mason et al., 1999; Wark et al., 1997), but standalone usage is 
also possible (Mok et al., 2004). 
18 Mouse dynamics. By monitoring all mouse actions produced by the user during 
interaction with the GUI, a unique profile can be generated which can be used for 
user re-authentication (Pusara and Brodley, 2004). Mouse actions of interest include 
general movement, drag and drop, point and click, and stillness. From those a set of 
features can be extracted for example, average speed against the distance travelled 
and average speed against the movement direction (Ahmed and Traore, 2005a; 
2005b). Pusara and Brodley (2004) describe a feature extraction approach in which 
they split the mouse event data into mouse wheel movements, clicks, menu and 
toolbar clicks. Click data is further subdivided into single and double click data. 
 Gamboa and Fred (2003; 2004) have tried to improve accuracy of mouse-dynamics-
based biometrics by restricting the domain of data collection to an online game 
instead of a more general GUI environment. As a result, applicability of their results 
is somewhat restricted and the methodology is more intrusive to the user. The system 
requires around 10–15 minutes of devoted game play instead of seamless data 
collection during the normal game play to the user human computer interaction. As 
far as the extracted features, x and y coordinates of the mouse, horizontal velocity, 
vertical velocity, tangential velocity, tangential acceleration, tangential jerk and 
angular velocity are utilised with respect to the mouse strokes to create a unique user 
profile. 
19 Network traffic. Network level intrusion detection is somewhat different from other 
types of intrusion detection as the monitored activity originates outside the system 
being protected. With the increase in popularity of internet and other networks, an 
intruder no longer has to have physical access to the system he is trying to penetrate. 
This means that the network dataflow arriving on different system ports and encoded 
using different protocols needs to be processed and reviewed. IDS based on network 
traffic analyse various packet attributes such as IP protocol-type values, packet size, 
server port numbers, source and destination IP prefixes, time-to-live values, IP/TCP 
header length, incorrect IP/TCP/UDP checksums, and TCP flag patterns. During the 
baseline profiling period, the number of packets with each attribute value is counted 
and taken as normal behaviour (Kim et al., 2006). Any deviation from the normal 
baseline profile may set an alert flag informing network administrator that an attack 
is taking place. Many behaviour based security systems have been developed based 
on the concept of network level attack detection (Novikov et al., 2006a; 2006b; 
Novikov, 2005; Silva et al., 2004; Sommer and Paxson, 2003; Zhang and 
Manikopoulos, 2003) and the general area of network traffic analysis is highly 
applicable for improved network and network application design (Liu and Huebner, 
2002; Thompson et al., 1997). 
20 Painting style. Just like authorship of literary works can be attributed based on the 
writers style, so can the works of art be accredited based on the style of the drawing. 
In particular, the subtle pen and brush strokes characteristic of a particular painter 
can be profiled. Lyu et al. (2004) developed a technique for performing multi-scale, 
multi-orientation painting scan decomposition. This decomposition changes the basis 
from functions maximally localised in space to one in which the basis functions are 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   92 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
also localised in orientation and scale. By constructing a compact model of the 
statistics from such a function, it is possible to detect consistencies or inconsistencies 
between paintings and drawings supposedly produced by the same author. 
21 Programming style. With the increasing number of viruses, worms, and Trojan 
horses, it is often useful in a forensic investigation to be able to identify an author of 
such malware programs based on the analysis of the source code. It is also valuable 
for the purposes of software debugging and maintenance to know who the original 
author of a certain code fragment was. Spafford and Weeber (1992) have analysed a 
number of features potentially useful for the identification of software authorship. In 
case only the executable code is available for analysis, data structures and applied 
algorithms can be profiled as well as any remaining compiler and system 
information, observed programming skill level, knowledge of the operating system 
and choice of the system calls. Additionally, use of predefined functions and 
provisions for error handling are not the same for different programmers. 
 In case the original source files are available, a large number of additional 
identifying features become accessible such as chosen programming language, code 
formatting style, type of code editor, special macros, style of comments, variable 
names, spelling and grammar, use of language features such as choice of loop 
structures, the ratio of global to local variables, temporary coding structures, and 
finally, types of mistakes observable in the code. Software metrics such as number of 
lines of code per function, comment-to-code ratio and function complexity may also 
be introduced (Spafford and Weeber, 1992). Similar code features are discussed by 
Gray et al. (1997) and Frantzeskou et al. (2004). 
22 Registry access. Apap et al. (2001) proposed a new type of host-based security 
approach they call registry anomaly detection (RAD) that monitors access to the 
Windows registry in real time and detects the actions of malicious software. 
Windows registry stores information about hardware installed on the system, which 
ports are used, user profiles, policies, user names, passwords and configuration 
settings for programs. Most programs access a certain set of registry keys during 
normal operation. Similarly most users use only a certain subset of programs 
available on the machine. This results in a high degree of regularity in registry 
interaction during the normal operation of the system. However, malicious software 
may substantially deviate from this regular activity and can be detected. Many 
attacks involve starting programs which have rarely been used in the past or 
changing keys that have never been changed before. If a RAD system is trained on 
clean data, then these kinds of registry operations will appear abnormal to the system 
and result in issue of an alert (Apap et al., 2001). 
23 Signature/handwriting. Signature verification is a widely accepted methodology for 
confirming identity (Herbst and Coetzer, 1998; Jain et al., 2002; Lei et al., 2004; 
Nalwa, 1997). Two distinct approaches to signature verification are traditionally 
recognised based on the data collection approach, they are online and off-line 
signature verification also known as static and dynamic approaches (Riha and 
Matyas, 2000). In the off-line signature verification, the image of the signature is 
obtained using a scanning device, possibly some time after the signing took place. 
With online signature verification, special hardware is used to capture dynamics of 
the signature, typically, pressure sensitive pens in combination with digitising tablets 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 93    
 
are utilised. Because online data acquisition methodology obtains features not 
available in the off-line mode, dynamic signature verification is more reliable 
(Muralidharan and Wunnava, 2004). 
 With online signature verification, in addition to the trajectory coordinates of the 
signature, other features like pressure at pen tip, acceleration and pen-tilt can be 
collected. In general signature related features can be classified into two groups, i.e., 
global and local. Global features include signing speed, signature bounding box, 
Fourier descriptors of the signature’s trajectory, number of strokes, and signing flow. 
Local features describe specific sample point in the signature and relationship 
between such points, for example, distance and curvature change between two 
successive points may be analysed as well as x and y offsets relative to the first point 
on the signature trajectory, and critical points of the signature trajectory 
(Muralidharan and Wunnava, 2004; Plamondon and Lorette, 1989). 
 Signature-based user verification is a particular type of general handwriting-based 
biometric authentication. Unlike with signatures, handwriting-based user 
verification/recognition is content independent, which makes the process somewhat 
more complicated (Ballard et al., 2006a; 2006b; Ramann et al., 2002). Each person’s 
handwriting is seen as having a specific texture. The spatial frequency and 
orientation contents represent the features of each texture (Zhu et al., 2000). Since 
handwriting provides a much more substantial biometric sample in comparison to 
signatures, respective verification accuracy can be much greater. 
24 Soft behavioural biometrics. Jain et al. (2004a; 2004b) define soft biometrics as 
“…traits as characteristics that provide some information about the individual, but 
lack the distinctiveness and permanence to sufficiently differentiate any two 
individuals”. They further state that soft biometric traits can either be continuous 
such as height or weight, or discrete such as gender or ethnicity. Authors propose 
expending the definition to include soft behavioural biometrics, which also can be 
grouped into continuous and discrete types. Continuous soft behavioural biometric 
traits include measurements produced by various standardised tests, some of the 
most popular such tests are IQ test for intelligence, and verbal sections of SAT, 
GRE, GMAT for language abilities. Discrete soft behavioural biometrics are skills 
which a particular person either has or does not have. Examples of such include 
ability to speak a particular foreign language, knowledge of how to fly a plane, ride a 
motorcycle, etc. 
 While such soft behavioural biometrics are not sufficient for identification or 
verification of individuals, they can be combined with other biometric approaches to 
increase system accuracy. They can also be used in certain situations to reject 
individual’s verification claim. For example, in a case of academic cheating, a 
significantly fluctuating score on a repeatedly taken standardised test can be used to 
suspect that not the same person answered all the questions on a given test (Jacob 
and Levitt, 2004). 
25 Storage activity. Many actions of intruders became visible at the storage level 
interface. Manipulation of system utilities (to add backdoors), tampering with audit 
logs (to destroy evidence), resetting of attributes (to hide changes), and addition of 
suspicious content (known virus) all show up as the changes in the storage layer of 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   94 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
the system. A storage-based security system analyses all requests received by the 
storage server and can issue alerts about suspicious activity to the system 
administrator. Additionally, it can slow down the suspected intruder’s storage access 
or isolate intruder via a forking of version trees to a sandbox. Storage-based security 
approach has the advantage of being independent from the client’s operating system 
and so can continue working after the initial compromise, unlike host-based security 
systems which can be disabled by the intruder (Pennington et al., 2002). Research 
using storage activity is fast gaining in popularity with intrusions being detected at 
the block storage level (Stanton et al., 2005), in storage area network (SAN) 
environments (Banekazemi et al., 2005), object-based storage devices (Zhang and 
Wang, 2006), workstation disk drives (Griffin et al., 2003) and in the context of the 
overall intrusion detection (Stanton et al., 2005). 
26 System calls. A system call is the method used by a program to request service from 
the operating system, or more particularly, the operating system kernel. System calls 
use a special instruction which causes the processor to transfer control to a more 
privileged code segment. Intruder detection can be achieved by comparing an 
application’s run-time system calls with a pre-defined normal system call behaviour 
model. The assumption is that, as long as the intruder can’t make arbitrary system 
calls, it is unlikely that he can achieve his desired malicious goals (Lam et al., 2006). 
Following the original work of Hofmeyr et al. (1998) and Warrender et al. (1999), a 
number of researchers have pursuit development of security systems based on 
analysing system call sequences (Ghosh et al., 1999; Giffin et al., 2004; Lam et al., 
2006; Marceau, 2000; Nguyen et al., 2003; Wagner and Dean, 2001). Typically, a 
model of normal system call behaviour is learned during the training phase which is 
a baseline-state assumed to be free of attacks (Bhatkar et al., 2006), alternative 
approaches use static analysis of the source code or binary code (Giffin et al., 2004). 
A number of representation schemas for the behavioural model have been proposed, 
including strings (Warrender et al., 1999; Wespi et al., 2000), finite state automata 
and push down automata (Feng et al., 2003; Giffin, et al., 2004). 
27 Tapping. Henderson et al. (2001; 2002) have studied the idea of tapping recognition, 
based on the idea that you are able to recognise who is knocking on your door. They 
concentrated on the waveform properties of the pulses which result from tapping the 
polymer thick-film sensor on a smart card. Produced pressure pulses are further 
processed to extract useful features such as: pulse height, pulse duration, and the 
duration of the first inter-pulse interval. The recognition algorithm utilised in this 
research has been initially developed for processing of keyboard dynamics, which is 
a somewhat similar technology of recognising tapping with respect to keyboard keys. 
28 Text authorship. E-mail and source code authorship identification represent 
application and improvement of techniques developed in a broader field of text 
authorship determination. Written text and spoken word once transcribed can be 
analyzed in terms of vocabulary and style to determine its authorship. In order to do 
so a linguistic profile needs to be established. Many linguistic features can be 
profiled such as: lexical patterns, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, information content 
or item distribution through a text (Halteren, 2004). Stamatatos et al. (1999) in their 
analysis of modern Greek texts, proposed using such text descriptors as sentence 
count, word count, punctuation mark count, noun phrase count, word included in 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 95    
 
noun phrase count prepositional phrase count, word included in prepositional phrase 
count, and keyword count. Overall area of authorship attribution is very promising 
with a lot of ongoing research (Juola and Sofko, 2004; Koppel and Schler, 2004; 
Koppel et al., 2004). 
29 Voice/speech/singing. Speaker identification is one of the best researched biometric 
technologies (Campbell, 1997; Ciota, 2004; Sanderson and Paliwal, 2001). 
Verification is based on information about the speaker’s anatomical structure 
conveyed in amplitude spectrum, with the location and size of spectral peaks related 
to the vocal tract shape and the pitch striations related to the glottal source of the user 
(Kalyanaraman, 2006). Speaker identification systems can be classified based on the 
freedom of what is spoken (Ratha et al., 2001): 
• Fixed text. The speaker says a particular word selected at enrolment. 
• Text dependent. The speaker is prompted by the system to say a particular 
 phrase. 
• Text independent. The speaker is free to say anything he wants, verification 
 accuracy typically improves with larger amount of spoken text. 
Feature extraction is applied to the normalised amplitude of the input signal which is 
further decomposed into several band-pass frequency channels. A frequently extracted 
feature is a logarithm of the Fourier transform of the voice signal in each band along with 
pitch, tone, cadence, and shape of the larynx (Jain et al., 1999). Accuracy of voice based 
biometrics systems can be increased by inclusion of visual speech (lip dynamics) (Jourlin 
et al., 1997; Luettin et al., 1996; Mason et al., 1999; Wark et al., 1997) and incorporation 
of soft behavioural biometrics such as accent (Deshpande et al., 2005; Lin and Simske, 
2004). Recently some research has been aimed at expanding the developed technology to 
singer recognition for the purposes of music database management (Tsai and Wang, 
2006) and to laughter recognition. Currently, the laughter-recognition software is rather 
crude and cannot accurately distinguish between different people (Ito et al., 2005; 
Mainguet, 2006). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   96 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Figure 1 Examples of behavioural biometrics: a) biometric sketch, b) blinking, c) calling,  
d) car driving, e) command line lexicon, f) credit card use, g) dynamic facial features, 
h) e-mail, i) gait, j) game strategy, k) GUI interaction, l) handgrip, m) haptic,  
n) keystrokes, o) lip movement, p) mouse dynamics, q) painting style,  
r) programming style, s) signature, t) tapping, u) text authorship, v) voice (see online 
version for colours) 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 97    
 
3 Generalised algorithm 
In this section, authors describe a generalised algorithm for behavioural biometrics, 
which can be applied to any type of human activity. The first step is to break up the 
behaviour in question into a number of atomic operations each one corresponding to a 
single decision. Ideally all possible operations should be considered, but in a case of 
behaviour with a very large repertoire of possible operations a large subset of most 
frequent operations might be sufficient. 
User’s behaviour should be observed and a frequency count for the occurrence of the 
atomic operations should be produced. The resulting frequency counts form a feature 
vector which is used to verify or reject the user based on the similarity score produced by 
a similarity function. An experimentally determined threshold serves as a decision 
boundary for separating legitimate users from intruders. In case user identification is 
attempted, a neural network or a decision tree approach might be used to select the best 
matching user from the database of existing templates. Below is the outline of the 
proposed generalised algorithm is presented: 
1 pick behaviour 
2 break-up behaviour into component actions 
3 determine frequencies of component actions for each user 
4 combine results into a feature vector profile 
5 apply similarity measure function to the stored template and current behaviour 
6 experimentally determine a threshold value 
7 verify or reject user based on the similarity score comparison to the threshold value. 
Step 5 in the above algorithm is not trivial and over the years, a lot of research has gone 
into understanding what makes a good similarity measure function for different biometric 
systems. A good similarity measure takes into account statistical characteristics of the 
data distribution assuming enough data is available to determine such properties (Lee and 
Park, 2003). Alternatively, expert knowledge about the data can be used to optimise a 
similarity measure function, e.g., a weighted Euclidian distance function can be 
developed if it is known that certain features are more valuable then others. The distance 
score has to be very small for two feature vectors belonging to the same individual and 
therefore representing a similar strategy. At the same time it needs to be as large as 
possible for feature vectors coming from different individuals, as it should represent two 
distinct playing strategies (Yampolskiy and Govindajaru, 2006a). 
Lee and Park (2003) describe the following method for making a similarity measure 
based on the statistical properties of the data: data is represented as a random variable 
x=(x1,…,xD) with dimensionality D. The data set X=[xn|n=1,…,N] can be decomposed 
into sub-sets Xk = [xnk|nk = 1,…, Nk] (k=1,…,K), where each sub-set Xk is made up of 
data from the class Ck corresponding to an individual k. For identification the statistical 
properties of data Xnk are usually considered, which can be represented by a probability 
density function pk(x). If pk(x) for each k, for given data x, it is possible to calculate 
f(pk(x)), where f is a monotonic function and find a class Ck maximising pk(x). The 
similarity measure between a new data item and the centre of mean μk of class Ck is given 
by the Euclidean distance. If covariance matrix Σk for pk(x) is estimated, then the 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   98 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
similarity measure defined as –log pk(x) is the Mahalanobis distance (Lee and Park, 
2003). 
In the context of behavioural biometrics Euclidean distance (Sturn, 2000), 
Mahalanobis distance (Yampolskiy and Govindajaru, 2006b) and Manhattan distance 
(Sturn, 2000; Yampolskiy and Govindajaru, 2006b) are among the most popular 
similarity measure functions. 
4 Comparison and analysis 
All of the presented behavioural biometrics share a number of characteristics and so can 
be analysed as a group using seven properties of good biometrics presented by Jain et al. 
(1999; 2004d). 
• Universality. Behavioural biometrics is dependent on specific abilities possessed by 
different people to a different degree or not at all and so, in a general population, 
universality of behavioural biometrics is very low. But since behavioural biometrics 
is only applied in a specific domain, the actual universality of behavioural biometrics 
is a 100%. 
• Uniqueness. Since only a small set of different approaches to performing any task 
exist, uniqueness of behavioural biometrics is relatively low. Number of existing 
writing styles, different game strategies and varying preferences are only sufficient 
for user verification not identification unless the set of users is extremely small 
(Adler et al., 2006). 
• Permanence. Behavioural biometrics exhibit a low degree of permanence as they 
measure behaviour which changes with time as person learns advanced techniques 
and faster ways of accomplishing tasks. However, this problem of concept drift is 
addressed in the behaviour based intrusion detection research and systems are 
developed capable of adjusting to the changing behaviour of the users (Koychev and 
Schwab, 2000; Tsymbal, 2004). 
• Collectability. Collecting behavioural biometrics is relatively easy and unobtrusive 
to the user. In some instances, the user may not even be aware that data collection is 
taking place. The process of data collection is fully automated and is very low cost. 
• Performance. The identification accuracy of most behavioural biometrics is low 
particularly as the number of users in the database becomes large. However, 
verification accuracy is very good for some behavioural biometrics. 
• Acceptability. Since behavioural biometrics can be collected without user 
participation, they enjoy a high degree of acceptability, but might be objected to for 
ethical or privacy reasons. 
• Circumvention. It is relatively difficult to get around behavioural biometric systems 
as it requires intimate knowledge of someone else’s behaviour, but once such 
knowledge is available, fabrication might be very straightforward (Schuckers, 2002). 
This is why it is extremely important to keep the collected behavioural profiles 
securely encrypted. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 99    
 
All behavioural biometrics essentially measure human actions which result from specific 
to every human skills, style, preference, knowledge, motor-skills or strategy. Table 2 
summarises what precisely is being measured by different behavioural biometrics as well 
as lists some of the most frequently used features for each type of behaviour. Indirect 
HCI-based biometrics are not included as they have no meaning independent of the direct 
human computer interaction which causes them. 
Motor-skill based biometrics measure innate, unique and stable muscle actions of 
users performing a particular task. Table 3 outlines which muscle groups are responsible 
for a particular motor-skill as well as lists some of the most frequently used features for 
each muscle control based biometric approach. 
While many behavioural biometrics are still in their infancy, some very promising 
research has already been done. The results obtained justify feasibility of using behaviour 
for verification of individuals and further research in this direction is likely to improve 
accuracy of such systems. Table 4 summarises obtained accuracy ranges for the set of 
direct behavioural biometrics for which such data is available. Table 5 reports detection 
rates and error rates for indirect human computer interaction based behavioural 
biometrics. 
An unintended property of behavioural profiles is that they might contain information 
which may be of interest to third parties which have potential to discriminate against 
individuals based on such information. As a consequence intentionally revealing or 
obtaining somebody else’s behavioural profile for the purposes other than verification is 
highly unethical. Examples of private information which might be revealed by some 
behavioural profiles follow: 
• Calling behaviour. Calling data is a particularly sensitive subject since it might 
reveal signs of infidelity or interest in non-traditional adult entertainment. 
• Car driving style. Car insurance companies may be interested to know if a driver 
frequently speeds and is an overall aggressive driver in order to charge an increased 
coverage rate or to deny coverage all together. 
• Command line lexicon. Information about proficiency with the commands might be 
used by an employer to decide if you are sufficiently qualified for a job involving 
computer interaction. 
• Credit card use. Credit card data reveals information about what items you frequently 
purchase and in what locations you can be found violating your expectation of 
privacy. For example, an employer might be interested to know if an employee buys 
a case of beer every day indicating a problem with alcoholism. 
• E-mail behaviour. An employer would be interested to know if employees send out 
personal e-mails during office hours. 
• Game strategy. If information about game strategy is obtained by the player’s 
opponents it might be analysed to find weaknesses in player’s game and as a result 
give an unfair advantage to the opponents. 
• Programming style. Software metric obtained from analysis of code may indicate a 
poorly performing coder and as a result jeopardise the person’s employment. 
Additionally, any of the motor-skill based biometrics may reveal a physical handicap of a 
person and so result in potential discrimination. Such biometrics as voice can reveal 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   100 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
emotions, and the face images may reveal information about emotions and health 
(Crompton, 2003). Because behavioural biometric indirectly measures our thoughts and 
personal traits, any data collected in the process of generation of a behavioural profile 
needs to be safely stored in an encrypted form. 
Table 2 Summary of behavioural biometrics with corresponding traits and features 
Behavioural 
Biometric Measures Features 
Biometric sketch Knowledge Location and relative position of different primitives 
Calling 
behaviour Preferences 
Date and time of the call, duration, called ID, called 
number, cost of call, number of calls to a local 
destination, number of calls to mobile destinations, 
number of calls to international destinations 
Car driving style Skill Pressure from accelerator pedal and brake pedal, vehicle speed, steering angle 
Command line 
lexicon 
Technical 
vocabulary 
Used commands together with corresponding frequency 
counts, and lists of arguments to the commands 
Credit card use Preferences Account number, transaction type, credit card type, merchant ID, merchant address 
E-mail 
behaviour Style 
Length of the e-mails, time of the day the mail is sent, 
how frequently inbox is emptied, the recipients’ addresses 
Game strategy Strategy/skill Count of hands folded, checked, called, raised,  check-raised, re-raised, and times player went all-in 
Haptic Style 
3D world location of the pen, average speed, mean 
velocity, mean standard deviation, navigation style, 
angular turns and rounded turns 
Keystroke 
dynamics Skill 
Time durations between the keystrokes, inter-key strokes 
and dwell times, which is the time a key is pressed down, 
overall typing speed, frequency of errors (use of 
backspace), use of numpad, order in which user presses 
shift key to get capital letters 
Mouse dynamics Style 
x and y coordinates of the mouse, horizontal velocity, 
vertical velocity, tangential velocity, tangential 
acceleration, tangential jerk and angular velocity 
Painting Style Style Subtle pen and brush strokes characteristic 
Programming 
style 
Skill, style, 
preferences 
Chosen programming language, code formatting style, 
type of code editor, special macros, comment style, 
variable names, spelling and grammar, language features, 
the ratio of global to local variables, temporary coding 
structures, errors 
Soft behavioural 
biometrics 
Intelligence, 
vocabulary, 
skills 
Word knowledge, generalisation ability, mathematical 
skill 
Text authorship Vocabulary 
Sentence count, word count, punctuation mark count, 
noun phrase count, word included in noun phrase count 
prepositional phrase count, word included in 
prepositional phrase count and keyword count 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 101    
 
Table 3 Motor-skill biometrics with respective muscles and features 
Motor-skill 
based 
biometric 
Muscles involved Extracted features 
Blinking Orbicularis oculi, corrugator supercilii, depressor supercilii 
Time between blinks, how long the 
eye is held closed at each blink, 
physical characteristics the eye 
undergoes while blinking 
Dynamic facial 
features 
Levator labii superioris, levator anguli 
oris zygomaticus major, zygomaticus 
minor, mentalis, depressor labii 
inferioris, depressor anguli oris, 
buccinator, orbicularis oris 
Motion of skin pores on the face 
Gait/stride 
Tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis 
longus, extensor digitorum longus, 
peroneus tertius, extensor digitorum 
brevis, extensor hallucis brevis, 
gastrocnemius, soleus, plantaris, 
popliteus, flexor hallucis longus flexor 
digitorum longus 
Amount of arm swing, rhythm of 
the walker, bounce, length of steps, 
vertical distance between head and 
foot, distance between head and 
pelvis, maximum distance between 
the left and right foot 
Handgrip 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti, flexor brevis 
minimi digiti 
Resistance measurements in 
multiple points 
Haptic 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis,| flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti,| flexor brevis 
minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar 
interossei 
3D world location of the pen, 
average speed, mean velocity, mean 
standard deviation, navigation style, 
angular turns and rounded turns 
Keystroke 
dynamics 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti, flexor brevis 
minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar 
interossei 
Time durations between the 
keystrokes, inter-key strokes and 
dwell times, which is the time a key 
is pressed down, overall typing 
speed, frequency of errors (use of 
backspace), use of numpad, order in 
which user presses shift key to get 
capital letters 
Lip movement 
Levator palpebrae superiorisj, levator 
anguli oris, mentalis, depressor labii 
inferioris, depressor anguli oris, 
buccinator, orbicularis oris, risorius 
Mouth width, upper/lower lip 
width, lip opening height/width, 
distance between horizontal lip line 
and upper lip 
Source: Standring (2004) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   102 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Table 3 Motor-skill biometrics with respective muscles and features (continued) 
Motor-skill 
based 
biometric 
Muscles involved Extracted features 
Mouse 
dynamics 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti, flexor brevis 
minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar 
interossei 
x and y coordinates of the mouse, 
horizontal velocity, vertical 
velocity, tangential velocity, 
tangential acceleration, tangential 
jerk and angular velocity 
Signature/hand
writing 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti, flexor brevis 
minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar 
interossei 
Coordinates of the signature, 
pressure at pen tip, acceleration and 
pen-tilt, signing speed, signature 
bounding box, Fourier descriptors 
of the signature’s trajectory, 
number of strokes, and signing flow 
Tapping 
Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens 
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, 
adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, 
abductor minimi digiti, flexor brevis 
minimi digiti 
Pulse height, pulse duration, and 
the duration of the first inter-pulse 
interval 
Voice/speech 
Cricothyroid, posterior ricoarytenoid, 
lateral cricoarytenoid, arytenoid, 
thyroarytenoid 
Logarithm of the Fourier transform 
of the voice signal in each band 
along with pitch, tone, cadence 
Source: Standring (2004) 
Table 4 Recognition, verification and error rates of behavioural biometrics 
Behavioural 
biometric Publication 
Detection 
rate FAR FRR EER 
Biometric 
sketch Brömme and Al-Zubi (2003)    7.2% 
Blinking Westeyn and Starner (2004) 82.02%    
Calling 
behaviour Fawcett and Provost (1997) 92.5%    
Car driving 
style Erdogan et al. (2005a) 88.25%   4.0% 
Command line 
lexicon Marin et al. (2001) 74.4%  33.5%  
Credit card 
use Brause et al. (1999) 99.995%  20%  
E-mail 
behaviour Vel et al. (2001) 90.5%    
Gait/stride Kale et al. (2004) 90%    
Game strategy Yampolskiy and Govindajaru (2007)    7.0% 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 103    
 
Table 4 Recognition, verification, and error rates of behavioural biometrics (continued) 
Behavioural 
biometric Publication 
Detection 
Rate FAR FRR EER 
Handgrip Veldhuis et al. (2004)    1.8% 
Haptic Orozco et al. (2006)  25%  22.3% 
Keystroke 
dynamics Bergadano et al. (2002)  0.01% 4%  
Lip movement Mok et al. (2004)    2.17% 
Mouse 
dynamics Pusara and Brodley (2004)  0.43% 1.75%  
Programming 
style Frantzeskou et al. (2004) 73%    
Jain et al. (2002)  1.6% 2.8%  Signature 
handwriting Zhu et al. (2000) 95.7%    
Tapping Henderson et al. (2001)    2.3% 
Text 
authorship Halteren (2004)  0.2% 0.0%  
Colombi et al. (1996)    0.28% Voice/speech/
singing Tsai and Wang (2006)    29.6% 
Table 5 Detection and false positive rates for indirect behavioural biometrics 
Type of indirect 
biometric Publication Detection rate 
False positive 
rate 
Audit logs Lee et al. (1999) 93% 8% 
Call-stack Feng et al. (2003) – 1% 
GUI interaction Garg et al. (2006) 96.15% 3.85% 
Network traffic Zhang and Manikopoulos (2003) 96.2% 0.0393% 
Registry access Apap et al. (2001) 86.9% 3.8% 
Storage activity Stanton et al. (2005) 97% 4% 
System calls Ghosh et al. (1999) 86.4% 4.3% 
5 Applications 
Reliable security to a large degree depends on development of biometric technology in 
general and behavioural biometrics in particular. This affordable and non-intrusive way 
of verifying user’s identity holds a lot of potential to develop secure and user friendly 
systems, networks and workplaces. As long as the issues of privacy are sufficiently 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   104 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
addressed by the developers of behaviour-based security systems, commercial potential 
of development in this area is very substantial (Jervis et al., 2006; Schimke et al., 2004). 
Behavioural biometrics and related technologies have potential to improve such 
diverse areas as personalised education, mobile commerce, user intention understanding, 
risk and financial analysis. Additionally, the following modelling and profiling 
endeavours can all benefit from progress in the field of behavioural biometrics: 
• Opponent modelling – is related to the field of game theory and studies different 
models for understanding and predicting behaviour of players in different games. 
While for many games, such as chess, in order to win it is sufficient to play the best 
possible strategy and ignore the unique behaviour of your opponent in many other 
games, such as poker, it is not. Having a well performing prediction model of your 
opponent’s behaviour can give you an edge necessary to defeat him in an otherwise 
equal game. 
• User modelling – is studied for marketing and customisation purposes. It aims at 
creating a representation of the user for the purpose of customising products and 
service to better suite the user. For example, software can be made to only display 
options which are in the field of interest of this particular user making it easier for 
him to interact with an otherwise very complicated piece of software. 
• Criminal profiling – as done by police and FBI investigators trying to determine 
personality and identity of an individual who has committed a crime based on the 
behaviour, which was exhibited during the criminal act. 
• Jury profiling – is a technique used by lawyers and prosecutors to attempt to predict 
how a particular potential juror will vote with respect to the verdict based on juror’s 
current behaviour, answers to a questioner and overall physical and psychological 
appearance of the juror. 
• Plan recognition – is the process of understanding the goals of an intelligent agent 
from analysing the observable actions of that entity. It entails creation of a mapping 
from a temporal sequence of observable actions to an organisation of these actions 
into a logical representation that identifies the sub-goals comprising the overall 
action plan. 
6 Conclusions 
In this survey, authors have presented only the most popular behavioural biometrics but 
any human behaviour can be used as a basis for personal profiling and for subsequent 
verification. Some behavioural biometrics which are quickly gaining ground but are not a 
part of this survey include profiling of shopping behaviour based on market basked 
analysis (Prassas et al., 2001), web browsing and click-stream profiling (Fu and Shih, 
2002; Goecks and Shavlik, 2000; Liang and Lai, 2002), and even TV preferences 
(Democratic Media, 2001). 
Behavioural biometrics are particularly well suited for verification of users which 
interact with computers, cell phones, smart cars, or points of sale terminals. As the 
number of electronic appliances used in homes and offices increases, so does the 
potential for utilisation of this paper and promising technology. Future research should be 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 105    
 
directed at increasing overall accuracy of such systems, e.g., by looking into possibility 
of developing multimodal behavioural biometrics; as people often engage in multiple 
behaviours at the same time, e.g., talking on a cell phone while driving or using keyboard 
and mouse at the same time (Dahel and Xiao, 2003; Humm et al., 2006; Jain et al., 2005). 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant No. DGE 
0333417 ‘Integrative Geographic Information Science Traineeship Program’, awarded to 
University at Buffalo. 
References 
Adler, A., Youmaran, R. and Loyka, S. (2006) ‘Towards a Measure of Biometric Information’, 
retrieved August 2, 2006 from 
 http://www.sce.carleton.ca/faculty/adler/publications/2006/youmaran-ccece2006-biometric-
entropy.pdf. 
Ahmed, A.A.E. and Traore, I. (2005a) Anomaly Intrusion Detection based on Biometrics. 
Workshop on Information Assurance, United States Military Academy, West Point, NY. 
Ahmed, A.A.E. and Traore, I. (2005b) ‘Detecting computer intrusions using behavioural 
biometrics’, Third Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust, St. Andrews, New 
Brunswick, Canada. 
Al-Zubi, S., Brömme, A., and Tönnies, K. (2003) ‘Using an active shape structural model for 
biometric sketch recognition’, Proceedings of DAGM, Magdeburg, Germany. 
Anderson, J.P. (1980) ‘Computer security threat monitoring and surveillance’, Technical Report, 
James P. Anderson Company, Fort Washington, Pennsylvania. 
Angle, S., Bhagtani, R., and Chheda, H. (2005) ‘Biometrics: a further echelon of security’, The 
First UAE International Conference on Biological and Medical Physics. 
Apap, F., Honig, A., Hershkop, S., Eskin, E., and Stolfo, S. (2001) ‘Detecting malicious software 
by monitoring anomalous windows registry accesses’, Technical Report, CUCS Technical 
Report. 
Ballard, L., Lopresti, D., and Monrose, F. (2006a) ‘Evaluating the security of handwriting 
biometrics’, The 10th International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition 
(IWFHR ‘06), La Baule, France. 
Ballard, L., Monrose, F., and Lopresti, D.P. (2006b) ‘Biometric authentication revisited: 
understanding the impact of wolves in sheep’s clothing’, Fifteenth USENIX Security 
Symposium, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Banikazemi, M., Poff, D., and Abali, B. (2005) ‘Storage-based intrusion detection for storage area 
networks (SANs)’, Proceedings of 22nd IEEE/13th NASA Goddard Conference on Mass 
Storage Systems and Technologies, 2005. 
Bartolacci, G., Curtin, M., Katzenberg, M., Nwana, N., Cha, S.-H., and Tappert, C.C. (2005)  
‘Long-text keystroke biometric applications over the internet’, MLMTA. 
Bella, S.D. and Palmer, C. (2006) ‘Personal identifiers in musicians’ finger movement dynamics’, 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, Vol. 18. 
Benabdelkader, C., Cutler, R., and Davis, L. (2002) ‘Person identification using automatic height 
and stride estimation’, IEEE International Conference on Pattern Recognition. 
Bergadano, F., Gunetti, D., and Picardi, C. (2002) ‘User authentication through keystroke 
dynamics’, ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC). 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   106 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Bhatkar, S., Chaturvedi, A., and Sekar, R. (2006) ‘Dataflow anomaly detection’, IEEE Symposium 
on Security and Privacy. 
BioPrivacy Initiative (2005) ‘FAQ’, BioPrivacy Initiative, retrieved July 22, 2005 from 
 http://www.bioprivacy.org/faqmain.htm. 
Bolle, R., Connell, J., Pankanti, S., Ratha, N., and Senior, A. (2003) Guide to Biometrics, Springer. 
Brause, R., Langsdorf, T., and Hepp, M. (1999) ‘Neural data mining for credit card fraud 
detection’, Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial 
Intelligence. 
Brömme, A. (2003) ‘A classification of biometric signatures’, International Conference on 
Multimedia and Expo (ICME ‘03). 
Brömme, A. and Al-Zubi, S. (2003) ‘Multifactor biometric sketch authentication’, in A. Brömme 
and C. Busch, eds., Proceedings of the BIOSIG 2003, Darmstadt, Germany. 
Broun, C.C., Zhang, X., Mersereau, R.M. and Clements, M.A. (2002) ‘Automatic speechreading 
with applications to speaker verification’, Eurasip Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 
Special Issue on Joint Audio-Visual Speech Processing. 
Cahill, M., Lambert, D., Pinheiro, J., and Sun, D. (2000) ‘Detecting fraud in the real world’, 
Technical Report, Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies. 
Campbell, J.P. (1997) ‘Speaker recognition: a tutorial’, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 85, No. 9, 
pp.1437–1462. 
Cappelli, R., Maio, D., Maltoni, D., Wayman, J.L., and Jain, A.K. (2006) ‘Performance evaluation 
of fingerprint verification systems’, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis Machine 
Intelligence, Vol. 28, pp.3–18. 
Caslon Analytics (2005) Caslon-Analytics, retrieved October 2, 2005 from 
 http://www.caslon.com.au/biometricsnote6.htm. 
Ciota, Z. (2004) ‘Speaker verification for multimedia application’, IEEE International Conference 
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. 
Colombi, J., Ruck, D., Rogers, S., Oxley, M., and Anderson, T. (1996) ‘Cohort selection and word 
grammar effects for speaker recognition’, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing, Atlanta, GA. 
Crompton, M. (2003) ‘Biometrics and privacy: the end of the world as we know it or the white 
knight of privacy?’, 1st Biometrics Institute Conference. 
Curtin, M., Tappert, C.C., Villani, M., Ngo, G., Simone, J., Fort, H.S., and Cha, S. (2006) 
‘Keystroke biometric recognition on long-text input: a feasibility study’, Proc. Int. Workshop 
Sci Comp/Comp Stat (IWSCCS 2006), Hong Kong. 
Dahel, S.K. and Xiao, Q. (2003) ‘Accuracy performance analysis of multimodal biometrics’, IEEE 
Information Assurance Workshop on Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society. 
Dao, V. and Vemuri, V. (2000) ‘Profiling users in the UNIX OS environment’, International ICSC 
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications, University of Wollongong Australia. 
Delac, K. and Grgic, M. (2004) ‘A survey of biometric recognition methods’, 46th International 
Symposium Electronics in Marine, ELMAR-2004, Zadar, Croatia. 
Democratic Media (2001) ‘TV that watches you: the prying eyes of interactive television’, A 
Report by the Center for Digital Democracy, retrieved from 
 http://www.democraticmedia.org/privacyreport.pdf. 
Denning, D.E. (1987) ‘An intrusion-detection model’, IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering. 
Deshpande, S., Chikkerur, S., and Govindaraju, V. (2005) ‘Accent classification in speech’, Fourth 
IEEE Workshop on Automatic Identification Advanced Technologies. 
Dugelay, J-L., Junqua, J-C., Kotropoulos, C., Kuhn, R., Perronnin, F., and Pitas, I. (2002) ‘Recent 
advances in biometric person authentication’, IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics Speech and Signal 
Processing (ICASSP), Special Session on Biometrics, Orlando, Florida. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 107    
 
Erdogan, H., Ercil, A., Ekenel, H., Bilgin, S., Eden, I., Kirisci, M. and Abut, H. (2005a)  
‘Multi-modal person recognition for vehicular applications’, N.C. Oza et al. (eds.) MCS 2005, 
LNCS 3541, Monterey, CA. 
Erdogan, H., Ozyagci, A.N., Eskil, T., Rodoper, M., Ercil, A. and Abut, H. (2005b) ‘Experiments 
on decision fusion for driver recognition’, Biennial on DSP for In-vehicle and Mobile Systems, 
Sesimbra Portugal. 
Erzin, E., Yemez, Y., Tekalp, A.M., Erçil, A., Erdogan, H. and Abut, H. (2006) ‘Multimodal 
person recognition for human-vehicle interaction’, IEEE MultiMedia. 
Fawcett, T. and Provost, F. (1997) ‘Adaptive fraud detection’, Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Feng, H., Kolesnikov, O., Fogla, P., Lee, W. and Gong, W. (2003) ‘Anomaly detection using  
call-stack information’, Proceedings of the IEEE Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA, USA. 
Frantzeskou, G., Gritzalis, S. and Macdonell, S. (2004) ‘Source code authorship analysis for 
supporting the cybercrime investigation process’, 1st International Conference on eBusiness 
and Telecommunication Networks – Security and Reliability in Information Systems and 
Networks Track, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Setubal, Portugal. 
Fu, Y. and Shih, M. (2002) ‘A framework for personal web usage mining’, International 
Conference on Internet Computing (IC ‘2002), Las Vegas, NV. 
Gamboa, H. and Fred, A. (2003) ‘An identity authentication system based on human computer 
interaction behaviour’, Proc. of the 3rd Intl. Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Information 
Systems, ICEIS Press. 
Gamboa, H. and Fred, A. (2004) ‘A behavioural biometric system based on human computer 
interaction’, Proceedings of SPIE. 
Garg, A., Rahalkar, R., Upadhyaya, S., and Kwiat, K. (2006) ‘Profiling users in GUI-based systems 
for masquerade detection’, The 7th IEEE Information Assurance Workshop (IAWorkshop 
2006), West Point, New York, USA. 
Ghosh, A.K., Schwartzbard, A. and Schatz, M. (1999) ‘Learning program behaviour profiles for 
intrusion detection’, Proceedings of the First USENIX Workshop on Intrusion Detection and 
Network Monitoring, Santa Clara, California. 
Giffin, J., Jha, S. and Miller, B. (2004) ‘Efficient context-sensitive intrusion detection’, 11th Annual 
Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium (NDSS), San Diego, California. 
Goecks, J. and Shavlik, J. (2000) ‘Learning users’ interests by unobtrusively observing their normal 
behaviour’, Proceedings of the 2000 International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 
New Orleans, LA. 
Goldring, T. (2003) ‘User profiling for intrusion detection in Windows NT’, Computing Science 
and Statistics, Vol. 35. 
Gray, A., Sallis, P. and Macdonell, S. (1997) ‘Software forensics: extending authorship analysis 
techniques to computer programs’, Proc. 3rd Biannual Conf. Int. Assoc. of Forensic Linguists 
(IAFL’97). 
Griffin, J.L., Pennington, A.G., Bucy, J.S., Choundappan, D., Muralidharan, N. and Ganger, G.R. 
(2003) ‘On the feasibility of intrusion detection inside workstation disks’, Technical Report 
CMU-PDL-03-106, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Grosser, H., Britos, H., and García-Martínez, R. (2005) ‘Detecting fraud in mobile telephony using 
neural networks’, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Springer-Verlag. 
Gunetti, D., Picardi, C. and Ruffo, G. (2005) ‘Keystroke analysis of different languages:  
a case study’, Proc. of the Sixth Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis (IDA 2005), 
Springer-Verlag, Madrid, Spain. 
Gupta, G., Mazumdar, C. and Rao, M.S. (2004) ‘Digital forensic analysis of e-mails: a trusted  
e-mail protocol’, International Journal of Digital Evidence, Vol. 2. 
Halteren, H.V. (2004) ‘Linguistic profiling for author recognition and verification’, Proceedings of 
ACL-2004. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   108 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Henderson, N.J., Papakostas, T.V., White, N.M. and Hartel, P.H. (2001) ‘Polymer thick-film 
sensors: possibilities for smartcard biometrics’, Proceedings of Sensors and their applications 
XI. 
Henderson, N.J., White, N.M., Veldhuis, R.N.J., Hartel, P.H., and Slump, C.H. (2002) ‘Sensing 
pressure for authentication’, 3rd IEEE Benelux Signal Processing Symp. (SPS), Leuven, 
Belgium. 
Herbst, B. and Coetzer, H. (1998) ‘On an offline signature verification system’, Proceedings of the 
9th Annual South African Workshop on Pattern Recognition. 
Hilas, C. and Sahalos, J. (2005) ‘User profiling for fraud detection in telecommunication networks’, 
5th International Conference on Technology and Automation (ICTA 2005), Thessaloniki, 
Greece. 
Hofmeyr, S.A., Forrest, S. and Somayaji, A. (1998) ‘Intrusion detection using sequences of system 
calls’ Journal of Computer Security. 
Humm, A., Hennebert, J. and Ingold, R. (2006) ‘Scenario and survey of combined handwriting and 
speech modalities for user authentication’, 6th International Conference on Recent Advances in 
Soft Computing (RASC ‘06), Canterbury, UK. 
Igarashi, K., Miyajima, C., Itou, K., Takeda, K., Itakura, F. and Abut, H. (2004) ‘Biometric 
identification using driving behavioural signals’, Proc. 2004 IEEE International Conference 
on Multimedia and Expo. 
Ilgun, K., Kemmerer, R.A. and Porras, P.A. (1995) ‘State transition analysis: a rule-based intrusion 
detection approach’, Software Engineering. 
Ilonen, J. (2006) ‘Keystroke dynamics’, retrieved July 12, 2006) from 
 www.it.lut.fi/kurssit/03-04/010970000/seminars/Ilonen.pdf. 
Ito, A., Wang, X., Suzuki, M. and Makino, S. (2005) ‘Smile and laughter recognition using speech 
processing and face recognition from conversation video’, Proceedings of the 2005 
International Conference on Cyberworlds. 
Jacob, B.A. and Levitt, S.D. (2004) ‘To catch a cheat, education next’, retrieved from 
  www.educationnext.org. 
Jain, A., Griess, F. and Connell, S. (2002) ‘Online signature verification’, Pattern Recognition. 
Jain, A.K., Bolle, R. and Pankanti, S. (1999) Biometrics: Personal Identification in Networked 
Society, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Jain, A.K., Dass, S.C. and Nandakumar, K. (2004a) ‘Can soft biometric traits assist user 
recognition?’, Proceedings of SPIE Defense and Security Symposium, Orlando, FL. 
Jain, A.K., Dass, S.C. and Nandakumar, K. (2004b) ‘Soft biometric traits for personal recognition 
systems’, Proc. International Conference on Biometric Authentication (ICBA), Hong Kong. 
Jain, A.K., Pankanti, S., Prabhakar, S., Hong, L. and Ross, A. (2004c) ‘Biometrics: a grand 
challenge’, Proceedings of the International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Cambridge, 
UK. 
Jain, A.K., Ross, A. and Prabhakar, S. (2004d) ‘An introduction to biometric recognition’ IEEE 
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 
Jain, K., Nandakumar, K. and Ross, A. (2005) ‘Score normalisation in multimodal biometric 
systems’, Pattern Recognition. 
Jansen, A.R., Dowe, D.L. and Farr, G.E. (2000) ‘Inductive inference of chess player strategy’, 
Proceedings of the 6th Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence (PRICAI 
2000). 
Jermyn, I., Mayer, A., Monrose, F., Reiter, M.K. and Rubin, A.D. (1999) ‘The design and analysis 
of graphical passwords’, Proceedings of the 8th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, 
D.C. 
Jervis, E., Kennedy, M., Kepler, N. and Kim, J. (2006) ‘Trends in biometrics and user acceptance’, 
retrieved August 3, 2006 from 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 109    
 
 http://www.simson.net/ref/2005/csci_e-170/p1/future.pdf. 
Jourlin, P., Luettin, J., Genoud, D., and Wassner, H. (1997) ‘Acoustic-labial speaker verification’, 
Pattern Recognition Letters. 
Juola, P. and Sofko, J. (2004) ‘Proving and improving authorship attribution’, Proceedings of 
CaSTA-04 The Face of Text. 
Kale, A., Sundaresan, A., Rajagopalan, A.N., Cuntoor, N., Roychowdhury, A., Kruger, V., and 
Chellappa, R. (2004) ‘Identification of humans using gait’, IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing. 
Kalyanaraman, S (2006) ‘Biometric authentication systems: a report’, retrieved July 26, 2006 from 
 http://netlab.cs.iitm.ernet.in/cs650/2006/TermPapers/sriramk.pdf. 
Kauffman, J.A., Bazen, A.M., Gerez, S.H., and Veldhuis, R.N.J. (2003) ‘Grip-pattern recognition 
for smart guns’, 14th Annual Workshop on Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing (ProRISC), 
Veldhoven, The Netherlands. 
Kaufman, K., Cervone, G., and Michalski, R.S. (2003) ‘An application of symbolic learning to 
intrusion detection: preliminary results from the LUS methodology’, Reports of the Machine 
Learning and Inference Laboratory, MLI 03-2, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA. 
Kim, Y., Jo, J.-Y., and Suh, K. (2006) ‘Baseline profile stability for network anomaly detection’, 
IEEE ITNG 2006, Internet and Wireless Network Security Track, Las Vegas, NV. 
Ko, C., Fink, G., and Levitt, K. (1994) ‘Automated detection of vulnerabilities in privileged 
programs by execution monitoring’, Proceedings of the 10th Annual Computer Security 
Applications Conference. 
Koppel, M. and Schler, J. (2004) ‘Authorship verification as a one-class classification problem’, 
Proceedings of 21st International Conference on Machine Learning, Banff, Canada. 
Koppel, M., Schler, J., and Mughaz, D. (2004) ‘Text categorisation for authorship verification’, 
Eighth International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics, Fort Lauderdale, 
Florida. 
Koychev, I. and Schwab, I. (2000) ‘Adaptation to drifting user’s interests’, Proceedings of 
ECML2000 Workshop: Machine Learning in New Information Age, Barcelona, Spain. 
Kuge, N., Yamamura, T., and Shimoyama, O. (1998.) ‘A driver behaviour recognition method 
based on driver model framework’, Society of Automotive Engineers Publication. 
Lam, L-C., Li, W., and Chiueh, T-C. (2006) ‘Accurate and automated system call policy-based 
intrusion prevention’, Proceedings of 2006 International Conference on Dependable Systems 
and Networks (DSN 2006). 
Lane, T. and Brodley, C.E. (1997a) ‘An application of machine learning to anomaly detection’, 20th 
Annual National Information Systems Security Conference. 
Lane, T. and Brodley, C.E. (1997b) ‘Detecting the abnormal: machine learning in computer 
security’, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University Technical 
Report ECE-97-1, West Lafayette. 
Lee, K. and Park, H. (2003) ‘A new similarity measure based on intra-class statistics for biometric 
systems’, ETRI Journal. 
Lee, W., Stolfo, S.J., and Mok, K.W. (1999) ‘A data mining framework for building intrusion 
detection models’, IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA. 
Lei, H., Palla, S., and Govindaraju, V. (2004) ‘ER2: an intuitive similarity measure for online 
signature verification’, Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Frontiers in 
Handwriting Recognition (IWFHR ‘04). IEEE Computer Society. 
Li, Y., Wu, N., Jajodia, S., and Wang, X.S. (2002) ‘Enhancing profiles for anomaly detection using 
time granularities’, Journal of Computer Security. 
Liang, T.P. and Lai, H-J. (2002) ‘Discovering user interests from web browsing behaviour’, 
Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, Hawaii, USA. 
Lin, X. and Simske, S. (2004) ‘Phoneme-less hierarchical accent classification’, Conference Record 
of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   110 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Liu, A. and Salvucci, D. (2001) ‘Modeling and prediction of human driver behaviour’, Proc. of the 
9th HCI International Conference, New Orleans, LA. 
Liu, D. and Huebner, F. (2002) ‘Application profiling of IP traffic’, 27th Annual IEEE Conference 
on Local Computer Networks. 
Liu, Z. and Bridges, S.M. (2005) ‘Dynamic learning of automata from the call-stack log for 
anomaly detection’, International Conference on Information Technology: Coding and 
Computing (ITCC 2005). 
Luettin, J., Thacker, N.A., and Beet, S.W. (1996) ‘Speaker identification by lipreading’, 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP ‘96). 
Lunt, T. (1993) ‘Detecting intruders in computer systems’, Proceedings of the 1993 Conference on 
Auditing and Computer Technology. 
Lyu, S., Rockmore, D., and Farid, H. (2004) ‘A digital technique for art authentication.’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Mainguet, J-F. (2006) ‘Biometrics’, retrieved July 28, 2006 from 
 http://perso.orange.fr/fingerchip/biometrics/biometrics.htm. 
Marceau, C. (2000) ‘Characterising the behaviour of a program using multiple-length n-grams’, 
Proceedings of the New Security Paradigms Workshop 2000, Cork, Ireland. 
Marin, J., Ragsdale, D., and Surdu, J. (2001) ‘A hybrid approach to the profile creation and 
intrusion detection’, DARPA Information Survivability Conference and Exposition (DISCEX II 
‘01). 
Mason, J.S.D., Brand, J., Auckenthaler, R., Deravi, F., and Chibelushi, C. (1999) ‘Lip signatures 
for automatic person recognition’ IEEE Workshop, MMSP. 
Maxion, R.A. and Townsend, T.N. (2002) ‘Masquerade detection using truncated command lines’, 
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DNS-02), IEEE Computer 
Society. 
Michael, C.C. (2003) ‘Finding the vocabulary of program behaviour data for anomaly detection’, 
DARPA Information Survivability Conference and Exposition, 2003. 
Michael, C.C. and Ghosh, A. (2000) ‘Using finite automata to mine execution data for intrusion 
detection: a preliminary report’, Proceedings of the Third International Workshop in Recent 
Advances in Intrusion Detection, Toulouse, France. 
Mok, L., Lau, W.H., Leung, S.H., Wang, S.L., and Yan, H. (2004) ‘Person authentication using 
ASM based lip shape and intensity information’, International Conference on Image 
Processing. 
Monrose, F. and Rubin, A.D. (2000) ‘Keystroke dynamics as a biometric for authentication’, 
Future Generation Computing Systems (FGCS) Journal: Security on the web (special issue). 
Muralidharan, N. and Wunnava, S. (2004) ‘Signature verification: a popular biometric technology’, 
Second LACCEI International Latin American and Caribbean Conference for Engineering 
and Technology (LACCEI 2004), Miami, Florida, USA. 
Nalwa, V.S. (1997) ‘Automatic online signature verification’, Proceedings of the IEEE. 
Nguyen, N., Reiher, P., and Kuenning, G.H. (2003) ‘Detecting insider threats by monitoring system 
call activity’, IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society Information Assurance Workshop. 
Nixon, M.S. and Carter, J. N. (2004) ‘On gait as a biometric: progress and prospects’, Proceedings 
of Proc. EUSIPCO 2004, Vienna. 
Novikov, D., Yampolskiy, R.V., and Reznik, L. (2006a) ‘Anomaly detection based intrusion 
detection’, Third International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations 
(ITNG 2006), Las Vegas, Nevada, USA. 
Novikov, D., Yampolskiy, R.V., and Reznik, L. (2006b) ‘Artificial intelligence approaches for 
intrusion detection’, Long Island Systems Applications and Technology Conference (LISAT 
2006), Long Island, New York. 
Novikov, D. (2005) Neural Networks to Intrusion Detection, MS Thesis, Rochester Institute of 
Technology, Rochester, NY. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 111    
 
Oliver, N. and Pentland, A.P. (2000) ‘Graphical models for driver behaviour recognition in a 
SmartCar’, Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. 
Orozco, M., Asfaw, Y., Adler, A., Shirmohammadi, S., and Saddik, A.E. (2005) ‘Automatic 
identification of participants in haptic systems’, 2005 IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement 
Technology Conference, Ottawa, Canada. 
Orozco, M., Asfaw, Y., Shirmohammadi, S., Adler, A., and Saddik, A.E. (2006) ‘Haptic-based 
biometrics: a feasibility study’, IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, Alexandria, Virginia, USA. 
Pamudurthy, S., Guan, E., Mueller, K., and Rafailovich, M. (2005) ‘Dynamic approach for face 
recognition using digital image skin correlation’, Audio and Video-based Biometric Person 
Authentication (AVBPA), New York. 
Pennington, A.G., Strunk, J.D., Griffin, J.L., Soules, C.A.N., Goodson, G.R., and Ganger, G.R. 
(2002) ‘Storage-based intrusion detection: watching storage activity for suspicious behaviour’, 
Technical Report CMU-CS-02-179’, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Plamondon, R. and Lorette, G. (1989) ‘Automatic signature verification and writer identification: 
the state of the art’, Pattern Recognition, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp.107–131. 
Poker-edge (2006) ‘Stats and analysis’, Poker-edge.com, retrieved June 7, 2006 from 
 http://www.poker-edge.com/stats.php. 
Prassas, G., Pramataris, K.C., and Papaemmanouil, O. (2001) ‘Dynamic recommendations in 
internet retailing’, Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 
2001). 
Pusara, M. and Brodley, C.E. (2004) ‘User re-authentication via mouse movements’, 
VizSEC/DMSEC ‘04: Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Workshop on Visualisation and Data 
Mining for Computer Security, ACM Press, Washington, DC, USA. 
Ramann, F., Vielhauer, C., and Steinmetz, R. (2002) ‘Biometric applications based on 
handwriting’, IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME ‘02). 
Ramon, J. and Jacobs, N. (2002) ‘Opponent modeling by analysing play’, Proceedings of the 
Computers and Games Workshop on Agents in Computer Games, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
Ratha, N.K., Senior, A., and Bolle, R.M. (2001) ‘Automated biometrics’, Proceedings of 
International Conference on Advances in Pattern Recognition, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Renaud, K. (2003) ‘Quantifying the quality of web authentication mechanisms: a usability 
perspective’, Journal of Web Engineering, Rinton Press, retrieved from 
 http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~karen/Papers/j.pdf. 
Riha, Z. and Matyas, V. (2000) ‘Biometric authentication systems’, FIMU Report Series. 
Ruggles, T. (2007) ‘Comparison of biometric techniques’, retrieved May 27, 2007 from 
 http://www.bio-tech-inc.com/bio.htm. 
Sanderson, C. and Paliwal, K.K. (2001) ‘Information fusion for robust speaker verification’, Proc. 
7th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology (EUROSPEECH ‘01), 
Aalborg. 
Schimke, S., Vielhauer, C., Dutta, P.K., Basu, T.K., Rosa, A.D., Hansen, J., Yegnanarayana, B., 
and Dittmann, J. (2004) ‘Cross cultural aspects of biometrics’, Biometrics: Challenges Arising 
from Theory to Practice. 
Schonlau, M., Dumouchel, W., Ju, W-H., Karr, A.F., Theus, M., and Vardi, Y. (2001) ‘Computer 
intrusion: detecting masquerades’, Statistical Science, Vol. 16, pp.1–17. 
Schuckers, S.A.C. (2002) ‘Spoofing and anti-spoofing measures’, Information Security Technical 
Report. 
Seleznyov, A. and Puuronen, S. (1999) ‘Anomaly intrusion detection systems: handling temporal 
relations between events’, Web Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Recent 
Advances in Intrusion Detection (RAID ‘99). 
Shipilova, O. (2006) ‘Person recognition based on lip movements’, retrieved July 15, 2006 from 
 http://www.it.lut.fi/kurssit/03-04/010970000/seminars/Shipilova.pdf. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   112 R.V. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju    
 
Silva, L.D.S., Santos, A.F.D., Silva, J.D.D., and Montes, A. (2004) A Neural Network Application 
for Attack Detection in Computer Networks, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espanciais. 
Solayappan, N. and Latifi, S. (2006) ‘A survey of unimodal biometric methods’, Security and 
Management, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA. 
Sommer, R. and Paxson, V. (2003) ‘Enhancing byte-level network intrusion detection signatures 
with context’, Proc. of 10th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 
Spafford, E.H. and Weeber., S.A. (1992) ‘Software forensics: can we track code to its authors?’, 
15th National Computer Security Conference. 
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., and Kokkinakis, G. (1999) ‘Automatic authorship attribution’, Proc. 
Ninth Conf. European Chap. Assoc. Computational Linguistics, Bergen, Norway. 
Standring, S. (2004) Gray’s Anatomy: the Anatomical Basis of Medicine and Surgery, 39th ed., 
Churchill-Livingstone (ed). 
Stanton, P.T., Yurcik, W., and Brumbaugh, L. (2005) ‘FABS: file and block surveillance system 
for determining anomalous disk accesses’, Proceedings from the Sixth Annual IEEE 
Information Assurance Workshop. 
Stolfo, S.J., Hershkop, S., Wang, K., Nimeskern, O., and Hu, C-W. (2003a) ‘A behaviour-based 
approach to securing e-mail systems’, Mathematical Methods, Models and Architectures for 
Computer Networks Security, Springer Verlag. 
Stolfo, S.J., Hu, C-W., Li, W-J., Hershkop, S., Wang, K., and Nimeskern, O. (2003b) ‘Combining 
behaviour models to secure e-mail systems’, CU Tech Report, retrieved from 
 http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/ids/publications/EMT-weijen.pdf. 
Sturn, A. (2000) Cluster Analysis for Large Scale Gene Expression Studies, Masters Thesis, The 
Institute for Genomic Research, Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Thompson, K., Miller, G., and Wilder, R. (1997) ‘Wide-area internet traffic patterns and 
characteristics’, IEEE Network. 
Trujillo, M.O., Shakra, I., and Saddik, A.E. (2005) ‘Haptic: the new biometrics-embedded media to 
recognising and quantifying human patterns’, MULTIMEDIA ‘05: Proceedings of the 13th 
Annual ACM International Conference on Multimedia’, ACM Press, Hilton, Singapore. 
Tsai, W-H. and Wang, H-M. (2006) ‘Automatic singer recognition of popular music recordings via 
estimation and modeling of solo vocal signals’, IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and 
Language Processing. 
Tsymbal, A. (2004) ‘The problem of concept drift: definitions and related work’, Technical Report 
TCD-CS-2004-15, Computer Science Department, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. 
Uludag, U., Pankanti, S., Prabhakar, S., and Jain, A. K. (2004) ‘Biometric cryptosystems: issues 
and challenges’, Proceedings of the IEEE. 
Varenhorst, C. (2004) ‘Passdoodles: a lightweight authentication method’, retrieved from 
 http://people.csail.mit.edu/emax/papers/varenhorst.pdf. 
Vel, O.D., Anderson, A., Corney, M., and Mohay, G. (2001) ‘Mining e-mail content for author 
identification forensics’, SIGMOD: Special Section on Data Mining for Intrusion Detection 
and Threat Analysis. 
Veldhuis, R.N.J., Bazen, A.M., Kauffman, J.A., and Hartel, P.H. (2004) ‘Biometric verification 
based on grip-pattern recognition’, Security, Steganography, and Watermarking of Multimedia 
Contents. 
Wagner, D. and Dean, D. (2001) ‘Intrusion detection via static analysis’, IEEE Symposium on 
Security and Privacy. 
Wark, T., Thambiratnam, D., and Sridharan, S. (1997) ‘Person authentication using lip 
information’, Proceedings of IEEE 10th Annual Conference: Speech and Image Technologies 
for Computing and Telecommunications. 
Warrender, C., Forrest, S., and Pearlmutter, B. (1999) ‘Detecting intrusions using system calls: 
alternative data models’, Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 
Oakland, CA, USA. 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
    Behavioural biometrics: a survey and classification 113    
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
       
 
Wespi, A., Dacier, M., and Debar, H. (2000) ‘Intrusion detection using variable-length audit trail 
patterns’, Recent Advances in Intrusion Detrection (RAID). 
Westeyn, T., Pesti, P., Park, K., and Starner, T. (2005) ‘Biometric identification using song-based 
eye blink patterns’, Human Computer Interaction International (HCII), Las Vegas, NV. 
Westeyn, T. and Starner, T. (2004) ‘Recognising song-based blink patterns: applications for 
restricted and universal access’, Sixth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and 
Gesture Recognition. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. (2006) ‘Behaviour based identification of network intruders’, 19th Annual CSE 
Graduate Conference (Grad-Conf 2006), Buffalo, NY. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. (2007a) ‘Human computer interaction based intrusion detection’, 4th 
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2007), Las 
Vegas, Nevada, USA. 
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2007b) ‘Indirect human computer interaction-based biometrics for intrusion 
detection systems’, The 41st Annual IEEE International Carnahan Conference on Security 
Technology (ICCST 2007), Ottawa, Canada. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. (2007c) ‘Motor-skill based biometrics’, Assuring Business Processes, 
Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, G. Dhillon (ed), Global Publishing, Las 
Vegas, NV, USA. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. and Govindaraju, V. (2006a) ‘Similarity measure functions for strategy-based 
biometrics’, International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP 2006), Vienna, Austria. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. and Govindaraju, V. (2006b) ‘Use of behavioural biometrics in intrusion 
detection and online gaming. biometric technology for human identification III’, SPIE Defense 
and Security Symposium, Orlando, Florida. 
Yampolskiy, R.V. and Govindaraju, V. (2007) ‘Dissimilarity functions for behaviour-based 
biometrics’, Biometric Technology for Human Identification IV, SPIE Defense and Security 
Symposium, Orlando, Florida. 
Ye, N. (2000) ‘A markov chain model of temporal behaviour for anomaly detection’, Proceedings 
of the 2000 IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Information Assurance and Security 
Workshop. 
Yeung, D.Y. and Ding, Y. (2002) ‘Host-based intrusion detection using dynamic and static 
behavioural models’, Pattern Recognition, Vol. 36, pp.229-243. 
Zhang, Y. and Wang, D. (2006) ‘Research on object storage-based intrusion detection’, 12th 
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS). 
Zhang, Z. and Manikopoulos, C. (2003) ‘Investigation of neural network classification of computer 
network attacks’, International Conference on Information Technology: Research and 
Education. 
Zhu, Y., Tan, T., and Wang, Y. (2000) ‘Biometric personal identification based on handwriting’, 
15th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR ‘00). 
