1
Copyright © 2010, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter 1
Taxonomy of Behavioural 
Biometrics
Roman V. Yampolskiy
University of Louisville, USA
Venu Govindaraju
University at Buffalo, USA
IntroductIon to 
BehavIoral BIometrIcs
With the proliferation of computers in our every day 
lives need for reliable computer security steadily 
increases. Biometric technologies provide user 
friendly and reliable control methodology for ac-
cess to computer systems, networks and workplaces 
(Angle, Bhagtani, & Chheda, 2005; Dugelay, et al., 
2002; Lee & Park, 2003). The majority of research 
is aimed at studying well established physical bio-
metrics such as fingerprint (Cappelli, Maio, Maltoni, 
Wayman, & Jain, 2006) or iris scans (Jain, Ross, & 
Prabhakar, 2004d). Behavioural biometrics systems 
are usually less established, and only those which 
are in large part based on muscle control such as 
keystrokes, gait or signature are well analyzed 
(Bolle, Connell, Pankanti, Ratha, & Senior, 2003; 
Delac & Grgic, 2004; Jain, Pankanti, Prabhakar, 
Hong, & Ross, 2004c; Ruggles, 2007; Solayap-
pan & Latifi, 2006; Uludag, Pankanti, Prabhakar, 
& Jain, 2004).
Behavioural biometrics provide a number of 
advantages over traditional biometric technologies. 
They can be collected non-obtrusively or even 
without the knowledge of the user. Collection of 
aBstract
This chapter presents a taxonomy of the latest behavioural biometrics, including some future oriented 
approaches. Current research in the field is examined and analyzed along with the features used to 
describe different types of behaviour. After comparing accuracy rates for verification of users using dif-
ferent behavioural biometric approaches, researchers address privacy issues which arise or might arise 
in the future with the use of behavioural biometrics. Finally, generalized properties of behaviour are 
addressed as well as influence of environmental factors on observed behaviour and potential directions 
for future research in behavioural biometrics.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-60566-725-6.ch001
2
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
behavioural data often does not require any special 
hardware and is so very cost effective. While most 
behavioural biometrics are not unique enough to 
provide reliable human identification they have 
been shown to provide sufficiently high accuracy 
identity verification. This chapter is based on 
“Behavioral Biometrics: a Survey and Classifi-
cation.” by R. Yampolskiy and V. Govindaraju, 
which appeared in the International Journal of 
Biometrics, 1(1), 81-113. The chapter presents a 
new comprehensive overview and improvements 
on research previously published in a number of 
publications including: (Yampolskiy, 2006, 2007a, 
2007b, 2007c, 2007d, 2008a, 2008b; Yampolskiy 
& Govindaraju, 2006a, 2006b, 2007a, 2007b, 
2008)
In accomplishing their everyday tasks human 
beings employ different strategies, use different 
styles and apply unique skills and knowledge. One 
of the defining characteristics of a behavioural 
biometric is the incorporation of time dimension as 
a part of the behavioural signature. The measured 
behaviour has a beginning, duration, and an end 
(Bioprivacy.org, 2005a). Behavioural biometrics 
researchers attempt to quantify behavioural traits 
exhibited by users and use resulting feature profiles 
to successfully verify identity (Bromme, 2003). In 
this section authors present an overview of most 
established behavioural biometrics.
Behavioural biometrics can be classified into 
five categories based on the type of information 
about the user being collected. Category one is 
made up of authorship based biometrics, which are 
based on examining a piece of text or a drawing 
produced by a person. Verification is accomplished 
by observing style peculiarities typical to the au-
thor of the work being examined, such as the used 
vocabulary, punctuation or brush strokes.
Category two consists of Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI) based biometrics (Yampolskiy, 
2007a). In their everyday interaction with com-
puters human beings employ different strategies, 
use different style and apply unique abilities and 
knowledge. Researchers attempt to quantify such 
traits and use resulting feature profiles to success-
fully verify identity. HCI-based biometrics can be 
further subdivided into additional categories, first 
one consisting of human interaction with input 
devices such as keyboards, computer mice, and 
haptics which can register inherent, distinctive 
and consistent muscle actions (Bioprivacy.org, 
2005b). The second group consists of HCI-based 
behavioural biometrics which measure advanced 
human behaviour such as strategy, knowledge or 
skill exhibited by the user during interaction with 
different software.
Third group is closely related to the second one 
and is the set of the indirect HCI-based biomet-
rics which are the events that can be obtained by 
monitoring user’s HCI behaviours indirectly via 
observable low-level actions of computer soft-
ware (Yampolskiy, 2007b). Those include system 
call traces (Denning, 1987), audit logs (Ilgun, 
Kemmerer, & Porras, 1995), program execution 
traces (Ghosh, Schwartzbard, & Schatz, 1999a), 
registry access (Apap, Honig, Hershkop, Eskin, 
& Stolfo, 2002), storage activity (Pennington, et 
al., 2002), call-stack data analysis (Feng, Kole-
snikov, Fogla, Lee, & Gong, 2003b) and system 
calls (Garg, Rahalkar, Upadhyaya, & Kwiat, 2006 
; Pusara & Brodley, 2004). Such low-level events 
are produced unintentionally by the user during 
interaction with different software.
Same HCI-based biometrics are sometimes 
known to different researchers under different 
names. IDS based on system calls or audit logs 
are often classified as utilizing program execution 
traces and those based on call-stack data as based 
on system calls. The confusion is probably related 
to the fact that a lot of interdependency exists 
between different indirect behavioural biometrics 
and they are frequently used in combinations to 
improve accuracy of the system being developed. 
For example system calls and program counter 
data may be combined in the same behavioural 
signature or audit logs may contain information 
about system calls. Also one can’t forget that a 
human being is indirectly behind each one of those 
3
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
reflections of behaviour and so a large degree of 
correlation is to be expected.
Fourth and probably the best researched group 
of behavioural biometrics relies on motor-skills of 
the users to accomplish verification (Yampolskiy, 
2007c). Motor-skill is an ability of a human being 
to utilize muscles. Muscle movements rely upon 
the proper functioning of the brain, skeleton, 
joints, and nervous system and so motor skills 
indirectly reflect the quality of functioning of 
such systems, making person verification possible. 
Most motor skills are learned, not inherited, with 
disabilities having potential to affect the develop-
ment of motor skills. Authors adopt definition for 
motor-skill based behavioural biometrics, a.k.a. 
kinetics, as those biometrics which are based on 
innate, unique and stable muscle actions of the 
user while performing a particular task (Caslon.
com.au, 2005).
Fifth and final category consists of purely 
behavioural biometrics. Purely behavioural bio-
metrics are those which measure human behav-
iour directly not concentrating on measurements 
of body parts or intrinsic, inimitable and lasting 
muscle actions such as the way an individual walks, 
types or even grips a tool (Caslon.com.au, 2005). 
Human beings utilize different strategies, skills 
and knowledge during performance of mentally 
demanding tasks. Purely behavioural biometrics 
quantify such behavioural traits and make suc-
cessful identity verification a possibility.
All of the behavioural biometrics reviewed 
in this chapter share a number of characteristics 
and so can be analyzed as a group using seven 
properties of good biometrics presented by Jain 
et al. (Jain, Bolle, & Pankanti, 1999; Jain, et al., 
2004d). It is a good idea to check them before 
declaring some characteristics suitable for the 
automated recognition of individuals.
• Universality: Behavioural biometrics are 
dependent on specific abilities possessed 
by different people to a different degree 
or not at all and so in a general population 
universality of behavioural biometrics is 
very low. But since behavioural biometrics 
are only applied in a specific domain, the 
actual universality of behavioural biomet-
rics is a 100%.
• Uniqueness: Since only a small set of dif-
ferent approaches to performing any task 
exists uniqueness of behavioural biomet-
rics is relatively low. Number of existing 
writing styles, different game strategies 
and varying preferences are only sufficient 
for user verification not identification un-
less the set of users is extremely small 
(Adler, Youmaran, & Loyka, 2006).
• Permanence: Behavioural biometrics ex-
hibit a low degree of permanence as they 
measure behaviour which changes with 
time as person learns advanced techniques 
and faster ways of accomplishing tasks. 
However, this problem of concept drift is 
addressed in the behaviour based intrusion 
detection research and systems are devel-
oped capable of adjusting to the chang-
ing behaviour of the users (Koychev & 
Schwab, 2000; Tsymbal, 2004).
• Collectability: Collecting behavioural bi-
ometrics is relatively easy and unobtrusive 
to the user. In some instances the user may 
not even be aware that data collection is 
taking place. The process of data collection 
is fully automated and is very low cost.
• Performance: The identification accura-
cy of most behavioural biometrics is low 
particularly as the number of users in the 
database becomes large. However verifica-
tion accuracy is very good for some behav-
ioural biometrics.
• Acceptability: Since behavioural biomet-
ric characteristics can be collected without 
user participation they enjoy a high degree 
of acceptability, but might be objected to 
for ethical or privacy reasons.
• Circumvention: It is relatively difficult to 
get around behavioural biometric systems 
4
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
as it requires intimate knowledge of some-
one else’s behaviour, but once such knowl-
edge is available fabrication might be very 
straightforward (Schuckers, 2002). This 
is why it is extremely important to keep 
the collected behavioural profiles securely 
encrypted.
Background on 
BehavIoral research
It is often the case in the scientific discovery pro-
cess that multiple sub-fields of science study the 
same concept simultaneously but are not aware 
of the contributions made in the other fields to 
what essentially is the same problem. Multiple 
disciplines use different motivation for their 
research as well as create unique vocabulary to 
deal with the problem at hand. A lot of progress 
in finding a solution to such a problem can be 
made by realizing similarity of research goals 
and making scientists realize the wealth of avail-
able techniques from other fields which may be 
used with little to no modification for solving a 
problem at hand. We start by presenting just such 
a problem addressed by many fields, which are 
relatively unaware of each other, but all attempt 
to model human behaviour.
• User Profiling: is studied by researchers in 
the field of Intrusion Detection. It consists 
of observing someone interacting with a 
computer, creating a model of such be-
haviour and using it as a template for what 
is considered a normal behaviour for that 
particular user. If the behaviour of suppos-
edly the same user is significantly different 
we can speculate that perhaps it is a differ-
ent user masquerading as the user whose 
profile is stored in our security system as 
a template.
• User Modelling: is studied for market-
ing and customization purposes. It aims at 
creating a representation of the user for the 
purpose of customizing products and ser-
vice to better suite the user. For example 
software can be made to only display op-
tions which are in the field of interest of 
this particular user making it easier for him 
to interact with an otherwise very compli-
cated piece of software.
• Opponent Modelling: is related to the 
field of Game Theory and studies different 
models for understanding and predicting 
behaviour of players in different games. 
While for many games such as chess it is 
sufficient for victory to play the best pos-
sible strategy and ignore the unique behav-
iour of your opponent in many other games 
such as poker it is not. Having a well per-
forming prediction model of your oppo-
nent’s behaviour can give you an edge nec-
essary to defeat him in an otherwise equal 
game.
• Criminal Profiling: as done by police and 
FBI investigators is the practice of trying 
to determine personality and identity of 
an individual who has committed a crime 
based on the behaviour, which was exhib-
ited during the criminal act.
• Jury Profiling: is a technique used by law-
yers to attempt to predict how a particular 
potential juror will vote with respect to the 
verdict based on juror’s current behaviour, 
answers to a questioner and overall physi-
cal and psychological appearance of the 
juror.
While the researchers faced with the above 
problems represent relatively unrelated disciplines 
they are all essentially trying to achieve the same 
exact goals. They want to be able to do the fol-
lowing: By analyzing past and current actions 
create an accurate model of individual human’s 
behavior capable of predicting future actions based 
on a given situation and environmental factors. 
Given a description of behavior either identify 
5
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
an individual likely to conduct himself in such 
manner or to verify if a given individual is likely 
to behave in such a way (Yampolskiy, 2008a).
Basically in its most generalized form the 
problem boils down to a mapping from the set 
of behaviors to individuals and vise versa. How-
ever we can ask if it is possible to create more 
complicated mappings between personality and 
behavior.
Given occurrence of some behavior by an indi-
vidual can we predict happening of another smil-
ingly unrelated behavior by the same individual? It 
is obvious that in the case of related behaviors the 
answer is definitely - yes, for example someone 
who buys a first and second album by a famous 
rap artist is likely to also purchase a third one. 
But in the case of completely unrelated behaviors 
we don’t have any strong evidence supporting or 
disproving possibility of such correspondence. For 
example do people who collect stamps are also 
more likely to enjoy horseback riding?
Some research suggests that there is a connec-
tion between one set of behaviors and another. 
Rentfrow et al. in the Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology report that they found a con-
nection between person’s musical preferences 
and other unrelated social behaviors (Rentfrow & 
Gosling, 2005). The most famous example from 
the field of data mining tells us that people who 
buy diapers also tend to buy beer while at the store. 
Clearly this is a very interesting and beneficial area 
of research. The possible applications for cross-
behavioral prediction are numerous. Perhaps it is 
possible to make judgments about intelligence or 
health of an individual from something as benign 
as routine computer interaction. Maybe we can 
learn to judge suitability of a potential mate from 
table manners or find a reliable business partner 
by watching a person park his car.
Another interesting question to ask is: if two dif-
ferent individuals have similar behavioral profiles 
and individual A performs a novel behavior is it 
likely that individual B will also perform the same 
behavior in the near future. Intuitively it seems 
very plausible, for example, if two different people 
recently got married and left on a honeymoon we 
can expect that seeing one of them buy baby related 
items may allow us to predict similar purchases 
by the other in the nearest future. Obviously in 
this contrived example we had alternative ways 
of figuring this out.
It would seem desirable to have a single 
discipline devoted to solving such an important 
problem for many fields, but in reality a number 
of somewhat different fields all attempt to work 
on it to some degree, not mentioning the fields 
listed above we have:
• Behaviormetrics: which studies human 
behavior on the basis of statistics and in-
formation technology. Methodology in be-
havioral sciences is studied and mathemat-
ical or statistical models for understanding 
human behavior are developed (Yutaka, 
2005).
• Behavioral Sciences: “essentially inves-
tigates the decision processes and com-
munication strategies within and between 
organisms in a social system. BS encom-
passes all the disciplines that explore the 
behavior and strategies within and between 
organisms in the natural world. It involves 
the systematic analysis and investigation 
of humans and animal behavior, through 
controlled and naturalistic experimental 
observations and rigorous formulations” 
(Wikipedia.org, 2005).
Both of which can be put under a more gen-
eral umbrella of science of psychology defined 
as: “scientific study of human behavior, mental 
processes, and how they are affected and/or affect 
an individuals or group’s physical state, mental 
state, and external environment. It’s goal is to de-
scribe, understand, predict, and modify behavior” 
(Elissetche, 2005).
6
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
descrIptIon of 
BehavIoural BIometrIcs
Table 1 shows behavioural biometrics covered 
in this paper classified according to the five 
categories outlined above (Yampolskiy & Gov-
indaraju, 2008). Many of the reviewed biometrics 
are cross listed in multiple categories due to their 
dependence on multiple behavioural attributes. In 
addition enrolment time and verification time (D 
=days, H=hours, M=Minutes, S=Seconds) of the 
listed biometrics is provided as well as any hard-
ware required for the collection of the biometric 
characteristic data. Out of all the listed behavioural 
biometrics only two are believed to be useful not 
just for person verification but also for reliable 
large scale person identification, those are: signa-
ture/handwriting and speech. Other behavioural 
biometrics may be used for identification purposes 
but are not reliable enough to be employed in that 
capacity in the real world applications.
Presented next are short overviews of the 
most researched behavioural biometrics listed in 
alphabetical order (Yampolskiy & Govindaraju, 
2008).
audit logs
Most modern operating systems keep some re-
cords of user activity and program interaction. 
While such audit trails can be of some interest 
to behavioural intrusion detection researchers, 
specialized audit trails specifically designed for 
security enforcement can be potentially much more 
powerful. A typical audit log may contain such 
information as: CPU and I/O usage, number of 
connections from each location, whether a direc-
tory was accessed, a file created, another user ID 
changed, audit record was modified, amount of 
activity for the system, network and host (Lunt, 
1993). Experimentally it has been shown that col-
lecting audit events is a less intrusive technique 
than recording system calls (Wespi, Dacier, & 
Debar, 2000). Because an enormous amount of 
auditing data can be generated overwhelming an 
intrusion detection system it has been suggested 
that a random sampling might be a reasonable 
approach to auditing data (Anderson, 1980). Ad-
ditional data might be helpful in distinguishing 
suspicious activity from normal behaviour. For 
example facts about changes in user status, new 
users being added, terminated users, users on 
vocations, or changed job assignments might be 
needed to reduce the number of false positives 
produced by the IDS (Lunt, 1993). Since so much 
potentially valuable information can be captured 
by the audit logs a large number of researchers 
are attracted to this form of indirect HCI-based 
biometric (Denning, 1987; Ilgun, et al., 1995; Ko, 
Fink, & Levitt, 1994; Lee, Stolfo, & Mok, 1999; 
Li, Wu, Jajodia, & Wang, 2002; Michael, 2003; 
Michael & Ghosh, 2000; Seleznyov & Puuronen, 
1999; Ye, 2000).
Biometric sketch
Bromme et al. (Al-Zubi, Brömme, & Tönnies, 
2003; Brömme & Al-Zubi, 2003) proposed a 
biometric sketch authentication method based 
on sketch recognition and a user’s personal 
knowledge about the drawings content. The 
system directs a user to create a simple sketch 
for example of three circles and each user is free 
to do so in any way he pleases. Because a large 
number of different combinations exist for comb-
ing multiple simple structural shapes sketches of 
different users are sufficiently unique to provide 
accurate authentication. The approach measures 
user’s knowledge about the sketch, which is only 
available to the previously authenticated user. 
Such features as the sketches location and rela-
tive position of different primitives are taken as 
the profile of the sketch. Similar approaches are 
tried by (Varenhorst, 2004) with a system called 
Passdoodles and also by (Jermyn, Mayer, Mon-
rose, Reiter, & Rubin, 1999) with a system called 
Draw-a-Secret. Finally a V-go Password requests a 
user to perform simulation of simple actions such 
7
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Table 1. Classification and properties of behavioural biometrics (©2008. Inderscience Publishers Ltd. 
Used with permission.) 
Classification of the Various Types of 
Behavioural Biometrics
A
ut
ho
rs
hi
p
Direct 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction
In
di
re
ct
 H
um
an
 
C
om
pu
te
r 
In
te
ra
ct
io
n
M
ot
or
 S
ki
ll
Pu
re
ly
 B
eh
av
io
ur
al
Properties of Behavioural 
Biometrics
In
pu
t D
ev
ic
e 
In
te
ra
ct
io
n 
B
as
ed
So
ft
w
ar
e 
In
te
ra
ct
io
n 
B
as
ed
E
nr
ol
m
en
t t
im
e
Ve
ri
fic
at
io
n 
tim
e
Id
en
tif
ic
at
io
n
R
eq
ui
re
d 
H
ar
dw
ar
e
Audit Logs ● D D N Computer
Biometric Sketch ● ● M S N Mouse
Blinking ● M S N Camera
Call-Stack ● D H N Computer
Calling Behaviour ● D D N Phone
Car Driving Style ● H M N Car Sensors
Command Line Lexicon ● ● H H N Computer
Credit Card Use ● D D N Credit Card
Dynamic Facial Features ● M S N Camera
Email Behaviour ● ● ● D M N Computer
Gait/Stride ● M S N Camera
Game Strategy ● ● H H N Computer
GUI Interaction ● D H N Computer
Handgrip ● M S N Gun Sensors
Haptic ● ● M M N Haptic
Keystroke Dynamics ● ● M S N Keyboard
Lip Movement ● M S N Camera
Mouse Dynamics ● ● M S N Mouse
Network Traffic ● D D N Computer
Painting Style ● ● D D N Scanner
Programming Style ● ● ● H H N Computer
Registry Access ● D H N Computer
Signature/Handwriting ● M S Y Stylus
Storage Activity ● D D N Computer
System Calls ● D H N Computer
Tapping ● M S N Sensor
Text Authorship ● ● H M N Computer
Voice/Speech/Singing ● M S Y Microphone
8
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
as mixing a cocktail using a graphical interface, 
with the assumption that all users have a personal 
approach to bartending (Renaud, 2003).
Blinking
(Westeyn, Pesti, Park, & Starner, 2005; Westeyn 
& Starner, 2004) have developed a system for 
identifying users by analyzing voluntary song-
based blink patterns. During the enrolment phase 
user looks at the system’s camera and blinks to the 
beat of a song he has previously chosen produc-
ing a so-called “blinkprint”. During verification 
phase the user’s blinking is compared to the da-
tabase of the stored blinked patterns to determine 
which song is being blinked and as a result user 
identification is possible. In addition to the blink 
pattern itself supplementary features can also be 
extracted such as: time between blinks, how long 
the eye is held closed at each blink, and other 
physical characteristics the eye undergoes while 
blinking. Based on those additional features it was 
shown to be feasible to distinguish users blink-
ing the same exact pattern and not just a secretly 
selected song.
call-stack
Feng et al. (Feng, Kolesnikov, Fogla, Lee, & Gong, 
2003a) developed a method for performing anom-
aly detection using call stack information. The 
program counter indicates the current execution 
point of a program; and since each instruction of a 
program corresponds to a unique program counter 
this information is useful for intrusion detection. 
The idea is to extract return addresses from the 
call stack and generate an abstract execution path 
between two program execution points. This path 
is analyzed to decide whether this path is valid 
based on what has been learned during the normal 
execution of the program. Return addresses are a 
particularly good source of information on suspi-
cious behaviour. The approach has been shown 
capable of detecting some attacks that could not 
be detected by other approaches, while retaining 
a comparable false positive rate (Feng, et al., 
2003a). Additional research into call-stack-based 
intruder detection has been performed by Giffin 
et al. (Giffin, Jha, & Miller, 2004) and Liu et al. 
(Liu & Bridges, 2005).
calling Behavior
With the proliferation of the mobile cellular 
phone networks, communication companies are 
faced with the increasing amount of fraudulent 
calling activity. In order to automatically detect 
theft of service many companies are turning to 
behavioural user profiling with the hopes of de-
tecting unusual calling patterns and be able to stop 
fraud at an earliest possible time. Typical systems 
work by generating a user calling profile which 
consist of use indicators such as: date and time 
of the call, duration, called ID, called number, 
cost of call, number of calls to a local destination, 
number of calls to mobile destinations, number 
of calls to international destinations and the total 
statistics about the calls for the day (Hilas & 
Sahalos, 2005). Grosser et al. (Grosser, Britos, & 
García-Martínez, 2005) have shown that neural 
networks can be successfully applied to such a 
feature vector for the purpose of fraud detection. 
Cahill et al. (Cahill, Lambert, Pinheiro, & Sun, 
2000) have addressed ways to improve the selec-
tion of the threshold values which are compared 
with account summaries to see if fraud has taken 
place. Fawcett et al. (Fawcett & Provost, 1997) 
developed a rule-learning program to uncover 
indicators of fraudulent behaviour from a large 
database of customer transactions.
car driving style
People tend to operate vehicles in very different 
ways, some drivers are safe and slow others are 
much more aggressive and often speed and tailgate. 
As a result, driving behavior can be successfully 
treated as a behavioural biometric. Erdogan et al. 
9
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
(Erdogan, et al., 2005a; Erdogan, et al., 2005b; 
Erzin, et al., 2006) have shown that by analyzing 
pressure readings from accelerator pedal and brake 
pedal in kilogram force per square centimetre, ve-
hicle speed in revolutions per minute, and steering 
angle within the range of -720 to + 720 degrees 
it is possible to achieve genuine versus impostor 
driver authentication. Gaussian mixture modelling 
was used to process the resulting feature vectors, 
after some initial smoothing and sub-sampling of 
the driving signal. Similar results were obtained 
by Igarashi et al. (Igarashi, et al., 2004) on the 
same set of multimodal data. Liu et al. (Liu & 
Salvucci, 2001) in their work on prediction of 
driver behaviour have demonstrated that inclu-
sion of the driver’s visual scanning behaviour can 
further enhance accuracy of the driver behaviour 
model. Once fully developed, driver recognition 
can be used for car personalization, theft preven-
tion, as well as for detection of drunk or sleepy 
drivers. With so many potential benefits from this 
technology, research in driver behaviour modelling 
is not solely limited to the biometrics community 
(Kuge, Yamamura, & Shimoyama, 1998; Oliver 
& Pentland, 2000).
command line lexicon
A popular approach to the construction of behav-
iour based intrusion detection systems, is based 
on profiling the set of commands utilized by the 
user in the process of interaction with the operating 
system. A frequent target of such research is UNIX 
operating system, probably due to it having mostly 
command line nature. User’s differ greatly in their 
level of familiarity with the command set and all 
the possible arguments which can be applied to 
individual commands. Regardless of how well a 
user knows the set of available commands; most 
are fairly consistent in their choice of commands 
used to accomplish a particular task.
A user profile typically consists of a list of 
used commands together with corresponding 
frequency counts, and lists of arguments to the 
commands. Data collection process is often time 
consuming since as many as 15,000 individual 
commands need to be collected for the system 
to achieve high degree of accuracy (Maxion & 
Townsend, 2002b; Schonlau, et al., 2001). Ad-
ditional information about the secession may also 
be included in the profile such as the login host 
and login time, which help to improve accuracy 
of the user profile as it is likely that users perform 
different actions on different hosts (Dao & Vemuri, 
2000). Overall, this line of research is extremely 
popular (Lane & Brodley, 1997a, 1997b; Marin, 
Ragsdale, & Surdu, 2001; Yeung & Ding), but 
recently a shift has been made towards user profil-
ing in a graphical environment such as Windows 
as most users prefer convenience of a Graphical 
User Interface (GUI). Typical features extracted 
from the user’s interaction with a windows based 
machine include: time between windows, time 
between new windows, number of windows 
simultaneously open, and number of words in a 
window title (Goldring, 2003; Kaufman, Cervone, 
& Michalski, 2003).
credit card use
Data mining techniques are frequently used in 
detection of credit card fraud. Looking out for 
statistical outliers such as unusual transactions, 
payments to far away geographical locations or 
simultaneous use of a card at multiple locations 
can all be signs of a stolen account. Outliers are 
considerably different from the remainder of the 
data points and can be detected by using discor-
dancy tests. Approaches for fraud related outlier 
detection are based on distance, density, projection, 
and distribution analysis methods. A generalized 
approach to finding outliers is to assume a known 
statistical distribution for the data and to evaluate 
the deviation of samples from the distribution. 
Brause et al. (Brause, Langsdorf, & Hepp, 1999) 
have used symbolic and analog number data to 
detect credit card fraud. Such transaction informa-
tion as account number, transaction type, credit 
10
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
card type, merchant ID, merchant address, etc. 
were used in their rule based model. They have 
also shown that analog data alone can’t serve as 
a satisfying source for detection of fraudulent 
transactions.
dynamic facial features
Pamudurthy et al. (Pamudurthy, Guan, Mueller, & 
Rafailovich, 2005) proposed a dynamic approach 
to face recognition based on dynamic instead of 
static facial features. They track the motion of 
skin pores on the face during a facial expression 
and obtain a vector field that characterizes the 
deformation of the face. In the training process, 
two high-resolution images of an individual, one 
with a neutral expression and the other with a facial 
expression, like a subtle smile, are taken to obtain 
the deformation field (Mainguet, 2006).
Smile recognition research in particular is a 
subfield of dynamic facial feature recognition 
currently gaining in prominence (Ito, Wang, Su-
zuki, & Makino, 2005). The existing systems rely 
on probing the characteristic pattern of muscles 
beneath the skin of the user’s face. Two images 
of a person in quick progression are taken, with 
subjects smiling for the camera in the second 
sample. An analysis is later performed of how the 
skin around the subject’s mouth moves between 
the two images. This movement is controlled by 
the pattern of muscles under the skin, and is not 
affected by the presence of make-up or the degree 
to which the subject smiles (Mainguet, 2006).
email Behaviour
Email sending behaviour is not the same for all 
individuals. Some people work at night and send 
dozens of emails to many different addresses; oth-
ers only check mail in the morning and only corre-
spond with one or two people. All this peculiarities 
can be used to create a behavioural profile which 
can serve as a behavioural biometric characteristic 
for an individual. Length of the emails, time of 
the day the mail is sent, how frequently inbox is 
emptied and of course the recipients’ addresses 
among other variables can all be combined to cre-
ate a baseline feature vector for the person’s email 
behaviour. Some work in using email behaviour 
modelling was done by Stolfo et al. (Stolfo, Her-
shkop, Wang, Nimeskern, & Hu, 2003a; Stolfo, et 
al., 2003b). They have investigated possibility of 
detecting virus propagation via email by observ-
ing abnormalities in the email sending behaviour, 
such as unusual clique of recipients for the same 
email. For example sending the same email to 
your girlfriend and your boss is not an everyday 
occurrence.
De Vel et al. (Vel, Anderson, Corney, & Mohay, 
2001) have applied authorship identification tech-
niques to determine the likely author of an email 
message. Alongside the typical features used in text 
authorship identification authors also used some 
email specific structural features such as: use of 
a greeting, farewell acknowledgment, signature, 
number of attachments, position of re-quoted text 
within the message body, HTML tag frequency dis-
tribution and total number of HTML tags. Overall, 
almost 200 features are used in the experiment, 
but some frequently cited features used in text 
authorship determination are not appropriate in 
the domain of email messages due to the shorter 
average size of such communications.
gait/stride
Gait is one of the best researched muscle control 
based biometrics (BenAbdelkader, Cutler, & Da-
vis, 2002; Kale, et al., 2004; Nixon & Carter, 2004), 
it is a complex spatio-temporal motor-control 
behaviour which allows biometric recognition 
of individuals at a distance usually from captured 
video. Gait is subject to significant variations 
based on changes in person’s body weight, wad-
dling during pregnancy, injuries of extremities or 
of the brain, or due to intoxication (Jain, et al., 
1999). Typical features include: amount of arm 
swing, rhythm of the walker, bounce, length of 
11
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
steps, vertical distance between head and foot, 
distance between head and pelvis, maximum 
distance between the left and right foot (Kaly-
anaraman, 2006).
game strategy
Yampolskiy et al. (Yampolskiy, 2006; Yampolskiy 
& Govindaraju, 2006b, 2007b) proposed a system 
for verification of online poker players based on a 
behavioural profile which represents a statistical 
model of player’s strategy. The profile consists 
of frequency measures indicating range of cards 
considered by the player at all stages of the game. 
It also measures how aggressive the player is via 
such variables as percentages of re-raised hands. 
The profile is actually human readable meaning 
that a poker expert can analyze and understand 
strategy employed by the player from observing 
his or her behavioural profile (poker-edge.com, 
2006). For example just by knowing the percent-
age of hands a particular player chooses to play 
pre-flop it is possible to determine which cards are 
being played with high degree of accuracy.
Ramon et al. (Ramon & Jacobs, 2002) have 
demonstrated possibility of identifying Go players 
based on their style of game play. They analyzed 
a number of Go specific features such as type 
of opening moves, how early such moves are 
made and total number of liberties in the formed 
groups. They also speculate that the decision tree 
approach they have developed can be applied to 
other games such as Chess or Checkers.
Jansen et al. (Jansen, Dowe, & E., 2000) re-
port on their research in chess strategy inference 
from game records. In particular they were able 
to surmise good estimates of the weights used 
in the evaluation function of computer chess 
players and later applied same techniques to 
human grandmasters. Their approach is aimed 
at predicting future moves made by the players, 
but the opponent model created with some ad-
ditional processing can be utilized for opponent 
identification or at least verification. This can be 
achieved by comparing new moves made by the 
player with predicted once from models for dif-
ferent players and using the achieved accuracy 
scores as an indication of which profile models 
which player.
guI Interaction
Expanding on the idea of monitoring user’s key-
board and mouse activity Garg et al. (Garg, et al., 
2006) developed a system for collecting Graphi-
cal User Interface (GUI) interaction-based data. 
Collected data allows for generation of advanced 
behavioural profiles of the system’s users. Such 
comprehensive data may provide additional in-
formation not available form typically analyzed 
command line data. With proliferation of GUI 
based systems a shift towards security systems 
based on GUI interaction data, as opposed to com-
mand line data, is a natural progression. Ideally the 
collected data would include high-level detailed 
information about the GUI related actions of the 
user such as: left click on the Start menu, double 
click on explorer.exe, close Notepad.exe window, 
etc. Software generated by Garg et al. records all 
possible low-level user activities on the system in 
real time, including: system background processes, 
user run commands, keyboard activity and mouse 
clicks. All collected information is time stamped 
and pre-processed to reduce the amount of data 
actually used for intrusion detection purposes 
(Garg, et al., 2006).
handgrip
Developed mostly for gun control applications 
grip-pattern recognition approach assumes that 
users hold the gun in a sufficiently unique way 
to permit user verification to take place. By in-
corporating a hardware sensor array in the gun’s 
butt Kauffman et al. (Kauffman, Bazen, Gerez, 
& Veldhuis, 2003; Veldhuis, Bazen, Kauffman, & 
Hartel, 2004) were able to get resistance measure-
ments in as many as 44 x 44 points which are used 
12
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
in creation of a feature vector. Obtained pressure 
points are taken as pixels in the pressure pattern 
image used as input for verification algorithm 
based on a likelihood-ratio classifier for Gauss-
ian probability densities (Kauffman, et al., 2003). 
Experiments showed that more experienced gun 
users tended to be more accurately verified as 
compared to first time subjects.
haptic
Haptic systems are computer input/output devices 
which can provide us with information about 
direction, pressure, force, angle, speed, and posi-
tion of user’s interactions (Orozco, Asfaw, Adler, 
Shirmohammadi, & Saddik, 2005; Orozco, Asfaw, 
Shirmohammadi, Adler, & Saddik, 2006). Because 
so much information is available about the user’s 
performance a high degree of accuracy can be 
expected from a haptic based biometrics system. 
Orozco et al. (Orozco, et al., 2005; Orozco, et al., 
2006) have created a simple haptic application 
built on an elastic membrane surface in which 
the user is required to navigate a stylus through 
the maze. The maze has gummy walls and a 
stretchy floor. The application collects data about 
the ability of the user to navigate the maze, such 
as reaction time to release from sticky wall, the 
route, the velocity, and the pressure applied to 
the floor. The individual user profiles are made 
up of such information as 3D world location of 
the pen, average speed, mean velocity, mean 
standard deviation, navigation style, angular turns 
and rounded turns.
In a separate experiment Orozco et al. (Trujillo, 
Shakra, & Saddik, 2005) implement a virtual 
mobile phone application where the user interacts 
through a haptic pen to simulate making a phone 
call via a touch pad. The keystroke duration, pen’s 
position, and exerted force are used as the raw 
features collected for user profiling.
keystroke dynamics
Typing patterns are characteristic to each person, 
some people are experienced typists utilizing the 
touch-typing method, and others utilize the hunt-
and-peck approach which uses only two fingers. 
Those differences make verification of people 
based on their typing patterns a proven possibil-
ity, some reports suggest identification is also 
possible (Ilonen, 2006). For verification a small 
typing sample such as the input of user’s password 
is sufficient, but for recognition a large amount 
of keystroke data is needed and identification is 
based on comparisons with the profiles of all other 
existing users already in the system.
Keystroke features are based on time durations 
between the keystrokes, inter-key strokes and 
dwell times, which is the time a key is pressed 
down, overall typing speed, frequency of errors 
(use of backspace), use of numpad, order in 
which user presses shift key to get capital let-
ters and possibly the force with which keys are 
hit for specially equipped keyboards (Ilonen, 
2006; Jain, et al., 1999). Keystroke dynamics is 
probably the most researched type of HCI-based 
biometric characteristic (Bergadano, Gunetti, & 
Picardi, 2002 ; Monrose & Rubin, March 2000), 
with novel research taking place in different lan-
guages (Gunetti, Picardi, & Ruffo, 2005), for long 
text samples, (Bartolacci, et al., 2005; Curtin, et 
al., 2006) and for email authorship identification 
(Gupta, Mazumdar, & Rao, 2004).
In a similar fashion Bella et al. (Bella & Palmer, 
2006) have studied finger movements of skilled 
piano players. They have recorded finger motion 
from skilled pianists while playing a musical 
keyboard. Pianists’ finger motion and speed with 
which keys are struck was analyzed using func-
tional data analysis methods. Movement velocity 
and acceleration were consistent for the partici-
pants and in multiple musical contexts. Accurate 
pianists’ classification was achieved by training a 
neural network classifier using velocity/accelera-
tion trajectories preceding key presses.
13
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
lip movement
This approach originally based on the visual 
speech reading technology attempts to generate 
a model representing lip dynamics produced by a 
person during speech. User verification is based 
on how close the generated model fits observed lip 
movement. Such models are typically constructed 
around spatio-temporal lip features. First the lip 
region needs to be isolated from the video feed, 
and then significant features of lip contours are 
extracted typically from edges and gradients. Lip 
features include: the mouth opening or closing, 
skin around the lips, mouth width, upper/lower lip 
width, lip opening height/width, distance between 
horizontal lip line and upper lip (Broun, Zhang, 
Mersereau, & Clements, 2002; Shipilova, 2006). 
Typically lip dynamics are utilized as a part of a 
multimodal biometric system, usually combined 
with speaker recognition based authentication 
(Jourlin, Luettin, Genoud, & Wassner, 1997; 
Luettin, Thacker, & Beet, 1996; Mason, Brand, 
Auckenthaler, Deravi, & Chibelushi, 1999; Wark, 
Thambiratnam, & Sridharan, 1997), but standalone 
usage is also possible (Mok, Lau, Leung, Wang, 
& Yan, 2004).
mouse dynamics
By monitoring all mouse actions produced by the 
user during interaction with the Graphical User 
Interface (GUI), a unique profile can be gener-
ated which can be used for user re-authentication 
(Pusara & Brodley, 2004). Mouse actions of in-
terest include general movement, drag and drop, 
point and click, and stillness. From those a set 
of features can be extracted for example average 
speed against the distance travelled, and average 
speed against the movement direction (Ahmed 
& Traore, 2005a, 2005b). Pusara et al. (Pusara 
& Brodley, 2004) describe a feature extraction 
approach in which they split the mouse event data 
into mouse wheel movements, clicks, menu and 
toolbar clicks. Click data is further subdivided 
into single and double click data.
Gamboa et al. (Gamboa & Fred, 2003, 2004) 
have tried to improve accuracy of mouse-dynam-
ics-based biometrics by restricting the domain of 
data collection to an online game instead of a more 
general GUI environment. As a result applicabil-
ity of their results is somewhat restricted and the 
methodology is more intrusive to the user. The 
system requires around 10-15 minutes of devoted 
game play instead of seamless data collection 
during the normal to the user human computer 
interaction. As far as the extracted features, x and 
y coordinates of the mouse, horizontal velocity, 
vertical velocity, tangential velocity, tangential 
acceleration, tangential jerk and angular velocity 
are utilized with respect to the mouse strokes to 
create a unique user profile.
network traffic
Network level intrusion detection is somewhat 
different from other types of intrusion detec-
tion as the monitored activity originates outside 
the system being protected. With the increase 
in popularity of Internet and other networks an 
intruder no longer has to have physical access to 
the system he is trying to penetrate. This means 
that the network dataflow arriving on different 
system ports and encoded using different pro-
tocols needs to be processed and reviewed. IDS 
based on network traffic analyze various packet 
attributes such as: IP protocol-type values, packet 
size, server port numbers, source and destination 
IP prefixes, Time-To-Live values, IP/TCP header 
length, incorrect IP/TCP/UDP checksums, and 
TCP flag patterns. During the baseline profiling 
period the number of packets with each attribute 
value is counted and taken as normal behaviour 
(Kim, Jo, & Suh, 2006). Any deviation from 
the normal baseline profile may set an alert flag 
informing network administrator that an attack 
is taking place. Many behaviour based security 
systems have been developed based on the concept 
of network level attack detection (Novikov, 2005; 
14
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Novikov, Yampolskiy, & Reznik, 2006a, 2006b; 
Silva, Santos, Silva, & Montes, 2004; Sommer 
& Paxson, 2003; Zhang & Manikopoulos, 2003) 
and the general area of network traffic analysis 
is highly applicable for improved network and 
network application design (Liu & Huebner, 2002; 
Thompson, Miller, & Wilder, 1997).
painting style
Just like authorship of literary works can be at-
tributed based on the writers style, so can the 
works of art be accredited based on the style of 
the drawing. In particular the subtle pen and brush 
strokes characteristic of a particular painter can 
be profiled. Lyu et al. (Lyu, Rockmore, & Farid, 
2004) developed a technique for performing 
a multi-scale, multi-orientation painting scan 
decomposition. This decomposition changes 
the basis from functions maximally localized in 
space to one in which the basis functions are also 
localized in orientation and scale. By construct-
ing a compact model of the statistics from such 
a function it is possible to detect consistencies or 
inconsistencies between paintings and drawings 
supposedly produced by the same author.
programming style
With the increasing number of viruses, worms, 
and Trojan horses it is often useful in a forensic 
investigation to be able to identify an author of 
such malware programs based on the analysis of 
the source code. It is also valuable for the purposes 
of software debugging and maintenance to know 
who the original author of a certain code fragment 
was. Spafford et al. (Spafford & Weeber., 1992) 
have analyzed a number of features potentially 
useful for the identification of software authorship. 
In case only the executable code is available for 
analysis, data structures and applied algorithms 
can be profiled as well as any remaining compiler 
and system information, observed programming 
skill level, knowledge of the operating system 
and choice of the system calls. Additionally use 
of predefined functions and provisions for error 
handling are not the same for different program-
mers.
In case the original source files are available 
a large number of additional identifying features 
become accessible such as: chosen programming 
language, code formatting style, type of code edi-
tor, special macros, style of comments, variable 
names, spelling and grammar, use of language 
features such as choice of loop structures, the 
ratio of global to local variables, temporary coding 
structures, and finally types of mistakes observ-
able in the code. Software metrics such as number 
of lines of code per function, comment-to-code 
ratio and function complexity may also be intro-
duced (Spafford & Weeber., 1992). Similar code 
features are discussed by Gray et al. (Gray, Sallis, 
& MacDonell, 1997) and in Grantzeskou et al. 
(Frantzeskou, Gritzalis, & MacDonell, 2004).
registry access
Apap et al. (Apap, et al., 2002) proposed a new 
type of host-based security approach they call 
Registry Anomaly Detection (RAD) that monitors 
access to the Windows registry in real time and 
detects the actions of malicious software. Win-
dows registry stores information about hardware 
installed on the system, which ports are used, 
user profiles, policies, user names, passwords 
and configuration settings for programs. Most 
programs access a certain set of registry keys 
during normal operation. Similarly most users use 
only a certain subset of programs available on the 
machine. This results in a high degree of regularity 
in registry interaction during the normal operation 
of the system. However, malicious software may 
substantially deviate from this regular activity and 
can be detected. Many attacks involve starting 
programs which have rarely been used in the past 
or changing keys that have never been changed 
before. If a RAD system is trained on clean data, 
then these kinds of registry operations will appear 
15
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
abnormal to the system and result in issue of an 
alert (Apap, et al., 2002).
signature/handwriting
Signature verification is a widely accepted 
methodology for confirming identity (Herbst & 
Coetzer, 1998; Jain, Griess, & Connell, 2002; Lei, 
Palla, & Govindaraju, 2004; Nalwa, 1997). Two 
distinct approaches to signature verification are 
traditionally recognized based on the data col-
lection approach, they are: on-line and off-line 
signature verification also known as static and 
dynamic approaches (Riha & Matyas, 2000). In 
the off-line signature verification the image of 
the signature is obtained using a scanning device, 
possibly some time after the signing took place. 
With on-line signature verification special hard-
ware is used to capture dynamics of the signature, 
typically pressure sensitive pens in combination 
with digitizing tablets are utilized. Because on-line 
data acquisition methodology obtains features not 
available in the off-line mode, dynamic signature 
verification is more reliable (Muralidharan & 
Wunnava, 2004).
With on-line signature verification in addition 
to the trajectory coordinates of the signature, other 
features like pressure at pen tip, acceleration and 
pen-tilt can be collected. In general signature re-
lated features can be classified into two groups: 
global and local. Global features include: signing 
speed, signature bounding box, Fourier descriptors 
of the signature’s trajectory, number of strokes, 
and signing flow. Local features describe specific 
sample point in the signature and relationship 
between such points, for example distance and 
curvature change between two successive points 
may be analyzed as well as x and y offsets rela-
tive to the first point on the signature trajectory, 
and critical points of the signature trajectory 
(Muralidharan & Wunnava, 2004; Plamondon 
& Lorette, 1989).
Signature-based user verification is a particular 
type of general handwriting based biometric au-
thentication. Unlike with signatures, handwriting-
based user verification/recognition is content 
independent, which makes the process somewhat 
more complicated (Ballard, Lopresti, & Mon-
rose, 2006; Ballard, Monrose, & Lopresti, 2006; 
Ramann, Vielhauer, & Steinmetz, 2002). Each 
person’s handwriting is seen as having a specific 
texture. The spatial frequency and orientation con-
tents represent the features of each texture (Zhu, 
Tan, & Wang, 2000). Since handwriting provides 
a much more substantial biometric characteristic 
sample in comparison to signatures respective 
verification accuracy can be much greater.
soft Behavioural Biometrics
Jain et al. (Jain, Dass, & Nandakumar, 2004a, 
2004b) define soft biometrics as: “…traits as 
characteristics that provide some information 
about the individual, but lack the distinctiveness 
and permanence to sufficiently differentiate any 
two individuals”. They further state that soft 
biometric traits can either be continuous such 
as height or weight or discrete such as gender or 
ethnicity. Authors propose expending the defini-
tion to include soft behavioural biometrics, which 
also can be grouped into continuous and discrete 
types. Continuous soft behavioural biometric 
traits include measurements produced by various 
standardized tests, some of the most popular such 
tests are IQ test for intelligence, and verbal sec-
tions of SAT, GRE, GMAT for language abilities. 
Discrete soft behavioural biometrics are skills 
which a particular person either has or does not 
have. Examples of such include ability to speak 
a particular foreign language, knowledge of how 
to fly a plane, ride a motorcycle, etc.
While such soft behavioural biometrics are 
not sufficient for identification or verification 
of individuals they can be combined with other 
biometric approaches to increase system accuracy. 
They can also be used in certain situations to reject 
individual’s verification claim. For example in a 
case of academic cheating a significantly fluctuat-
16
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
ing score on a repeatedly taken standardized test 
can be used to suspect that not the same person 
answered all the questions on a given test (Jacob 
& Levitt, 2004).
storage activity
Many actions of intruders became visible at the 
storage level interface. Manipulation of system 
utilities (to add backdoors), tampering with audit 
logs (to destroy evidence), resetting of attributes 
(to hide changes) and addition of suspicious con-
tent (known virus) all show up as the changes in 
the storage layer of the system. A storage-based 
security system analyzes all requests received 
by the storage server and can issue alerts about 
suspicious activity to the system administrator. Ad-
ditionally it can slow down the suspected intruder’s 
storage access or isolate intruder via a forking of 
version trees to a sandbox. Storage-based security 
approach has the advantage of being independent 
from the client’s operating system and so can 
continue working after the initial compromise, 
unlike host-based security systems which can be 
disabled by the intruder (Pennington, et al., 2002). 
Research using storage activity is fast gaining in 
popularity with intrusions being detected at the 
block storage level (Stanton, Yurcik, & Brum-
baugh, 2005), in Storage Area Network (SAN) 
environments (Banikazemi, Poff, & Abali, 2005), 
object-based storage devices (Zhang & Wang, 
2006), workstation disk drives (Griffin, et al., 
2003) and in the context of the overall intrusion 
detection (Stanton, et al., 2005).
system calls
A system call is the method used by a program to 
request service from the operating system, or more 
particularly, the operating system kernel. System 
calls use a special instruction which causes the 
processor to transfer control to a more privileged 
code segment. Intruder detection can be achieved 
by comparing an application’s run-time system 
calls with a pre-defined normal system call be-
haviour model. The assumption is that as long as 
the intruder can’t make arbitrary system calls, it is 
unlikely that he can achieve his desired malicious 
goals (Lam, Li, & Chiueh, 2006). Following the 
original work of Forest et al. (Hofmeyr, Forrest, & 
Somayaji, 1998; Warrender, Forrest, & Pearlmut-
ter, 1999) a number of researchers have pursuit 
development of security systems based on analyz-
ing system call sequences (Ghosh, Schwatzbard, 
& Shatz, 1999b; Giffin, et al., 2004; Lam, et al., 
2006 ; Marceau, 2000; Nguyen, Reiher, & Kuen-
ning, 2003; Wagner & Dean, 2001). Typically a 
model of normal system call behavior is learned 
during the training phase which is a baseline-state 
assumed to be free of attacks (Bhatkar, Chaturvedi, 
& Sekar, May 2006), alternative approaches use 
static analysis of the source code or binary code 
(Giffin, et al., 2004). A number of representation 
schemas for the behavioral model have been 
proposed, including strings (Warrender, et al., 
1999; Wespi, et al., 2000), finite state automata 
and push down automata (Feng, et al., 2003a; 
Giffin, et al., 2004).
tapping
Henderson et al. (Henderson, White, Veldhuis, 
Hartel, & Slump, 2002; Henderson, Papakostas, 
White, & Hartel, 2001) have studied the idea of 
tapping recognition, based on the idea that you are 
able to recognize who is knocking on your door. 
They concentrated on the waveform properties of 
the pulses which result from tapping the polymer 
thick-film sensor on a smart card. Produced pres-
sure pulses are further processed to extract useful 
features such as: pulse height, pulse duration, and 
the duration of the first inter-pulse interval. The 
recognition algorithm utilized in this research 
has been initially developed for processing of 
keyboard dynamics, which is a somewhat similar 
technology of recognizing tapping with respect 
to keyboard keys.
17
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
text authorship
Email and source code authorship identifica-
tion represent application and improvement of 
techniques developed in a broader field of text 
authorship determination. Written text and spo-
ken word once transcribed can be analyzed in 
terms of vocabulary and style to determine its 
authorship. In order to do so a linguistic profile 
needs to be established. Many linguistic features 
can be profiled such as: lexical patterns, syntax, 
semantics, pragmatics, information content or 
item distribution through a text (Halteren, 2004). 
Stematatos et al. (Stamatatos, Fakotakis, & Kok-
kinakis, 1999) in their analysis of modern Greek 
texts proposed using such text descriptors as: 
sentence count, word count, punctuation mark 
count, noun phrase count, word included in noun 
phrase count prepositional phrase count, word 
included in prepositional phrase count and key-
word count. Overall area of authorship attribution 
is very promising with a lot of ongoing research 
(Juola & Sofko, 2004; Koppel & Schler, 2004; 
Koppel, Schler, & Mughaz, 2004).
voice/speech/singing
Speaker identification is one of the best researched 
biometric technologies (Campbell, 1997; Ciota, 
2004; Sanderson & Paliwal, 2001). Verification is 
based on information about the speaker’s anatomi-
cal structure conveyed in amplitude spectrum, with 
the location and size of spectral peaks related to 
the vocal tract shape and the pitch striations related 
to the glottal source of the user (Kalyanaraman, 
2006). Speaker identification systems can be 
classified based on the freedom of what is spoken 
(Ratha, Senior, & Bolle, 2001):
• Fixed text: The speaker says a particular 
word selected at enrolment.
• Text dependent: The speaker is prompted 
by the system to say a particular phrase.
• Text independent: The speaker is free to 
say anything he wants, verification accu-
racy typically improves with larger amount 
of spoken text.
Feature extraction is applied to the normalized 
amplitude of the input signal which is further de-
composed into several band-pass frequency chan-
nels. A frequently extracted feature is a logarithm 
of the Fourier Transform of the voice signal in each 
band along with pitch, tone, cadence, and shape of 
the larynx (Jain, et al., 1999). Accuracy of voice 
based biometrics systems can be increased by 
inclusion of visual speech (lip dynamics) (Jourlin, 
et al., 1997; Luettin, et al., 1996; Mason, et al., 
1999; Wark, et al., 1997) and incorporation of soft 
behavioural biometrics such as accent (Deshpande, 
Chikkerur, & Govindaraju, 2005; Lin & Simske, 
2004). Recently some research has been aimed 
at expanding the developed technology to singer 
recognition for the purposes of music database 
management (Tsai & Wang, Jan. 2006a) and to 
laughter recognition. Currently, the laughter-
recognition software is rather crude and cannot 
accurately distinguish between different people 
(Ito, et al., 2005; Mainguet, 2006).
Some of the presented approaches are not 
sufficiently unique, permanent, easily collectable 
or difficult to circumvent but they can be seen as 
behavioural counterparts of “soft” physical bio-
metrics well recognized in the field. Soft biomet-
rics are also not strong enough to be a backbone 
of a standalone biometric security system, but are 
nonetheless valuable in improving accuracy of 
multimodal systems. Likewise, we believe that 
multimodal behaviour-based biometric systems 
will be able to take advantage of many of tech-
nologies presented in our survey and therefore it 
is important to include them in order to make our 
survey as comprehensive and as useful as possible 
to the largest number of researchers and develop-
ers. For example game strategy alone may not be 
sufficient for person identification but combined 
18
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Figure 1. Examples of Behavioural Biometrics: a) Biometric Sketch, b) Blinking, c) Calling, d) Car Driving, e) 
Command Line Lexicon, f) Credit Card Use, g) Dynamic Facial Features, h) Email, i) Gait, j) Game Strategy, 
k) GUI Interaction, l) Handgrip, m) Haptic, n) Keystrokes, o) Lip Movement, p) Mouse Dynamics, q) Painting 
Style, r) Programming Style, s) Signature, t) Tapping, u) Text Authorship, v) Voice. Adopted from (Yampolskiy & 
Govindaraju, 2008)
19
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
with keyboard dynamics and mouse movements 
it might be sufficiently discriminative. Also as 
breakthroughs are made in the field of behavioural 
biometrics it is likely that some of the described 
technologies will become easier to collect and 
harder to circumvent.
Practically all behavioural biometrics are not 
strong enough for person identification only for 
verification purposes and so the assumption is 
always made that we are dealing with a cooper-
ating subject who wishes to positively verify his 
identity. For all behaviours even for low level ones 
an un-cooperating subject can completely change 
his behaviour in order to avoid being successfully 
profiled by the security system. This is an inherent 
limitation of most behavioural biometric systems. 
(see Figure 1)
new BehavIoural 
BIometrIc modalItIes
Because behavioural biometrics are a new and 
still developing field even such basic concept as 
what qualifies as a behavioural biometric is still 
not universally excepted. In our detailed survey 
we have chosen to only cover approaches in which 
behaviour in question is under full or at least partial 
control of the individual exhibiting it. In this sec-
tion we presented a number of approaches which 
have been classified as behavioural biometrics by 
other researchers in the field (Revett, 2008) and 
which as a rule are not under the full control of 
the subject. Despite our personal belief that such 
methods do not fall under the definition of behav-
ioural biometrics we feel it is necessary to include 
such approaches for the sake of completeness of 
presentation of the state-of-the-art in the field at 
least until any ambiguity about them is resolved 
by the scientific community.
odor as a Biometric
Animals, for example dogs, are perfectly ca-
pable of recognizing people based on odor. Idea 
behind this type of authentication is to create an 
Electronic Nose (ENose) capable of sniffing out 
person’s identity. The ENose consists of a collec-
tion of sensors each one serving as a receptor for 
a particular odor. Once a significant number of 
odors can be profiled by the system it becomes an 
interesting pattern recognition problem to match 
odor-print to people. This is a promising line of 
research and is still in the early stages of develop-
ment with no functional systems available on the 
market (Korotkaya, 2003).
heart Beat sound
Recently some research effort was put towards 
investigation of the possibility of using heart sound 
as a biometric for human identification. The main 
advantage of using heart sound as a biometric is 
that it cannot be easily spoofed as compared to 
other, particularly non-physical biometric modali-
ties. Preliminary results show that with optimally 
selected parameters, an identification rate of up 
to 96% is achievable for a small database of 
seven persons (Phua, Dat, Chen, & Shue, 2006). 
The heart beat is known as the Inherent Liveness 
Biometrics because “The way the human heart 
beats” biometric characteristic is only valid for a 
living person (Preez & Soms, 2005).
BIologIcal sIgnals as a 
BehavIoral BIometrIcs
A number of biological signals have been classi-
fied as behavioural biometrics in recent literature 
(Marcel & Millan, 2007; Revett, 2008; Thorpe, 
Oorschot, & Somayaji, 2005). Numerous ex-
amples include the electrocardiogram (ECG), 
the electroencephalogram (EEG), and the elec-
trooculogram (EOG) as well as some emerging 
20
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
technologies, like Brain-Computer Interface 
(BCI), Human-Computer Interface (HCI), and 
Electrocenphlogram Interface (EEGI), NHCI 
(Neural Human-Computer Interface) and NI 
(Neural Interface) (Lawson, 2002). In addition 
to electrical activity, neural activity also gener-
ates other types of signals, for example magnetic 
and metabolic, that could be utilized in a BCI. 
Magnetic activity is recordable with magnetoen-
cephalography (MEG), brain metabolic activity as 
mirrored by changes in blood flow can be measured 
with positron emission tomography (PET), and 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
(Marcel & Millan, 2007). There are also invasive 
BCI signal recording methods such as implanted 
electrodes (Thorpe, et al., 2005).
ecg as a Behavioural Biometric
The ECG is a recording of the electrical activity 
produced by the beating of the heart. A series of 
sensors are positioned over the heart and pick 
up the electrical signals produced by various 
regions of the heart during the pumping cycle. 
The recording of the heartbeat generates a unique 
and reliable profile for any particular individual. 
Recent experiments provide sufficient evidence to 
suggest that it is a highly discriminative biomet-
ric modality in some cases near 100% accurate 
(Revett, 2008).
Brainwaves: eeg as a 
Behavioural Biometric
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is a recording 
of the electrical activity of the brain. Numerous 
studies demonstrate that the brainwave pattern of 
every individual is unique and that the EEG can 
be used for biometric identification (Marcel & 
Millan, 2007). EEG signal changes with variation 
in types of cognitive activities. The signal itself 
can be isolated from the background noise through 
a series of filters. The idea behind this approach 
is to associate a particular EEG signature with a 
particular set of thoughts, such as recorded dur-
ing type or human computer interaction (Revett, 
2008). Correct classification of individual in the 
accuracy range of 80% to 100% has been achieved 
in recent experiments (Mohammadi, Shoushtari, 
Ardekani, & Shamsollahi, 2006).
passthoughts
Thorpe et al. proposed using Brain Computer Inter-
face (BCI) technology to have a user directly trans-
mit his thoughts to a computer (PassThoughts). 
The system extracts entropy from a user’s brain 
signal upon reading a thought. The brain signals 
are processed in an accurate and repeatable way 
providing a changeable, authentication method 
resilient to shoulder-surfing. The potential size 
of the space of a pass-thought system is not clear 
at this point but likely to be very large, due to 
the lack of bounds on what composes a thought 
(Thorpe, et al., 2005). (see Table 2)
software InteractIon 
BIometrIc technologIes
Up to this point a lot of research in behavioural 
biometrics concentrated on a very low level be-
Table 2. Accuracy rates for novel behavioural 
biometric modalities 
Behavioral Biometric Publication Accuracy 
Rate
Musicians’ Finger Movements (Bella & Palmer, 
2006)
84%
Odor (Korotkaya, 
2003)
-
Heart Beat (Phua, et al., 
2006)
96%
electrocardiogram (ECG) (Revett, 2008) 100%
electroencephalogram (EEG) (Mohammadi, et 
al., 2006)
80-100%
PassThoughts (Thorpe, et al., 
2005)
90%
21
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
haviour of the users such as keystroke dynamics 
and mouse movements which are used to inter-
act with a computer. While relatively accurate, 
those behavioural biometrics only concentrate 
on manifestations of behaviour dependent on 
physical abilities of an individual and completely 
ignore higher level intentional behaviours, which 
may provide superior descriptors for successfully 
verifying identity of human beings.
User interaction with almost every type of 
software can be used to generate a personalized 
behavioural signature capable of verifying user’s 
identity. While some research in that area has been 
done, particularly with command line interfaces 
(Maxion & Townsend, 2002a; Schonlau, et al., 
2001) and more recently with spoint and click 
interfaces (Goldring, 2003) much more can be 
accomplished. Usually low-level side effects of 
user activity are all that is taken to generate a user 
profile (Yampolskiy, 2007b). For example one 
study concentrated on things like number of open 
windows, time between new windows and number 
of words in a window title(Goldring, 2003). As 
the technology advances it may become possible 
to use higher-level behaviours to generate more 
accurate user profiles:
• Operating system interaction behav-
iour: A profile consists of OS specific be-
haviours of the user. Almost every task in a 
modern OS can be accomplished with mul-
tiple equally well performing approaches. 
So a user’s choice of doing some task may 
constitute a single data point in the behav-
ioural signature. For example using a desk-
top icon to start an application as apposed 
to going through the Start button in the MS 
Windows environment. Dozens if not hun-
dreds of similar choices provide a wealth 
of behavioural information sufficient to 
verify if the same user is interacting with 
the OS.
• Web browsing behaviour: Just as unique 
as the OS manipulation behaviour can be 
the set of actions user takes to work with 
a network such as Internet. The choice of 
web browser, search engine, collection of 
often-visited sites and other similar web 
related choices could be a great personal 
identifier. Online searching behaviour can 
be a particularly telling descriptor since the 
choice of keywords used, topics of search-
ing and skill necessary to construct com-
plicated logical predicates say a lot about 
who the person is.
• Email checking/sending behaviour: 
In addition to the different people we all 
chose to communicate with via email, we 
all have unique ways of composing emails. 
Even a simple task of replying to an email 
can be done very differently. Some people 
choose to include the original message in 
the response there is others insist on delet-
ing it (Vel, et al., 2001). Some add a com-
plicated personalized signature to the end 
of the message while others simply send 
“regards”. The number of emails sent and 
received also greatly varies. Many other 
personal choices can also be considered 
such as how a person reads his new mes-
sages. Some people tend to read them all 
first and choose to reply to some at a later 
time, while others always immediately re-
ply to a new message not wishing to keep 
the sender waiting for a response.
• Word processing behaviour: There is a 
million different ways to format a docu-
ment (Yampolskiy, 2007d). Choices of 
fonts, styles, paragraph structure and so 
on can be as unique as the users who com-
pose those documents. In addition a great 
amount of additional information can be 
collected about the actual writing of the 
individual such as common topic, vocabu-
lary size, common spelling and grammati-
cal errors.
• Media interaction behaviour: Modern 
computers serve as DVD players, stereo 
22
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
systems, photo albums and art galleries to 
name just some media related applications. 
How a user organizes a play list of songs, 
speed with which he looks through a photo 
album and which news feeds he likes to lis-
ten too can be used to tell different users a 
part.
• Photo editing behaviour: An operation 
of complicated photo processing software 
such as Photoshop requires a significant 
level of skill. Just like with OS or word 
processors no two users will perform 
many complicated tasks exactly the same 
way. Since many different images require 
similar processing we can quickly collect 
enough data to start verifying user identi-
ties in the creative environments such as 
provided by image processing software.
• Any other software: An attentive reader 
can clearly notice a pattern in the above 
behavioural biometrics related to software 
use. All software provides many ways and 
options for accomplishing similar tasks. 
The more complicated a piece of software 
is the more unique will be a behavioural 
signature generated by the user of the said 
piece of software. This might be particu-
larly true in security sensitive domains of 
power management companies and intelli-
gence agency’s databases where verifying 
user’s identity is a task second in impor-
tance only to the primary function of the 
software.
vIdeo surveIllance BIometrIcs
Big brother is watching you. The surveillance 
cameras are no longer limited to convenience 
stores. Banks, libraries, airports, factories and 
even street corners are under constant observation 
not to mention prisons, police stations, and gov-
ernment buildings. For example in London there 
are at least 500,000 cameras in the city, and one 
study showed that in a single day a person could 
expect to be filmed 300 times (Stecklow, Singer, 
& Patrick, 2005). With such a wealth of data it is 
only logical that we will try to use this information 
to find, recognize, identify and verify people.
Obviously the best approach to doing so is via 
face recognition but since it is not always possible, 
as in the cases there no clear face shot is available, 
alternative biometric solutions can be exploited. 
Gait has been one such alternative being researched 
at multiple centres around the world. We propose 
a number of behaviour-based biometrics, which 
can be extracted from surveillance videos and 
analyzed without inconveniencing even a single 
person with document checks, body searches and 
similar extreme measures.
Today the processing necessary to obtain de-
sired behavioural information may be well beyond 
capabilities of our technology, but the capabilities 
of biometric science are quickly growing and it 
is entirely possible to have prototypes of such 
technologies available in a few years and working 
systems in a decade or so. In any case, the first 
step is to identify what technology is desirable to 
have before any such technology begins its way 
from research lab to the deployment in the field, 
and this is precisely this first step this paper aims 
at taking:
• Eating and drinking behaviour: Since 
many restaurants and café houses with 
outside sitting enjoy the security provided 
by surveillance cameras it is possible to 
consider person’s eating habits as a be-
havioural biometric. The type of a diet a 
person follows such as vegetarian, vegan, 
kosher, or Atkins is a good personal de-
scriptor. How a person eats, how they hold 
a fork, use a napkin, cut their stake all that 
can be useful for identification purposes. 
What sides they choose with their meal, do 
they use a lot of salt, paper or hot sauce 
all such information can add uniqueness to 
their behavioural signature. Additionally 
23
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
we can consider interaction with the res-
taurant staff such as ordering and tipping 
habits.
• Interaction with electronics: In our ev-
eryday life we are constantly using differ-
ent electronic devices. We get money from 
ATMs, talk on our cell phones, watch TV 
or listen to radio, in all such situations we 
are very particular about just how we in-
teract with the above-mentioned devices. 
If we take cell phones as an example some 
people prefer to use speakerphone while 
others go with a hands free ear set. We all 
use different dialling fingers, hold phone 
at a different angle, and keep the phone in 
various locations in or on our wardrobe. 
Similar observations can be made about all 
other interactions with electronics, from 
TV channel flipping habits to notebook 
carrying style.
• Driving Style: Be it an automobile or a 
plane the way we control such a contraption 
is very unique. Take driving for example, 
how fast one accelerates, applies breaks, 
makes turns all can be taken to uniquely 
identify a particular driver (Erdogan, et al., 
2005a; Erdogan, et al., 2005b; Erzin, et al., 
2006). An in car computer can provide lots 
of such information to supplement outside 
monitoring by traffic cameras. This inti-
mate knowledge of the driver’s behaviour 
can be used to identify an incident of auto 
theft or to customize the car’s handling to a 
particular driver.
• Shopping habits: Shopping habits of peo-
ple have long been subject to intense Data 
Mining scrutiny in hopes of finding ways 
to improve sales and increase success of 
special promotions. For a behavioural pro-
file we can look at what form of payment 
a person uses. Do they go with a shopping 
cart or a basket, which order do the take 
scanning shelves of different products, not 
to mention which products they select and 
how those products can be used to better 
characterize them.
• Exercise routine: Lots of people try to 
stay lean and healthy by going to the gym. 
Gyms provide an enormous amount of per-
sonal choices for the individual. Hundreds 
of different machines each one with unique 
settings options, swimming pools, saunas, 
and locker rooms. A security system can 
keep track of the times of attendance, du-
ration of exercise, machines and weights 
used, and type of exercises performed.
• Dress and appearance choices: Many 
people have a very unique dress style, often 
with a particular piece of attire so unique it 
is sufficient to immediately identify them. 
Even though the daily choice of wardrobe 
changes the style frequently remains the 
same. Some people like loose hanging 
T-shirts, some prefer cloths so tight they 
have hard time putting it on. Hats, high 
heels, scarves, jewellery, hairstyles all al-
low us to show our personality and at the 
same time to successfully profile us.
• Vocabulary: while voice has long been 
used to identify people we can add a lot 
of additional variables to the successful be-
havioural equation. What languages does a 
person speak, what words he likes to use a 
lot, even overuse? How big is his vocabu-
lary and what words he never uses? Is he 
very talkative? How many words per unit 
of time? The above descriptors can eas-
ily be used not just with spoken word but 
with emails, writings, reports basically any 
documents.
• Other Behaviours: Any skill behaviour, 
any preference or anything else which 
makes us who we are can be used as a be-
havioural descriptor. The list below is not 
all-inclusive and is only meant to spark 
ideas for novel research directions and 
groundbreaking projects. Can a behavioural 
biometric system be developed around: 
24
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Working habits, Social behaviour (social 
contacts, hand shaking), Knowledge (what 
types of information this person knows 
about), Sense of humour (how a person 
laughs), Temper (aggressive, passive), 
Intelligence (capacity to learn and remem-
ber, behaviour in a classroom environment), 
Interests (books, hobbies), Athletic ability 
(fighting style, dancing style, swimming 
style), Talents (drawing, singing, playing 
musical instruments), Likes / dislikes (rap 
music, tanning), Sexual preferences and 
physical preference for others, Strategy 
for using tools, Grooming and hygiene 
habits, Picture taking(picture posing and 
acting), Public speaking(presenting man-
nerisms), Psychological disorders (para-
noia, schizophrenia), Credit cards(use and 
payment pattern), Seat choice(on a plain 
or movie theatre), Investing(stocks, bank 
account preferences), Interaction with 
animals(pets).
general propertIes 
of BehavIor
While the set of possible behaviours is truly infi-
nite it might be possible to find some measurable 
properties of behaviour, which can be found in all 
behaviours and correspond well between different 
behaviours in the same individual. This would 
be extremely useful in Multi-modal Behavioural 
Biometrics (MBB) in which multiple different 
behaviours are used together to create a single pro-
file. Examples of MBB include combining mouse 
movement data with keyboard dynamics or voice 
with lip motion and typically significantly increase 
accuracy of the system. Ideally at the same time 
those cross-behavioural property measurements 
will be somewhat different between different in-
dividuals making it easier to tell different people 
apart. Some possible cross-behavioural properties 
are presented below:
• Speed: how fast a behaviour is performed. 
Examples may include typing speed and 
number of words spoken per minute.
• Correctness: number of mistakes as com-
pared to the desired behaviour in a given 
situation. For example number of mistyped 
characters or slips of the tongue.
• Redundancy: useless repetitiveness of the 
same behaviour per time period. For ex-
ample saying same thing twice.
• Consistency: a statistical measurement 
of how similar this person’s behaviour is 
from one data taking section to the other. 
Some people are more predictable than 
others and tend to follow the same routine 
more precisely.
• Rule obedience: some people believe that 
rules are made to be broken. They park next 
to fire hydrants, cheat on exams, take 10 
items to a 7 or less items cash register and 
abuse the proper rules of spoken language. 
The opposite of that behaviour is strict fol-
lowing of the rules to the point of absur-
dity, such as putting a seatbelt on to sit in a 
parked car. In any case people of those two 
types are relatively consistent in their rule 
obedience across different behaviours.
Influence of envIronment 
on BehavIor
One of the problems with behavioral biometrics is 
that human behavior itself is not perfectly repeti-
tive. People act differently based on their current 
mood, illness, sleep deprivation, drugs, stress, 
conflict, hunger, previous events and surround-
ing environment. For example, a person who did 
not get enough sleep may act irritated, shout a 
lot and be sloppy at performing his work duties. 
While fully understanding human emotions may 
be well beyond capability of modern computers 
it might be possible to incorporate the effects of 
the environment into the behavioral model.
25
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
The main component of the environment is 
the geo-spatial location of the individual. The 
same person will act very differently if they are 
in privacy of their home or at a public event. In 
terms of computer networks we can observe that 
a person who is connecting to the network from 
his home computer may perform different ac-
tions as compared to the times he was accessing 
the network from his work computer (Kim, et 
al., 2006). This leads us to the following thesis: 
location influences behavior. We are not claiming 
that knowing individual’s location is sufficient 
condition for predicting his or her behavior, but 
we propose that it is one of the factors knowing 
which may increase the accuracy of behavior 
prediction.
As more and more computers and mobile 
devices such as cell phones come equipped with 
GPS (Global Positioning System) chips identify-
ing location of an individual will become trivial. 
For now individual’s location can be obtained by 
looking up IP address information for the computer 
from which individual is accessing the network.
Continuing with our previous example of a 
person accessing a network from different loca-
tions and assuming that the network in question 
is Internet we can predict that if an individual is 
accessing Internet from his home computer he will 
be more likely to check the schedule of movies at 
a local theatre playing within the next hour then 
to perform a search for suppliers of aluminium 
tubing (assuming he works in the acquisitions 
department). So knowing the geo-spatial loca-
tion of an individual our behaviour prediction 
model can be fine-tuned to produce much better 
results. While the above example is trivial, it 
might be possible to anticipate some changes in 
behaviour caused by any number of factors and 
include such changes in our dynamic personal 
behaviour model.
However good our algorithms are it is still 
very possible for a behaviour based biometric to 
generate a number of false alarms. This can be 
seen as a significant shortcoming, but can also be 
viewed as beneficial. Suppose the system triggers 
an alarm for an abnormal behaviour pattern, but 
quick investigation positively verifies individual’s 
identity. So now we can conclude that for some 
reason the individual is not acting like himself. 
This information can be beneficial for example 
in the domain of games, more specifically Poker. 
Knowing that a very strong player is not using his 
usual superior strategy may be very valuable. It is 
possible the player in question is on tilt (temporary 
psychological instability) and so will likely make 
some bad decisions which a good player can take 
advantage of. A similar example in workplace 
may indicate that an individual is out of it, and is 
likely to be performing a substandard level work 
and so it might benefit the company to temporarily 
remove that employee from his position, maybe 
sending him on a well-needed vocation.
generalIzed algorIthm for 
purely BehavIoral BIometrIcs
In this section we describe a generalized algorithm 
for purely behavioural biometrics, which can be 
applied to any type of high level decision based 
human activity. The first step is to break up the 
behaviour in question into a number of atomic 
operations each one corresponding to a single 
decision, idea or a choice. Ideally all possible 
operations should be considered, but in a case of 
behaviour with a very large repertoire of possible 
operations a large subset of most frequent opera-
tions might be sufficient.
User’s behaviour should be observed and a 
frequency count for the occurrence of the atomic 
operations should be produced. The resulting 
frequency counts form a feature vector which 
is used to verify or reject the user based on the 
similarity score produced by a similarity function. 
An experimentally determined threshold serves 
as a decision boundary for separating legitimate 
users from intruders. In case user identification 
is attempted a neural network or a decision tree 
26
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
approach might be used to select the best match-
ing user from the database of existing templates. 
Below outline of the proposed generalized algo-
rithm is presented:
1. Pick behaviour
2. Break up behaviour into component 
actions
3. Determine frequencies of component ac-
tions for each user
4. Combine results into a feature vector 
profile
5. Apply similarity measure function to the 
stored template and current behaviour
6. Experimentally determine a threshold 
value
7. Verify or reject user based on the similarity 
score comparison to the threshold value
Step 5 in the above algorithm is not trivial and 
over the years a lot of research has gone into un-
derstanding what makes a good similarity measure 
function for different biometric systems. A good 
similarity measure takes into account statistical 
characteristics of the data distribution assuming 
enough data is available to determine such prop-
erties (Lee & Park, 2003). Alternatively expert 
knowledge about the data can be used to opti-
mize a similarity measure function, for example 
a weighted Euclidian distance function can be 
developed if it is known that certain features are 
more valuable then others. The distance score has 
to be very small for two feature vectors belonging 
to the same individual and therefore representing 
a similar strategy. At the same time it needs to be 
as large as possible for feature vectors coming 
from different individuals, as it should represent 
two distinct playing strategies (Yampolskiy & 
Govindaraju, 2006b).
Lee et al. (Lee & Park, 2003) describe the fol-
lowing method for making a similarity measure 
based on the statistical properties of the data: data 
is represented as a random variable x=(x1,…,xD) 
with dimensionality D. The data set X=[xn|n=1,…
,N] can be decomposed into sub-sets Xk = [xnk|nk 
= 1,…, Nk] (k=1,…,K), where each sub-set Xk is 
made up of data from the class Ck corresponding 
to an individual k. For identification the statistical 
properties of data Xnk are usually considered, 
which can be represented by a probability density 
function pk(x). If pk(x) for each k, for given data 
x, it is possible to calculate f(pk(x)), where f is a 
monotonic function and find a class Ck maximiz-
ing pk(x). The similarity measure between a new 
data item and the centre of mean μk of class Ck 
is given by the Euclidean distance. If covariance 
matrix Σk for pk(x) is estimated, then the similarity 
measure defined as –log pk(x) is the Mahalanobis 
distance (Lee & Park, 2003).
In the context of behavioural biometrics 
Euclidean distance (Sturn, 2000), Mahalanobis 
distance (Yampolskiy & Govindaraju, 2007b) and 
Manhattan distance (Sturn, 2000; Yampolskiy & 
Govindaraju, 2007b) are among the most popular 
similarity measure functions.
comparIson and analysIs
All behavioural biometrics essentially measure 
human actions which result from specific to ev-
ery human skills, style, preference, knowledge, 
motor-skills or strategy. Table 3 summarizes 
what precisely is being measured by different 
behavioural biometrics as well as lists some of 
the most frequently used features for each type 
of behaviour. Indirect HCI-based biometrics are 
not included as they have no meaning independent 
of the direct human computer interaction which 
causes them.
Motor-skill based biometrics measure innate, 
unique and stable muscle actions of users perform-
ing a particular task. Table 4 outlines which muscle 
groups are responsible for a particular motor-skill 
as well as lists some of the most frequently used 
features for each muscle control based biometric 
approach.
While many behavioural biometrics are still in 
27
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
their infancy some very promising research has 
already been done. The results obtained justify 
feasibility of using behaviour for verification of 
individuals and further research in this direction 
is likely to improve accuracy of such systems. 
Table 5 summarizes obtained accuracy ranges for 
the set of direct behavioural biometrics for which 
such data is available. Table 6 reports detection 
rates and error rates for indirect human computer 
interaction based behavioural biometrics.
An unintended property of behavioural profiles 
is that they might contain information which may 
be of interest to third parties which have potential 
to discriminate against individuals based on such 
information. As a consequence intentionally re-
vealing or obtaining somebody else’s behavioural 
profile for the purposes other than verification is 
highly unethical. Examples of private information 
which might be revealed by some behavioural 
profiles follow:
• Calling Behaviour: Calling data is a par-
ticularly sensitive subject since it might 
reveal signs of infidelity or interest in non-
traditional adult entertainment.
• Car driving style: Car insurance 
Table 3. Behavioural biometrics with traits and features (©2008. Inderscience Publishers Ltd. Used 
with permission.) 
Behavioural Biometric Measures Features
Biometric Sketch Knowledge location and relative position of different primitives
Calling Behaviour Preferences date and time of the call, duration, called ID, called number, cost of call, number of 
calls to a local destination, number of calls to mobile destinations, number of calls 
to international destinations
Car driving style Skill Pressure from accelerator pedal and brake pedal, vehicle speed, steering angle
Command Line Lexicon Technical Vocabulary used commands together with corresponding frequency counts, and lists of argu-
ments to the commands
Credit Card Use Preferences account number, transaction type, credit card type, merchant ID, merchant address
Email Behaviour Style Length of the emails, time of the day the mail is sent, how frequently inbox is emp-
tied, the recipients’ addresses
Game Strategy Strategy/Skill Count of hands folded, checked, called, raised, check-raised, re-raised, and times 
player went all-in
Haptic Style 3D world location of the pen, average speed, mean velocity, mean standard devia-
tion, navigation style, angular turns and rounded turns
Keystroke Dynamics Skill time durations between the keystrokes, inter-key strokes and dwell times, which 
is the time a key is pressed down, overall typing speed, frequency of errors (use 
of backspace), use of numpad, order in which user presses shift key to get capital 
letters
Mouse Dynamics Style x and y coordinates of the mouse, horizontal velocity, vertical velocity, tangential 
velocity, tangential acceleration, tangential jerk and angular velocity
Painting Style Style subtle pen and brush strokes characteristic
Programming Style Skill, Style, Prefer-
ences
chosen programming language, code formatting style, type of code editor, special 
macros, comment style, variable names, spelling and grammar, language features, 
the ratio of global to local variables, temporary coding structures, errors
Soft Behavioural Bio-
metrics
Intelligence, Vocabu-
lary, Skills
word knowledge, generalization ability, mathematical skill
Text Authorship Vocabulary sentence count, word count, punctuation mark count, noun phrase count, word 
included in noun phrase count prepositional phrase count, word included in preposi-
tional phrase count and keyword count
28
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
companies may be interested to know if a 
driver frequently speeds and is an overall 
aggressive driver in order to charge an in-
creased coverage rate or to deny coverage 
all together.
• Command Line Lexicon: Information 
about proficiency with the commands 
might be used by an employer to decide 
if you are sufficiently qualified for a job 
involving computer interaction.
• Credit Card Use: Credit card data re-
veals information about what items you 
frequently purchase and in what locations 
you can be found violating your expecta-
tion of privacy. For example an employer 
might be interested to know if an employee 
buys a case of beer every day indicating a 
problem with alcoholism.
Table 4. Motor-skill biometrics with respective muscles and features (Standring, 2004) 
Motor Skill Based 
Biometric
Muscles Involved Extracted Features
Blinking orbicularis oculi, corrugator supercilii, depressor supercilii time between blinks, how long the eye is held closed at 
each blink, physical characteristics the eye undergoes 
while blinking
Dynamic Facial Fea-
tures
levator labii superioris, levator anguli oris zygomaticus major, 
zygomaticus minor, depressor labii inferioris, depressor anguli 
oris, buccinator, orbicularis oris
motion of skin pores on the face
Gait/Stride tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum 
longus, peroneus tertius, extensor digitorum brevis, extensor 
hallucis brevis, gastrocnemius, soleus, plantaris, popliteus, 
flexor hallucis longus flexor digitorum longus
amount of arm swing, rhythm of the walker, bounce, 
length of steps, vertical distance between head and 
foot, distance between head and pelvis, maximum 
distance between the left and right foot
Handgrip abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti, flexor brevis minimi digiti
resistance measurements in multiple points
Haptic abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis,| flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti,| flexor brevis minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar interossei
3D world location of the pen, average speed, mean 
velocity, mean standard deviation, navigation style, 
angular turns and rounded turns
Keystroke Dynam-
ics
abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti, flexor brevis minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar interossei
time durations between the keystrokes, inter-key 
strokes and dwell times, which is the time a key is 
pressed down, overall typing speed, frequency of errors 
(use of backspace), use of numpad, order in which user 
presses shift key to get capital letters
Lip Movement levator palpebrae superiorisj, levator anguli oris, mentalis, 
depressor labii inferioris, depressor anguli oris, buccinator, 
orbicularis oris, risorius
Mouth width, upper/lower lip width, lip opening 
height/width, distance between horizontal lip line 
and upper lip
Mouse Dynamics abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti, flexor brevis minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei
x and y coordinates of the mouse, horizontal velocity, 
vertical velocity, tangential velocity, tangential accel-
eration, tangential jerk and angular velocity
Signature/ Hand-
writing
abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti, flexor brevis minimi digiti, opponens digiti minimi, 
lumbrical, dorsal interossei, palmar interossei
coordinates of the signature, pressure at pen tip, accel-
eration and pen-tilt, signing speed, signature bounding 
box, Fourier descriptors of the signature’s trajectory, 
number of strokes, and signing flow
Tapping abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, adductor pollicis, palmaris brevis, abductor minimi 
digiti, flexor brevis minimi digiti
Pulse height, pulse duration, and the duration of the 
first inter-pulse interval
Voice/ 
Speech
cricothyroid, posterior ricoarytenoid, lateral cricoarytenoid, 
arytenoid, thyroarytenoid
logarithm of the Fourier transform of the voice signal 
in each band along with pitch and tone
29
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Table 5. Recognition and error rates of behavioural biometrics (©2008. Inderscience Publishers Ltd. 
Used with permission) 
Behavioural 
Biometric
Publication Detection 
Rate
FAR FRR EER
Biometric Sketch Bromme 2003 (Brömme & Al-Zubi, 2003) 7.2%
Blinking Westeyn 2004 (Westeyn & Starner, 2004) 82.02%
Calling Behaviour Fawcett 1997 (Fawcett & Provost, 1997) 92.5%
Car driving style Erdogan 2005 (Erdogan, et al., 2005a) 88.25% 4.0%
Command Line 
Lexicon
Marin 2001 (Marin, et al., 2001) 74.4% 33.5%
Credit Card Use Brause 1999 (Brause, et al., 1999) 99.995% 20%
Email Behaviour de Vel 2001 (Vel, et al., 2001) 90.5%
Gait/Stride Kale 2004 (Kale, et al., 2004) 90%
Game Strategy Yampolskiy 2007 (Yampolskiy & Govindaraju, 2007b) 7.0%
Handgrip Veldhuis 2004 (Veldhuis, et al., 2004) 1.8%
Haptic Orozco 2006 (Orozco, et al., 2006) 25% 22.3%
Keystroke Dynam-
ics
Bergadano 2002 (Bergadano, et al., 2002) 0.01% 4%
Lip Movement Mok 2004 (Mok, et al., 2004) 2.17%
Mouse Dynamics Pusara 2004 (Pusara & Brodley, 2004) 0.43% 1.75%
Programming 
Style
Frantzeskou 2004 (Frantzeskou, et al., 2004) 73%
Signature 
Handwriting
Jain 2002 (Jain, et al., 2002) 
Zhu 2000 (Zhu, et al., 2000)
95.7% 1.6% 2.8%
Tapping Henderson 2001 (Henderson, et al., 2001) 2.3%
Text Authorship Halteren 2004 (Halteren, 2004) 0.2% 0.0%
Voice/Speech 
Singing
Colombi 1996 (Colombi, Ruck, Rogers, Oxley, & 
Anderson, 1996) 
Tsai 2006 (Tsai & Wang, Jan. 2006b)
0.28% 
29.6%
Table 6. Detection and false positive rates for indirect biometrics (©2008. Inderscience Publishers Ltd. 
Used with permission) 
Type of Indirect 
Biometric
Publication Detection Rate False Positive Rate
Audit Logs Lee (Lee, et al., 1999) 93% 8%
Call-Stack Feng (Feng, et al., 2003b) - 1%
GUI Interaction Garg (Garg, et al., 2006) 96.15% 3.85%
Network Traffic Zhang (Zhang & Manikopoulos, 2003) 96.2% .0393%
Registry Access Apap (Apap, et al., 2002) 86.9% 3.8%
Storage Activity Stanton (Stanton, et al., 2005) 97% 4%
System Calls Ghosh (Ghosh, et al., 1999b) 86.4% 4.3%
30
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
• Email Behaviour: An employer would be 
interested to know if employees send out 
personal emails during office hours.
• Game Strategy: If information about game 
strategy is obtained by the player’s oppo-
nents it might be analyzed to find weak-
nesses in player’s game and as a result give 
an unfair advantage to the opponents.
• Programming Style: Software metric ob-
tained from analysis of code may indicate 
a poorly performing coder and as a result 
jeopardize the person’s employment.
Additionally, any of the motor-skill based 
biometrics may reveal a physical handicap of a 
person and so result in potential discrimination. 
Such biometrics as voice can reveal emotions, 
and the face images may reveal information about 
emotions and health (Crompton, 2003). Because 
behavioural biometric indirectly measures our 
thoughts and personal traits any data collected in 
the process of generation of a behavioural profile 
needs to be safely stored in an encrypted form.
conclusIon
In this chapter authors have presented only the 
most popular behavioural biometrics but any hu-
man behaviour can be used as a basis for personal 
profiling and for subsequent verification. Some 
behavioural biometrics which are quickly gaining 
ground but are not a part of this survey include 
profiling of shopping behaviour based on market 
basked analysis (Prassas, Pramataris, & Papaem-
manouil, 2001), web browsing and click-stream 
profiling (Fu & Shih, 2002; Goecks & Shavlik, 
2000; Liang & Lai, 2002), and even TV prefer-
ences (Democraticmedia.org, 2001). To make it 
easier to recognize newly proposed approaches as 
behavioural biometrics we propose a definition of 
what properties constitute a behavioural biometric 
characteristic. We define behavioural biometric 
as any quantifiable actions of a person. Such ac-
tions may not be unique to the person and may 
take a different amount of time to be exhibited 
by different individuals.
Behavioural biometrics are particularly well 
suited for verification of users which interact with 
computers, cell phones, smart cars, or points of 
sale terminals. As the number of electronic ap-
pliances used in homes and offices increases so 
does the potential for utilization of this novel and 
promising technology. Future research should be 
directed at increasing overall accuracy of such 
systems, for example by looking into possibility 
of developing multimodal behavioural biometrics, 
as people often engage in multiple behaviours 
at the same time., for example, talking on a cell 
phone while driving or using keyboard and mouse 
at the same time (Dahel & Xiao, 2003; Humm, 
Hennebert, & Ingold, 2006; Jain, Nandakumar, 
& Ross, 2005).
Fields as diverse as marketing, game theory, 
security and law enforcement all can greatly ben-
efit from accurate modeling of human behavior. 
One of the aims of this chapter was to show that 
the problem at hand is not unique to any given 
field and that a solution found once might benefit 
many industries without a need for rediscovering 
it for each sub-field.
General introduction to the field of biometrics 
and more particularly behavioral biometrics is 
given alongside the benefits of this non-intrusive 
approach. An overview of possible software based 
behavioral biometrics was given followed by a 
large exploratory section on potential future lines 
of research in video surveillance based behavioral 
biometrics. We proposed and explored some novel 
behavioral biometrics and research paths as well 
as some universal descriptors of behavior in 
general. It was followed with an analysis of how 
behavior can be influenced by the environment 
in particular location of the individual engaging 
in the behavior.
There are a number of conclusions we can draw 
from the above discussion. Fruitful lines of research 
will investigate relationship between behavior 
31
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
and identity, different behaviors and correlations 
in future actions between people who share same 
personality traits. It may prove extremely valuable 
for multi-modal behavioral biometrics to study 
universal behavioral descriptors such as speed and 
correctness. Much more could to be done to better 
understand precisely how outside factors such as 
location influence human behavior and is it pos-
sible to predict the changes in behavior if changes 
in the environment are known.
Because many of the presented technologies 
represent behavioural biometrics which are not 
strong enough to serve as a backbone of a com-
plete security system on their own, we suggest 
that a lot of research in behavioural biometrics be 
geared towards multimodal behavioural biomet-
rics. Successful research in this area would allow 
for development of systems with accuracy levels 
sufficient not just for identity verification, but also 
for person identification obtained as a result of 
combining different behaviours. Breakthroughs in 
purely behavioural biometrics research will also 
undoubtedly lead to improvements in associated 
applications such as product customization, devel-
opment of tailored opponents in games as well as 
multitude of competency assessment tools.
Future of behavioral research looks very 
bright. The next decade will bring us technolo-
gies providing unprecedented level of security, 
product customization, social compatibility and 
work efficiency. Ideas presented in the section on 
novel behavioral biometrics provide a wealth of 
opportunities for interesting research and develop-
ment. A great side effect of such research would be 
general greater understanding of human behavior, 
personality and perhaps human mind itself.
references
Adler, A., Youmaran, R., & Loyka, S. (2006). 
Towards a measure of biometric information. 
Retrieved on August 2, 2006, from http://www.
sce.carleton.ca/faculty/adler/publications/2006/
youmaran-ccece2006-biometric-entropy.pdf
Ahmed, A. A. E., & Traore, I. (2005a, June). 
Anomaly intrusion detection based on biometrics. 
Paper presented at the Workshop on Information 
Assurance, United States Military Academy, West 
Point, NY.
Ahmed, A. A. E., & Traore, I. (2005b, October). 
Detecting computer intrusions using behavioral 
biometrics. Paper presented at the Third Annual 
Conference on Privacy, Security, and Trust, St. 
Andrews, New Brunswick, Canada.
Al-Zubi, S., Brömme, A., & Tönnies, K. (2003, 
September 10-12). Using an active shape struc-
tural model for biometric sketch recognition. Paper 
presented at the DAGM, Magdeburg, Germany 
(pp. 187-195).
Anderson, J. P. (1980). Computer security threat 
monitoring and surveillance. Fort Washington, 
PA: James P. Anderson Company.
Angle, S., Bhagtani, R., & Chheda, H. (2005, 
March 27-30). Biometrics: A further echelon of 
security. Paper presented at the First UAE Inter-
national Conference on Biological and Medical 
Physics.
Apap, F., Honig, A., Hershkop, S., Eskin, E., & 
Stolfo, S. (2002). Detecting malicious software 
by monitoring anomalous windows registry ac-
cesses. Paper presented at the Fifth International 
Symposium on Recent Advances in Intrusion 
Detection (pp. 16-18).
Ballard, L., Lopresti, D., & Monrose, F. (2006, 
October). Evaluating the security of handwriting 
biometrics. Paper presented at the 10th Interna-
tional Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting 
Recognition (IWFHR06), La Baule, France (pp. 
461-466).
Ballard, L., Monrose, F., & Lopresti, D. P. (2006, 
July-August). Biometric authentication revisited: 
Understanding the impact of wolves in sheep’s 
clothing. Paper presented at the Fifteenth USENIX 
Security Symposium, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
32
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Banikazemi, M., Poff, D., & Abali, B. (2005, 
April 11-14). Storage-based intrusion detection 
for storage area networks (SANs). Paper presented 
at the 22nd IEEE/13th NASA Goddard Conference 
on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (pp. 
118- 127).
Bartolacci, G., Curtin, M., Katzenberg, M., 
Nwana, N., Cha, S.-H., & Tappert, C. C. (2005). 
Long-text keystroke biometric applications over 
the Internet. Paper presented at the MLMTA (pp. 
119-126).
Bella, S. D., & Palmer, C. (2006). Personal iden-
tifiers in musicians’ finger movement dynamics. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, ▪▪▪, 18.
BenAbdelkader, C., Cutler, R., & Davis, L. (2002). 
Person identification using automatic height and 
stride estimation. Paper presented at the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Pattern Recognition.
Bergadano, F., Gunetti, D., & Picardi, C. (2002). 
User authentication through keystroke dynam-
ics. [TISSEC]. ACM Transactions on Infor-
mation and System Security, 5(4), 367–397. 
doi:10.1145/581271.581272
Bhatkar, S., Chaturvedi, A., & Sekar, R. (2006, 
May). Dataflow anomaly detection. Paper pre-
sented at the IEEE Symposium on Security and 
Privacy.
Bioprivacy.org. (2005a). FAQ. BioPrivacy Initia-
tive. Retrieved on July 22, 2005, from http://www.
bioprivacy.org/faqmain.htm
Bioprivacy.org. (2005b). FAQ’s and definitions. 
International Biometric Group, LLC. Retrieved 
on October 2, 2005, from http://www.bioprivacy.
org/bioprivacy_text.htm
Bolle, R., Connell, J., Pankanti, S., Ratha, N., 
& Senior, A. (2003). Guide to biometrics. New 
York: Springer.
Brause, R., Langsdorf, T., & Hepp, M. (1999). 
Neural data mining for credit card fraud detec-
tion. Paper presented at the 11th IEEE International 
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence 
(pp. 103-106).
Bromme, A. (2003, July 6-9). A classification of 
biometric signatures. Paper presented at the In-
ternational Conference on Multimedia and Expo 
(ICME ‘03) (pp. 17-20).
Brömme, A., & Al-Zubi, S. (2003, July 24). Mul-
tifactor biometric sketch authentication. Paper 
presented at the BIOSIG, Darmstadt, Germany 
(pp. 81-90).
Broun, C. C., Zhang, X., Mersereau, R. M., & 
Clements, M. A. (2002). Automatic speechreading 
with applications to speaker verification. Eurasip 
Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Special 
Issue on Joint Audio-Visual Speech Processing.
Cahill, M., Lambert, D., Pinheiro, J., & Sun, D. 
(2000). Detecting fraud in the real world. (Tech. 
Rep.). Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies.
Campbell, J. P. (1997). Speaker recognition: A tu-
torial. Proceedings of the IEEE, 85(9), 1437–1462. 
doi:10.1109/5.628714
Cappelli, R., Maio, D., Maltoni, D., Wayman, 
J. L., & Jain, A. K. (2006). Performance evalu-
ation of fingerprint verification systems. IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, 28(1), 3–18. doi:10.1109/TPA-
MI.2006.20
Caslon.com.au. (2005). Caslon-analytics. Re-
trieved on October 2, 2005, from http://www.
caslon.com.au/biometricsnote8.htm
Ciota, Z. (2004, October 10-13). Speaker verifica-
tion for multimedia application. Paper presented 
at the IEEE International Conference on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics (pp. 2752- 2756).
33
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Colombi, J., Ruck, D., Rogers, S., Oxley, M., & 
Anderson, T. (1996). Cohort selection and word 
grammar effects for speaker recognition. Paper 
presented at the IEEE International Conference 
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 
Atlanta, GA (pp. 85-88).
Crompton, M. (2003). Biometrics and privacy: The 
end of the world as we know it or the white knight 
of privacy? Paper presented at the 1st Biometrics 
Institute Conference.
Curtin, M., Tappert, C. C., Villani, M., Ngo, 
G., Simone, J., Fort, H. S., et al. (2006, June). 
Keystroke biometric recognition on long-text 
input: A feasibility study. Paper presented at the 
Workshop Sci Comp/Comp Stat (IWSCCS 2006), 
Hong Kong.
Dahel, S. K., & Xiao, Q. (2003, June 18-20). 
Accuracy performance analysis of multimodal 
biometrics. Paper presented at the IEEE Informa-
tion Assurance Workshop on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics Society (pp. 170- 173).
Dao, V., & Vemuri, V. (2000, December 11-15). 
Profiling users in the UNIX OS environment. Paper 
presented at the International ICSC Conference on 
Intelligent Systems and Applications, University 
of Wollongong Australia.
Delac, K., & Grgic, M. (2004, June 16-18). A 
survey of biometric recognition methods. Paper 
presented at the 46th International Symposium 
Electronics in Marine, ELMAR-2004, Zadar, 
Croatia (pp. 184-193).
Democraticmedia.org. (2001). TV that watches 
you: The prying eyes of interactive television. 
A report by the Center for Digital Democracy. 
Retrieved June 11, 2001, from www.democrat-
icmedia.org/privacyreport.pdf
Denning, D. E. (1987). An intrusion-detec-
tion model. IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, 13(2), 222–232. doi:10.1109/
TSE.1987.232894
Deshpande, S., Chikkerur, S., & Govindaraju, 
V. (2005, October 17-18). Accent classification 
in speech. Paper presented at the Fourth IEEE 
Workshop on Automatic Identification Advanced 
Technologies (pp. 139-143).
Dugelay, J.-L., Junqua, J.-C., Kotropoulos, 
C., Kuhn, R., Perronnin, F., & Pitas, I. (2002, 
May). Recent advances in biometric person 
authentication. Paper presented at the IEEE Int. 
Conf. on Acoustics Speech and Signal Process-
ing (ICASSP), Special Session on Biometrics, 
Orlando, FL.
Elissetche, M. M. (2005). Social science diction-
ary. Retrieved on October 6, 2005, from http://
www.elissetche.org/dico/p.htm
Erdogan, H., Ercil, A., Ekenel, H., Bilgin, S., 
Eden, I., & Kirisci, M. (2005a). Multimodal per-
son recognition for vehicular applications. LNCS, 
3541, 366–375.
Erdogan, H., Ozyagci, A. N., Eskil, T., Rodoper, 
M., Ercil, A., & Abut, H. (2005b, September). 
Experiments on decision fusion for driver rec-
ognition. Paper presented at the Biennial on DSP 
for in-vehicle and mobile systems, Sesimbra, 
Portugal.
Erzin, E., Yemez, Y., Tekalp, A. M., Erçil, A., 
Erdogan, H., & Abut, H. (2006). Multimodal 
person recognition for human-vehicle interac-
tion. IEEE MultiMedia, 13, 18–31. doi:10.1109/
MMUL.2006.37
Fawcett, T., & Provost, F. (1997). Adaptive fraud 
detection. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 
1(3), 291–316. doi:10.1023/A:1009700419189
Feng, H., Kolesnikov, O., Fogla, P., Lee, W., & 
Gong, W. (2003a, May 11-14). Anomaly detection 
using call stack information. Paper presented at 
the IEEE Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA.
34
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Feng, H. H., Kolesnikov, O. M., Fogla, P., Lee, 
W., & Gong, W. (2003b). Anomaly detection 
using call stack information. Paper presented at 
the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 
(pp. 62-78).
Frantzeskou, G., Gritzalis, S., & MacDonell, S. 
(2004, August). Source code authorship analy-
sis for supporting the cybercrime investigation 
process. Paper presented at the 1st International 
Conference on E-Business and Telecommunica-
tion Networks-Security and Reliability in Infor-
mation Systems and Networks Track, Setubal, 
Portugal (pp. 85-92).
Fu, Y., & Shih, M. (2002, June). A framework for 
personal Web usage mining. Paper presented at the 
International Conference on Internet Computing 
(IC’2002), Las Vegas, NV (pp. 595-600).
Gamboa, H., & Fred, A. (2003). An identity au-
thentication system based on human computer 
interaction behaviour. Paper presented at the 3rd 
Intl. Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Infor-
mation Systems (pp. 46-55).
Gamboa, H., & Fred, A. (2004). A behavioral 
biometric system based on human computer 
interaction. Paper presented at the SPIE (pp. 
5404-5436).
Garg, A., Rahalkar, R., Upadhyaya, S., & Kwiat, K. 
(2006, June 21-23). Profiling users in GUI based 
systems for masquerade detection. Paper presented 
at The 7th IEEE Information Assurance Workshop 
(IAWorkshop 2006), West Point, NY.
Ghosh, A. K., Schwatzbard, A., & Shatz, M. 
(1999b, April). Learning program behavior 
profiles for intrusion detection. Paper presented 
at the 1st USENIX Workshop on Intrusion Detec-
tion and Network Monitoring, Santa Clara, CA 
(pp. 51-62).
Giffin, J., Jha, S., & Miller, B. (2004, February). 
Efficient context-sensitive intrusion detection. 
Paper presented at the 11th Annual Network 
and Distributed Systems Security Symposium 
(NDSS), San Diego, CA.
Goecks, J., & Shavlik, J. (2000). Learning users’ 
interests by unobtrusively observing their normal 
behavior. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, New 
Orleans, LA (pp. 129-132).
Goldring, T. (2003). User profiling for intrusion 
detection in windows NT. Computing Science 
and Statistics, 35.
Gray, A., Sallis, P., & MacDonell, S. (1997). 
Software forensics: Extending authorship analysis 
techniques to computer programs. Paper presented 
at the In Proc. 3rd Biannual Conf. Int. Assoc. of 
Forensic Linguists (IAFL’97).
Griffin, J. L., Pennington, A. G., Bucy, J. S., 
Choundappan, D., Muralidharan, N., & Ganger, 
G. R. (2003). On the feasibility of intrusion detec-
tion inside workstation disks. (Tech. Rep. CMU-
PDL-03-106). Carnegie Mellon University.
Grosser, H., Britos, H., & García-Martínez, R. 
(2005). Detecting fraud in mobile telephony using 
neural networks. (LNAI, pp. 613-615).
Gunetti, D., Picardi, C., & Ruffo, G. (2005). 
Keystroke analysis of different languages: A case 
study. Paper presented at the Proc. of the Sixth 
Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis (IDA 
2005), Madrid, Spain (pp. 133-144).
Gupta, G., Mazumdar, C., & Rao, M. S. (2004). 
Digital forensic analysis of e-mails: A trusted 
e-mail protocol. International Journal of Digital 
Evidance, 2(4).
Halteren, H. v. (2004). Linguistic profiling for 
author recognition and verification. Paper pre-
sented at the ACL-2004.
35
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Henderson, N. J., White, N. M., Veldhuis, R. N. 
J., Hartel, P. H., & Slump, C. H. (2002). Sensing 
pressure for authentication. Paper presented at 
the 3rd IEEE Benelux Signal Processing Symp. 
(SPS), Leuven, Belgium (pp. 241-244).
Henderson, N. Y., Papakostas, T. V., White, N. 
M., & Hartel, P. H. (2001). Polymer thick-film 
sensors: Possibilities for smartcard biometrics. 
Paper presented at the Sensors and Their Applica-
tions XI (pp. 83-88).
Herbst, B., & Coetzer, H. (1998). On an offline 
signature verification system. Paper presented at 
the 9th Annual South African Workshop on Pattern 
Recognition (pp. 39-43).
Hilas, C., & Sahalos, J. (2005, October 15-16). 
User profiling for fraud detection in telecom-
munication networks. Paper presented at the 5th 
International Conference on Technology and 
Automation (ICTA 2005), Thessaloniki, Greece 
(pp. 382-387).
Hofmeyr, S. A., Forrest, S., & Somayaji, A. 
(1998). Intrusion detection using sequences of 
system calls. Journal of Computer Security, 6, 
151–180.
Humm, A., Hennebert, J., & Ingold, R. (2006, 
July 10-12). Scenario and survey of combined 
handwriting and speech modalities for user 
authentication. Paper presented at the 6th Inter-
national Conference on Recent Advances in Soft 
Computing (RASC’06), Canterbury, UK (pp. 
496-501).
Igarashi, K., Miyajima, C., Itou, K., Takeda, K., 
Itakura, F., & Abut, H. (2004). Biometric identi-
fication using driving behavioral signals. Paper 
presented at the Proc. 2004 IEEE International 
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (pp. 65-
68).
Ilgun, K., Kemmerer, R. A., & Porras, P. A. (1995). 
State transition analysis: A rule-based intrusion 
detection approach. Software Engineering, 21(3), 
181–199.
Ilonen, J. (2006). Keystroke dynamics. Retrieved 
on July 12, 2006, from www.it.lut.fi/kurs-
sit/03-04/010970000/seminars/ilonen.pdf
Ito, A., Wang, X., Suzuki, M., & Makino, S. (2005). 
Smile and laughter recognition using speech 
processing and face recognition from conversa-
tion video. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Cyberworlds (pp. 437-444).
Jacob, B. A., & Levitt, S. D. (2004). To catch 
a cheat. Paper presented at the Education Next 
Retrieved from www.educationnext.org
Jain, A., Griess, F., & Connell, S. (2002). Online 
signature verification. Pattern Recognition, 35, 
2963–2972. doi:10.1016/S0031-3203(01)00240-
0
Jain, A. K., Bolle, R., & Pankanti, S. (1999). 
BIOMETRICS: Personal identification in net-
worked society. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Jain, A. K., Dass, S. C., & Nandakumar, K. (2004a). 
Can soft biometric traits assist user recognition? 
Paper presented at the SPIE Defense and Security 
Symposium, Orlando, FL, April 2004.
Jain, A. K., Dass, S. C., & Nandakumar, K. (2004b, 
July). Soft biometric traits for personal recogni-
tion systems. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Biometric Authentication (ICBA), 
Hong Kong (pp. 731-738).
Jain, A. K., Pankanti, S., Prabhakar, S., Hong, L., 
& Ross, A. (2004c, August). Biometrics: A grand 
challenge. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Pattern Recognition, Cambridge, 
UK.
36
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Jain, A. K., Ross, A., & Prabhakar, S. (2004d). 
An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE 
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol, 14, 4–20. 
doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2003.818349
Jain, K., Nandakumar, K., & Ross, A. (2005). 
Score normalization in multimodal biometric 
systems. Pattern Recognition, 38(12), 2270–2285. 
doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2005.01.012
Jansen, A. R., Dowe, D. L., & E., G. (2000). Farr 
inductive inference of chess player strategy. Paper 
presented at the 6th Pacific Rim International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (PRICAI’2000) 
(pp. 61-71).
Jermyn, I., Mayer, A., Monrose, F., Reiter, M. K., 
& Rubin, A. D. (1999, August 23-26). The design 
and analysis of graphical passwords. Paper pre-
sented at the 8th USENIX Security Symposium, 
Washington, D.C.
Jourlin, P., Luettin, J., Genoud, D., & Wassner, 
H. (1997). Acoustic-labial speaker verification. 
Pattern Recognition Letters, 18(9), 853–858. 
doi:10.1016/S0167-8655(97)00070-6
Juola, P., & Sofko, J. (2004). Proving and improv-
ing authorship attribution. Paper presented at the 
CaSTA-04 The Face of Text.
Kale, A., Sundaresan, A., Rajagopalan, A. N., & 
Cuntoor, N., RoyChowdhury, A., Kruger, V., et 
al. (2004). Identification of humans using gait. 
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(9). 
doi:10.1109/TIP.2004.832865
Kalyanaraman, S. (2006). Biometric authenti-
cation systems a report. Retrieved from http://
netlab.cs.iitm.ernet.in/cs650/2006/termpapers/
sriramk.pdf
Kauffman, J. A., Bazen, A. M., Gerez, S. H., & 
Veldhuis, R. N. J. (2003). Grip-pattern recogni-
tion for smart guns. Paper presented at the 14th 
Annual Workshop on Circuits, Systems, and 
Signal Processing (ProRISC), Veldhoven, The 
Netherlands (pp. 379-384).
Kaufman, K., Cervone, G., & Michalski, R. S. 
(2003). An application of symbolic learning to 
intrusion detection: Preliminary results from the 
LUS methodology (No. MLI 03-2). Fairfax, VA: 
George Mason University.
Kim, Y., Jo, J.-Y., & Suh, K. (2006, April). Base-
line profile stability for network anomaly detec-
tion. Paper presented at the IEEE ITNG 2006, 
Internet and Wireless Network Security Track, 
Las Vegas, NV.
Ko, C., Fink, G., & Levitt, K. (1994, December). 
Automated detection of vulnerabilities in privi-
leged programs by execution monitoring. Paper 
presented at the 10th Annual Computer Security 
Applications Conference (pp. 134-144).
Koppel, M., & Schler, J. (2004, July). Authorship 
verification as a one-class classification problem. 
Paper presented at the 21st International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Banff, Canada (pp. 
489-495).
Koppel, M., Schler, J., & Mughaz, D. (2004, 
January). Text categorization for authorship 
verification. Paper presented at the Eighth Inter-
national Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and 
Mathematics, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
Korotkaya, Z. (2003). Biometrics person authenti-
cation: Odor. Retrieved on October 12, 2008, from 
http://www.it.lut.fi/kurssit/03-04/010970000/
seminars/korotkaya.pdf
Koychev, I., & Schwab, I. (2000). Adaptation to 
drifting user’s interests. Paper presented at the 
Workshop: Machine Learning in New Information 
Age, Barcelona, Spain.
37
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Kuge, N., Yamamura, T., & Shimoyama, O. (1998). 
A driver behavior recognition method based on 
driver model framework. Paper presented at the 
Society of Automotive Engineers.
Lam, L.-c., Li, W., & Chiueh, T.-c. (2006, June). 
Accurate and automated system call policy-based 
intrusion prevention. Paper presented at the In-
ternational Conference on Dependable Systems 
and Networks (DSN 2006).
Lane, T., & Brodley, C. E. (1997a). An application 
of machine learning to anomaly detection. Paper 
presented at the 20th Annual National Information 
Systems Security Conference (pp. 366-380).
Lane, T., & Brodley, C. E. (1997b). Detecting 
the abnormal: Machine learning in computer 
security (No. ECE-97-1). West Lafayette: Purdue 
University
Lawson, W. (2002). The new wave (“Biometric ac-
cess & neural control”). Retrieved on November 
24, 2008, from http://www.icdri.org/biometrics/
new_wave.htm
Lee, K., & Park, H. (2003). A new similarity 
measure based on intraclass statistics for bio-
metric systems. ETRI Journal, 25(5), 401–406. 
doi:10.4218/etrij.03.0102.0017
Lee, W., Stolfo, S. J., & Mok, K. W. (1999). A data 
mining framework for building intrusion detection 
models. Paper presented at the IEEE Symposium 
on Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA.
Lei, H., Palla, S., & Govindaraju, V. (2004). ER2: 
An intuitive similarity measure for online signature 
verification. Paper presented at the Ninth Inter-
national Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting 
Recognition (IWFHR’04) (pp. 191-195).
Li, Y., Wu, N., Jajodia, S., & Wang, X. S. (2002). 
Enhancing profiles for anomaly detection using 
time granularities. Paper presented at the Journal 
of Computer Security (pp. 137-157).
Liang, T. P., & Lai, H.-J. (2002). Discovering 
user interests from Web browsing behavior. Paper 
presented at the Hawaii International Conference 
on Systems Sciences, HI.
Lin, X., & Simske, S. (2004, November 7-10). 
Phoneme-less hierarchical accent classification. 
Paper presented at the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar 
Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers 
(pp. 1801- 1804).
Liu, A., & Salvucci, D. (2001, August 5-10). 
Modeling and prediction of human driver behav-
ior. Paper presented at the 9th HCI International 
Conference, New Orleans, LA (pp. 1479-1483).
Liu, D., & Huebner, F. (2002, November 6-8). 
Application profiling of IP traffic. Paper presented 
at the 27th Annual IEEE Conference on Local 
Computer Networks (pp. 220-229).
Liu, Z., & Bridges, S. M. (2005, April 4-6). Dy-
namic learning of automata from the call stack 
log for anomaly detection. Paper presented at the 
International Conference on Information Technol-
ogy: Coding and Computing (ITCC 2005) (pp. 
774-779).
Luettin, J., Thacker, N. A., & Beet, S. W. (1996). 
Speaker identification by lipreading. Paper 
presented at the 4th International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP’96).
Lunt, T. (1993). Detecting intruders in computer 
systems. Paper presented at the Conference on 
Auditing and Computer Technology.
Lyu, S., Rockmore, D., & Farid, H. (2004). A 
digital technique for art authentication. National 
Academy of Sciences, 101(49), 17006-17010.
Mainguet, J.-F. (2006). Biometrics, Retrieved 
on July 28, 2006, from http://perso.orange.fr/
fingerchip/biometrics/biometrics.htm
38
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Marceau, C. (2000, September 19-21). Character-
izing the behavior of a program using multiple-
length n-grams. Paper presented at the New 
Security Paradigms Workshop, Cork, Ireland.
Marcel, S., & Millan, J. (2007). Person authenti-
cation using brainwaves (EEG) and maximum a 
posteriori model adaptation. IEEE Transactions 
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
29(4), 743–752. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1012
Marin, J., Ragsdale, D., & Surdu, J. (2001). A 
hybrid approach to the profile creation and in-
trusion detection. Paper presented at the DARPA 
Information Survivability Conference and Exposi-
tion (DISCEX II’01).
Mason, J. S. D., Brand, J., Auckenthaler, R., De-
ravi, F., & Chibelushi, C. (1999). Lip signatures for 
automatic person recognition. Paper presented at 
the In IEEE Workshop, MMSP (pp. 457-462).
Maxion, R. A., & Townsend, T. N. (2002a, June 
23-26). Masquerade detection using truncated 
command lines. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Conference of Dependable Systems and 
Networks, Washington, D.C.
Maxion, R. A., & Townsend, T. N. (2002b). Mas-
querade detection using truncated command lines. 
Paper presented at the International Conference on 
Dependable Systems and Networks (DNS-02).
Michael, C. C. (2003, April 22-24). Finding the 
vocabulary of program behavior data for anomaly 
detection. Paper presented at the DARPA Infor-
mation Survivability Conference and Exposition 
(pp. 152-163).
Michael, C. C., & Ghosh, A. (2000, October). 
Using finite automata to mine execution data for 
intrusion detection: A preliminary report. Paper 
presented at the Third International Workshop in 
Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, Toulouse, 
France.
Mohammadi, G., Shoushtari, P., Ardekani, B. M., 
& Shamsollahi, M. B. (2006). Person identifica-
tion by using AR model for EEG signals. Paper 
presented at the World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology.
Mok, L., Lau, W. H., Leung, S. H., Wang, S. L., 
& Yan, H. (2004, October 24-27). Person authen-
tication using ASM based lip shape and intensity 
information. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Image Processing (pp. 561-564).
Monrose, F., & Rubin, A. D. (2000, March). Key-
stroke dynamics as a biometric for authentication. 
Future Generation Computing Systems (FGCS) 
Journal: Security on the Web (special issue).
Muralidharan, N., & Wunnava, S. (2004, June 
2-4). Signature verification: A popular biometric 
technology. Paper presented at the Second LAC-
CEI International Latin American and Caribbean 
Conference for Engineering and Technology 
(LACCEI’2004), Miami, FL.
Nalwa, V. S. (1997). Automatic online signa-
ture verification. Proceedings of the IEEE, 85, 
215–239. doi:10.1109/5.554220
Nguyen, N., Reiher, P., & Kuenning, G. H. (2003, 
June 18-20). Detecting insider threats by moni-
toring system call activity. Paper presented at the 
IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society 
Information Assurance Workshop (pp. 45-52).
Nixon, M. S., & Carter, J. N. (2004). On gait 
as a biometric: Progress and prospects. Paper 
presented at the EUSIPCO, Vienna.
Novikov, D. (2005). Neural networks to intrusion 
detection. Unpublished MS thesis, Rochester 
Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY.
39
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Novikov, D., Yampolskiy, R. V., & Reznik, L. 
(2006a, April 10-12). Anomaly detection based 
intrusion detection. Paper presented at the Third 
International Conference on Information Technol-
ogy: New Generations (ITNG 2006), Las Vegas, 
NV (pp. 420-425).
Novikov, D., Yampolskiy, R. V., & Reznik, L. 
(2006b, May 5). Artificial intelligence approaches 
for intrusion detection. Paper presented at the 
Long Island Systems Applications and Technol-
ogy Conference (LISAT2006), Long Island, NY 
(pp. 1-8).
Oliver, N., & Pentland, A. P. (2000). Graphi-
cal models for driver behavior recognition in a 
SmartCar. Paper presented at the IEEE Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium.
Orozco, M., Asfaw, Y., Adler, A., Shirmoham-
madi, S., & Saddik, A. E. (2005, May 17-19). 
Automatic identification of participants in haptic 
systems. Paper presented at the IEEE Instrumenta-
tion and Measurement Technology Conference, 
Ottawa, Canada.
Orozco, M., Asfaw, Y., Shirmohammadi, S., 
Adler, A., & Saddik, A. E. (2006, March 25-29). 
Haptic-based biometrics: A feasibility study. Paper 
presented at the IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, 
Alexandria, VA.
Pamudurthy, S., Guan, E., Mueller, K., & Ra-
failovich, M. (2005, July). Dynamic approach 
for face recognition using digital image skin 
correlation. Paper presented at the Audio- and 
Video-based Biometric Person Authentication 
(AVBPA), New York.
Paper presented at the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Multimedia and Expo (ICME ‘02) (pp. 
573-576).
Pennington, A. G., Strunk, J. D., Griffin, J. L., 
Soules, C. A. N., Goodson, G. R., & Ganger, G. 
R. (2002). Storage-based intrusion detection: 
Watching storage activity for suspicious behav-
ior. (No. CMU--CS-02-179). Carnegie Mellon 
University.
Phua, K., Dat, T. H., Chen, J., & Shue, L. (2006). 
Human identification using heart sound. Paper 
presented at the Second International Workshop 
on Multimodal User Authentication, Toulouse, 
France.
Plamondon, R., & Lorette, G. (1989). Automatic 
signature verification and writer identification: 
The state of the art. Pattern Recognition, 22(2), 
107–131. doi:10.1016/0031-3203(89)90059-9
poker-edge.com. (2006). Stats and analysis. 
Poker-edge.com Retrieved on June 7, 2006, from 
http://www.poker-edge.com/stats.php
Prassas, G., Pramataris, K. C., & Papaemman-
ouil, O. (2001, June). Dynamic recommendations 
in Internet retailing. Paper presented at the 9th 
European Conference on Information Systems 
(ECIS 2001).
Preez, J., & Soms, S. H. (2005). Person identifi-
cation and authentication by using “the way the 
heart beats.” Paper presented at the ISSA 2005 
New Knowledge Today Conference, Sandton, 
South Africa.
Pusara, M., & Brodley, C. E. (2004). User reau-
thentication via mouse movements. Paper pre-
sented at the ACM Workshop on Visualization and 
Data Mining for Computer Security, Washington, 
D.C. (pp. 1-8).
Ramann, F., Vielhauer, C., & Steinmetz, R. (2002). 
Biometric applications based on handwriting.
Ramon, J., & Jacobs, N. (2002). Opponent mod-
eling by analysing play. Paper presented at the 
Computers and Games workshop on Agents in 
Computer Games, Edmonton, Albera, Canada.
40
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Ratha, N. K., Senior, A., & Bolle, R. M. (2001, 
March). Automated biometrics. Paper presented 
at the International Conference on Advances in 
Pattern Recognition, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Renaud, K. (2003). Quantifying the quality of 
Web authentication mechanisms. A usability 
perspective. Journal of Web Engineering, 0(0). 
Retrieved from http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~karen/
papers/j.pdf
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The do-re-
mi’s of everyday life: The structure and personality 
correlates of music preferences. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 84, 1236–1256. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.6.1236
Revett, K. (2008). Behavioral biometrics: A remote 
access approach. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Riha, Z., & Matyas, V. (2000). Biometric authen-
tication systems. Paper presented at the FI MU 
Report Series.
Ruggles, T. (2007). Comparison of biometric 
techniques. Retrieved on May 27, 2007, from 
http://www.bio-tech-inc.com/bio.htm
Sanderson, C., & Paliwal, K. K. (2001). Infor-
mation fusion for robust speaker verification. 
Paper presented at the 7th European Conference 
on Speech Communication and Technology (EU-
ROSPEECH’01), Aalborg.
Schonlau, M., DuMouchel, W., Ju, W.-H., Karr, 
A. F., Theus, M., & Vardi, Y. (2001). Computer 
intrusion: Detecting maquerades. Statistical Sci-
ence, 16(1), 1–17.
Schuckers, S. A. C. (2002). Spoofing and anti-
spoofing measures. Information Security, 7(4), 
56–62.
Seleznyov, A., & Puuronen, S. (1999). Anomaly 
intrusion detection systems: Handling temporal 
relations between events. Paper presented at the 
2nd International Workshop on Recent Advances 
in Intrusion Detection (RAID’99).
Shipilova, O. (2006). Person recognition based on 
lip movements. Retrieved on July 15, 2006, from 
http://www.it.lut.fi/kurssit/03-04/010970000/
seminars/shipilova.pdf
Silva, L. S., Santos, A. F. d., Silva, J. D. d., & 
Montes, A. (2004). A neural network application 
for attack detection in computer networks. Instituto 
Nacional de Pesquisas Espanciais.
Solayappan, N., & Latifi, S. (2006). A survey of 
unimodal biometric methods. Paper presented at 
the Security and Management, Las Vegas, NV 
(pp. 57-63).
Sommer, R., & Paxson, V. (2003). Enhancing 
byte-level network intrusion detection signatures 
with context. Paper presented at the 10th ACM 
Conference on Computer and Communications 
Security.
Spafford, E. H., & Weeber, S. A. (1992, Octo-
ber). Software forensics: Can we track code to 
its authors? Paper presented at the 15th National 
Computer Security Conference (pp. 641-650).
Stamatatos, E., Fakotakis, N., & Kokkinakis, G. 
(1999, June). Automatic authorship attribution. 
Paper presented at the Ninth Conf. European 
Chap. Assoc. Computational Linguistics, Bergen, 
Norway (pp. 158-164).
Standring, S. (2004). Gray’s anatomy: The ana-
tomical basis of medicine and surgery.
Stanton, P. T., Yurcik, W., & Brumbaugh, L. (2005, 
June 15-17). FABS: File and block surveillance 
system for determining anomalous disk accesses. 
Paper presented at the Sixth Annual IEEE Informa-
tion Assurance Workshop (pp. 207-214).
Stecklow, S., Singer, J., & Patrick, A. (2005). 
Watch on the Thames. The Wall Street Journal. 
Retrieved on October 4, 2005, from http://online.
wsj.com/public/article/sb112077340647880052-
ckyzgab0t3asu4udfvnpwroaqcy_20060708.
html
41
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Stolfo, S. J., Hershkop, S., Wang, K., Nimeskern, 
O., & Hu, C.-W. (2003a, September). A behavior-
based approach to securing e-mail systems. Paper 
presented at the Mathematical Methods, Models, 
and Architectures for Computer Networks Se-
curity.
Stolfo, S. J., Hu, C.-W., Li, W.-J., Hershkop, S., 
Wang, K., & Nimeskern, O. (2003b). Combining 
behavior models to secure e-mail systems (No. CU 
Tech. Rep.). Retrieved from www1.cs.columbia.
edu/ids/publications/EMT-weijen.pdf
Sturn, A. (2000). Cluster analysis for large scale 
gene expression studies. Unpublished Masters 
thesis, The Institute for Genomic Research, 
Rockville, MD.
Thompson, K., Miller, G., & Wilder, R. 
(1997). Wide area Internet traffic patterns and 
characteristics. IEEE Network, 11, 10–23. 
doi:10.1109/65.642356
Thorpe, J., Oorschot, P. C. v., & Somayaji, A. 
(2005, October 23). Pass-thoughts: Authenticating 
with our minds. Paper presented at the Workshop 
on New Security Paradigms, Lake Arrowhead, 
CA (pp. 45-56).
Trujillo, M. O., Shakra, I., & Saddik, A. E. (2005). 
Haptic: The new biometrics-embedded media to 
recognizing and quantifying human patterns. Pa-
per presented at the 13th Annual ACM International 
Conference on Multimedia, Hilton, Singapore 
(pp. 387-390).
Tsai, W.-H., & Wang, H.-M. (2006a, January). 
Automatic singer recognition of popular music 
recordings via estimation and modeling of solo vo-
cal signals. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, 
and Language Processing, 14(1), 330–341. 
doi:10.1109/TSA.2005.854091
Tsai, W.-H., & Wang, H.-M. (2006b, January). 
Automatic singer recognition of popular music 
recordings via estimation and modeling of solo vo-
cal signals. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, 
and Language Processing, 14(1), 330–341. 
doi:10.1109/TSA.2005.854091
Tsymbal, A. (2004). The problem of concept 
drift: Definitions and related work (No. TCD-
CS-2004-15). Dublin, Ireland: Trinity College.
Uludag, U., Pankanti, S., Prabhakar, S., & Jain, 
A. K. (2004). Biometric cryptosystems: Issues 
and challenges. Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(6). 
doi:10.1109/JPROC.2004.827372
Varenhorst, C. (2004). Passdoodles: A lightweight 
authentication method. Retrieved on July 27, 2004, 
from http://people.csail.mit.edu/emax/papers/
varenhorst.pdf
Vel, O. D., Anderson, A., Corney, M., & Mohay, 
G. (2001). Mining e-mail content for author 
identification forensics. Paper presented at the 
SIGMOD: Special Section on Data Mining for 
Intrusion Detection and Threat Analysis.
Veldhuis, R. N. J., Bazen, A. M., Kauffman, J. 
A., & Hartel, P. H. (2004). Biometric verification 
based on grip-pattern recognition. Paper presented 
at the Security, Steganography, and Watermarking 
of Multimedia Contents (pp. 634-641).
Wagner, D., & Dean, D. (2001). Intrusion detection 
via static analysis. Paper presented at the IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Wark, T., Thambiratnam, D., & Sridharan, S. 
(1997). Person authentication using lip infor-
mation. Paper presented at the IEEE 10th Annual 
Conference, Speech and Image Technologies 
for Computing and Telecommunications (pp. 
153-156).
42
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Warrender, C., Forrest, S., & Pearlmutter, B. (1999, 
May 9-12). Detecting intrusions using system 
calls: Alternative data models. Paper presented 
at the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 
Oakland, CA (pp. 133-145).
Wespi, A., Dacier, M., & Debar, H. (2000). Intru-
sion detection using variable-length audit trail 
patterns. Paper presented at the Recent Advances 
in Intrusion Detection (RAID).
Westeyn, T., Pesti, P., Park, K., & Starner, T. (2005, 
July). Biometric identification using song-based 
eye blink patterns. Paper presented at the Human 
Computer Interaction International (HCII), Las 
Vegas, NV.
Westeyn, T., & Starner, T. (2004). Recognizing 
song-based blink patterns: Applications for re-
stricted and universal access. Paper presented at 
the Sixth IEEE International Conference on Au-
tomatic Face and Gesture Recognition (p. 717).
Wikipedia.org. (2005). Behavioural sciences. 
Retrieved on October 6, 2005, from http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/behavioral_sciences
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2006, February 24). Behavior 
based identification of network intruders. Paper 
presented at the 19th Annual CSE Graduate Con-
ference (Grad-Conf2006), Buffalo, NY.
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2007a, April 2-4). Human 
computer interaction based intrusion detection. 
Paper presented at the 4th International Conference 
on Information Technology: New Generations 
(ITNG 2007), Las Vegas, NA (pp. 837-842).
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2007b, October 9-11). Indirect 
human computer interaction-based biometrics for 
intrusion detection systems. Paper presented at the 
41st Annual IEEE International Carnahan Con-
ference on Security Technology (ICCST2007), 
Ottawa, Canada (pp. 138-145).
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2007c, April 11-12). Motor-
skill based biometrics. Paper presented at the 6th 
Annual Security Conference, Las Vegas, NV.
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2007d, April 2-4). Secure net-
work authentication with passtext. Paper presented 
at the 4th International Conference on Information 
Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2007), Las 
Vegas, NA (pp. 831-836).
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2008a). Behavioral modeling: 
An overview. American Journal of Applied Sci-
ences, 5(5), 496–503.
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2008b). Computer security: 
From passwords to behavioral biometrics. Lon-
don: New Academic Publishing.
Yampolskiy, R. V., & Govindaraju, V. (2006a, 
December 16-18). Similarity measure functions 
for strategy-based biometrics. Paper presented at 
the International Conference on Signal Processing 
(ICSP 2006), Vienna, Austria.
Yampolskiy, R. V., & Govindaraju, V. (2006b, 
April 17-22). Use of behavioral biometrics in 
intrusion detection and online gaming. Paper 
presented at the Biometric Technology for Hu-
man Identification III. SPIE Defense and Security 
Symposium, Orlando, FL.
Yampolskiy, R. V., & Govindaraju, V. (2007a). 
Direct and indirect human computer interaction 
based biometrics. Journal of Computers, 2(8), 
76–88.
Yampolskiy, R. V., & Govindaraju, V. (2007b, 
April 9-13). Dissimilarity functions for behavior-
based biometrics. Paper presented at the Biometric 
Technology for Human Identification IV. SPIE De-
fense and Security Symposium, Orlando, FL.
Yampolskiy, R. V., & Govindaraju, V. (2008). 
Behavioral biometrics: A survey and classification. 
[IJBM]. International Journal of Biometric, 1(1), 
81–113. doi:10.1504/IJBM.2008.018665
43
Taxonomy of Behavioural Biometrics
Ye, N. (2000). A Markov chain model of temporal 
behavior for anomaly detection. Paper presented 
at the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Infor-
mation Assurance and Security Workshop.
Yeung, D. Y., & Ding, Y. (2001). (n.d.) Host-
based intrusion detection using dynamic and 
static behavioral models. Pattern Recognition, 36, 
229–243. doi:10.1016/S0031-3203(02)00026-2
Yutaka, K. (2005). Behaviormetrics. Retrieved 
on October 6, 2005, from http://koko15.hus.
osaka-u.ac.jp/
Zhang, Y., & Wang, D. (2006, July 12-15). Re-
search on object-storage-based intrusion detec-
tion. Paper presented at the 12th International 
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems 
(ICPADS) (pp. 68- 78).
Zhang, Z., & Manikopoulos, C. (2003, August 11-
13). Investigation of neural network classification 
of computer network attacks. Paper presented at the 
International Conference on Information Technol-
ogy: Research and Education (pp. 590- 594).
Zhu, Y., Tan, T., & Wang, Y. (2000). Biometric 
personal identification based on handwriting. Pa-
per presented at the 15th International Conference 
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’00) (p. 2797).
