EDITORIAL 
Publish but don’t tarnish 
Mukhtiar Zaman*, Zeeshan Kibria** 
 
The higher education in Pakistan in under constant change and during the last two 
decades it has seen many new initiatives in the way it is organized or developed. The 
impetus of change has sent many ripples in all spheres and layers of education 
continuum creating a competitive environment. The change has found many institutions 
and individuals at different level of readiness and has led in certain instances of 
inappropriate responses, collective or individual, such as plagiarism. 
Derived from the Latin word plagiaries (literally kidnapper), the word plagiarism is used 
to denote someone stealing someone else's work. In 1601, the word plagiarism was 
introduced in England and described as someone guilty of literally theft.1 Plagiarism is 
generally referred to as unauthorized use of an author’s original work either copying it as 
such or slightly modifying it or wrongful appropriation and purloining and publication of 
another author's thoughts, ideas, or expressions2-4.  
Plagiarism although considered not a crime but generally carries immense academic 
dishonesty and breach of ethics and demands expulsion5. The continuous and rapid 
development of modern information technology and web access to thousands of reading 
material and literature as well as code sources, images, sounds and videos has made 
copying and pasting quite common among researchers5, 6 and is described as being 
rampant among universities and any kind of discipline7. The Higher Education 
Commission (HEC) Pakistan website, list 9 faculty members of different Universities who 
are black listed on the basis of plagiarism and there are many more under 
investigations8.  
Various reasons have been explained for indulging in plagiarism including a cut throat 
competitive environment, deadline pressures and an increasingly efficiency based 
academic environment promote "publish or perish" culture. As per previously published 
data, plagiarism is identified as a common problem in all institutions nationally and 
internationally7  
Internal Plagiarism (a term referring to use your own published data without following 
proper procedures and editorial consent) is also not uncommon. In 2007, five teachers 
from Punjab University India and 06 Professors and the Director of AIMS (All India 
Institute Medical Sciences) were accused of re-publishing their own material in different 
periodicals on different occasions9. The issue of self-plagiarism is of utmost importance 
in Pakistan and has been reported many times to the notice of editors of medical 
journals. This problem is more prevalent perhaps because of the fact that the highly 
influential professorial staff who after publishing their manuscripts in international 
journals manage to publish more or less the same thing in local journals10.  
*Professor/Incharge Pulmonology Unit, Khyber Teaching Hospital & Director 
Office of Research Innovation & Commercialization, Khyber Medical University, 
Peshawar.  
**Manager Development, Office of Research Innovation & Commercialization, 
Khyber Medical University, Peshawar.  
Plagiarism at academic institutions is a big challenge to maintain academic standards. It 
is found among different tiers of student populations and in some instances due to lack 
of their understanding that they are committing the academic dishonesty. There are no 
uniform guidelines on controlling mechanisms on plagiarism leading to required training, 
poor monitoring and appropriate reporting11. In a study of 365 students of universities of 
Pakistan, it was found that due to lack of optimum plagiarism awareness and institutions 
protocols among the study participants, many participants admitted to poor knowledge 
regarding plagiarism and many of them admitted that they have12. Plagiarism has 
become a driving force for certain individuals to increase their academic statuses and to 
receive monetary benefits11. Shirazi  et al7 rightly pointed out in their study that only 18% 
of medical students and 23% of faculty members knew about the copyright rules while 
only 18% of medical students and 27% in faculty reported no plagiarism in their practice 
so far. 
A variety of computerized databases (plagiarism detectors) is available globally to detect 
the plagiarized text13. The research of plagiarism detection is a bit chaotic but with the 
advent of the PAN 2009 conference all the research was brought together and thus 
nowadays the field is more centralized and there is no absolute way to perform 
plagiarism detection or gold standard model that should be used14. The TURNITIN 
program, made available by HEC in the Degree awarding institutions, for plagiarism 
detection is highly effective in identifying similarity with regards to both internal and 
external plagiarism. Unfortunately, TURTITIN is very rarely practiced else where in 
Pakistan, perhaps due to the cost of the software, shortage of computer literacy and of 
lack of trainings.  
Therefore, we conclude that plagiarism is a serious issue not globally but locally as well. 
We need to conduct more awareness campaigns to reduce the practice of copying and 
pasting. This will bring more quality in our published literature and generation of local 
evidence in healthcare industry. We also recommend that software such as TURNITIN 
should be available widely in all institutions; media houses and in the journal offices for 
quick check. The punishment for plagiarism should be standardized and HEC 
blacklisting and inquiries should be taken seriously by the institutions and government.  
 
REFERENCES: 
1. Green, Stuart P. Plagiarism, Norms, and the Limits of Theft Law: Some 
Observations on the Use of Criminal Sanctions in Enforcing Intellectual Property 
Rights. Hastings Law Journal 2002;54(1):SSRN: 315562. 
2. Stamatatos E. Intrinsic Plagiarism Detection Using Character n-gram Profiles. 
Stein, Rosso, Stamatatos, Koppel, Agirre (Eds):PAN'2009;9:38-46. 
3. Potthast M, Barrón-Cedeño A, Stein B, Rosso P. Cross-Language Plagiarism 
Detection. Language Resources and Evaluation 2010. 45 (1): 45–62  
4. Plagiarism. Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. [Cited on: 2nd feb 2013]. Available 
from; http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plagiarism. 
5. Maurer H, Kappe F, Zaka B. Plagiarism - A Survey. Journal of Universal 
Computer Science 2006;12(8):1050-1084.  
6. Wan R, Nordin S, Halib M, Ghazali Z. Plagiarism among undergraduate students 
in an engineering-based university: An exploratory analysis, European Journal of 
Social Sciences, 2011;25(4):537-549. 
7. Shirazi B, Jafarey M, Moazam F. Plagiarism and the medical fraternity: A study of 
knowledge and attitudes. J Pak Med Assoc 2010;60(4):269-273.  
8. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan. Plagiarism cases under investigation. 
[Cited on Feb 8, 2013]. Available fromt; 
http://www.hec.gov.pk/InsideHEC/Divisions/QALI/QADivision/Pages/PCUI.aspx.  
9. Mahmood KR. Plagiarism, copyright violation, duplication, fabrication, false 
statements, breach of research and publication ethics. Indian J Dermatol 
Venereol Leprol 2009;75:182-3.  
10. Gadit AAM. Plagiarism: How serious is this problem in Pakistan? JPMA 
December 2006; 55(12):618. 
11. Saeed S, Aamir R, Ramzan M. Plagiarism and its implications on higher 
education in developing countries. Int J Teach Case Stud 2011;3(2):123-130. 
12. Ramzan M, Munir MA, Siddique N, Asif M. Awareness about plagiarism amongst 
university students in Pakistan. Higher Education 2012;64(1):73-84.  
13. Potthast M, Barrón-Cedeño A, Eiselt A, Stein B, Rosso P. Overview of the 2nd 
International Competition on Plagiarism Detection. Martin Braschler and Donna 
Harman (Eds.): Notebook Papers of CLEF 2010 LABs and Workshops, 22-23 
September, Padua, Italy. ISBN 978-88-904810-0-0. 2010.  
14. Almquist P. Plagiarism detection: experiments to investigate the utility of 
linguistically informed features in detecting textual plagiarism. [Cited on3rd Feb 
2013]. Available at: http://www.csc.kth.se/~serafim/sx-team-
1/specification2_pelle.pdf 
 
