Enhance Web Pages Genre Identification Using
Neighboring Pages
Jia Zhu1, Xiaofang Zhou2, and Gabriel Fung3
1 School of ITEE, The University of Queensland, Australia
jiazhu@itee.uq.edu.au
2 School of ITEE, The University of Queensland, Australia
zxf@itee.uq.edu.au
3 IGNGAB Lab, Hong Kong
gabriel@igngab.com
Abstract. Recently web pages genre identification attracts more atten-
tions because of its importance in web searching. Most of existing works
used the features extracted from web pages and applied machine learn-
ing approaches like SVM as classifier to identify the genre of web pages.
However, in the case where web pages do not contain enough information,
such an approach may not work well. In this paper, we consider to tackle
genre identification in such situations. We propose a link-based graph
model that taking into account neighboring pages but greatly reducing
the noisy information by selecting an appropriate subset of neighboring
pages. We evaluated this neighboring pages based classifier with other
classifiers. The experiments conducted on two known corpora, and the
favorable results indicated that our proposed approach is feasible.
1 Introduction
As the World Wide Web continues to grow exponentially, web pages classification
becomes extremely important in web searching. Web pages genre identification,
as a sub category of web pages classification, focuses on functional purposes
and discovering groups of texts compared to topic identification. For example,
a website like www.news.com.au, has many topics in the pages, e.g. sport news
and finance news, but the genre of these pages in this website is news.
The most important component to identify web genre is to select an appropri-
ate feature set. As the word genre, genre identification focuses on the properties
in the pages include textural information [12], e.g. term frequency, and structural
information [2], e.g. HTML tags, because textural information often represents
the content of a web page while structural information is about how the content
is presented. However, these features are sometimes missing or unrecognizable
for various reasons. For example, those web pages contain large images or video
objects but little textual content(see Figure 1). In such case, it is difficult for a
classifier to correctly identify the genre of a web page. Our approach uses addi-
tional information from web pages’ neighboring pages because more information
could provide more evidence for classifiers to learn the classification model [3].
A. Bouguettaya, M. Hauswirth, and L. Liu (Eds.): WISE 2011, LNCS 6997, pp. 282–289, 2011.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011
Enhance Web Pages Genre Identification Using Neighboring Pages 283
Fig. 1. A web page with few information
We define those pages from a page’s backward and forward links as neighboring
pages, and the radius is 2 which means the farthest pages we consider are 2 hops
from the original page according to our observation and computation cost. The
problem is one page might have many neighboring pages and they are likely to
belong to different web genres.
We propose a link-based graph model to select the most related neighboring
pages and extract those information which are useful for the task of web pages
genre identification. Comparing with the existing methods, our approach takes
into account as many neighboring pages as possible while greatly reducing the
noisy information by selecting an appropriate subset of neighboring pages.
The proposed approach is evaluated using two benchmark corpora for web
pages genre identification. We compare our approach to existing works from
different points of views. The experimental results show that our approach is
feasible. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss
related works in web page genre identification. In Section 3, we describe the main
challenges of genre identification and the details of our approach. In Section 4,
we present our experiments, evaluation metrics, and results. We also conclude
this study in Section 5.
2 Related Work
The previous studies of web pages genre identification differ significantly with
respect to two factors: 1) the feature set they use to represent the content and
structure of web pages, 2) the method to classify web pages based on the cho-
sen feature set. The following review of some previous works is presented in
chronological order.
Meyer and Stein [15] provided a corpus of eight genres following a user study
on genre usefulness with a support vector machine classifier. Moreover, they ex-
amined various feature sets attempting to combine different kinds of information
including word frequencies, text Statistics and part-of-speech frequencies.
Kennedy and Shepherd [7] emphasized on a specific genre and its sub-genres.
Using a neural network they attempted to discriminate between home pages and
284 J. Zhu, X. Zhou, and G. Fung
non home pages. Their feature set comprises features about the content (e.g.
common words and meta tags), form (e.g. number of images), and functionality
(e.g. number of links and use of scripts). The best reported results were for
personal home pages.
Kanaris and Stamatatos [6] purpose low-level feature sets of variable-length
character n-grams and combine this representation with information about the
most frequent html-tags. Based on two benchmark corpora, their SVM based
classification approach can improve the results in both cases.
Lei [4] examined the effect of various attributes on four different web gen-
res, FAQ, News, E-Shopping and Personal Home Pages using the Naive Bayes
classifier and the Information Gain Measure for feature selection. The results in-
dicated that fewer features produce better precision but more features produce
better recall, and that attributes in combinations will always perform better
than single attributes.
3 Proposed Approach
The aim of our approach is to identify web pages genre based on a list of features.
As described above in Section 2, researchers usually use On-Page Features [12]
for web pages genre identification include textural information written in HTML,
e.g. the text in the heading, and structural information [4], such as HTML tags,
because they can be accessed and gained easily.
Additionally, we retrieve additional information from neighboring pages and
propose a link-based graph model to select a subset of neighboring pages that is
the same genre as the original page. Details are given in this section.
3.1 On-Page Features
Like most of other existing works, we extract terms from page URL, title, key-
words, headings and anchors and apply TFIDF [13] to these textural information.
Eventually, we have a vector that is a list of TFIDF score represented terms we
extract from each page.
For structural information, we use features that have been examined in exist-
ing works as discussed in Section 2. We select number of images, links, emails,
forms, tables and div tags which represent the form and function of a page re-
spectively. However, our preliminary study and evaluations show that structural
information use independently cannot get sound results if the dataset contains
various genres of web pages. Therefore, we combine structural information with
textual information together to perform genre identification.
3.2 Neighboring Pages Selection
We collect neighboring pages from web pages’ backward and forward links and
design a link-based similarity measure called GenreSim based on the PageSim
Enhance Web Pages Genre Identification Using Neighboring Pages 285
similarity measure[10]. Compared to other popular link-based similarity mea-
sures like SimRank[5] and Co-citation[13], PageSim can measure similarity
between any two pages without the need of intermediate pages as required in
SimRank. Additionally, PageSim can consider neighboring pages in multiple hops
in contrast to Co-citation only considers direct neighboring pages.
We model all the neighboring pages and the original page as a directed graph
G = (V, E) with vertices V representing web pages vi(i = 0, 1, 2, ..., n) and
directed edges E representing hyperlinks among the web pages. Page v0 is the
original page. Below is a list of definitions for our model:
Definition 1. Path: We call p(u, v) is a path donates a sequence of vertices
from vertex u to vertex v through a set of edges ei(i = 1, 2, ..., n), e ∈ E and
E ∈ G.
Definition 2. Path Set: We call PATH(u, v) is the set of all possible paths
from vertex u to v.
Definition 3. Page Score: We call Score(v) is the score of a page v which
represents the importance of v in the web graph according to its backward and
forward links and it is query independent.
Definition 4. Backward and Forward Links: We call B(v) is the set of backward
link neighboring pages vertices of vertex v and F (v) is the set of forward link
neighboring pages vertices of vertex v.
In GenreSim, we not only use forward links as the original PageSim similarity
measure but also use backward links because the number of backward links of a
page can give us a general estimate of its prominence on the web graph. We also
implement a weighted method to compute the page score to make it suitable for
genre identification.
Let Score(u, v) denotes the recommendation score of page u propagate to v
through PATH(u, v) because a hyperlink from a page u to v can be considered
as the recommendation of page v by u while u and v should have some kinds of
similarity [1]. Naturally, the recommendation are decreased along with the links.
We then define:
Score(u, v) =
⎧⎪⎨
⎪⎩
Σp∈PATH(u,v)
d·Score(u)∏
x∈p,x =v(|F (x)|+|B(x)|) , v = u
Score(u), v = u
where d ∈ (0, 1] is a decay factor and u, v ∈ V .
Regards to the score of a page in above equation, we extend the HITS al-
gorithm to calculate the score because our web graph is based on neighboring
pages only. Hypertext-induced topic selection (HITS) is a algorithm developed
by Kleinberg [8] originally. Web pages that have many links pointing to them
are called authorities, while web pages that have many outgoing links are called
286 J. Zhu, X. Zhou, and G. Fung
hubs. Let H(p) and A(p) be the hub and authority score of page p. These scores
are defined such that the following equations are satisfied for all pages p:
H(p) = Σu∈S|p→uA(u), A(p) = Σv∈S|v→pH(v) (1)
where H(p) and A(p) are normalized for all web pages and calculated by number
of links. We use the sum of authority and hub score as the score of a page because
pages with high authority score are expected to have relevant content, whereas
pages with high hub scores are expected to contain links to relevant content.
However, the problem of this computation method is for some pages with high
score which only have few backward links but large number of forward links,
they highly likely are spam pages and point to many irrelevant pages. To avoid
this issue, we modify above equation as:
H(p) = Σu∈S|p→uω(p) ·A(u), A(p) = Σv∈S|v→pω(p) ·H(v) (2)
where ω(p) is the weighted parameters and calculated by the relevance value of
a neighboring page to the original page. Since our purpose is to find neighboring
pages that are the same genre as the original page, if two pages in the same
domain are the same genre, they are likely have similar amount of backward
links because they are expected to have relevant content. We define:
ω(p) =
1
|N −N(p)|+ 1 (3)
where N is the number of backward links of the original page and N(p) is the
number of backward links of neighboring page p. By this way, the closer number
of backward links to the original page, the higher weight the page will be given.
Then we have the similarity score Sim(u, v) donates the similarity between u
and v which represents their importance against other pages and the recommen-
dation they propagate to other pages are similar in the graph. Since the graph
is built from neighboring pages which means most of pages are from the same
domain. Therefore, it is likely that u and v belong to the same web genre. For in-
stance, Michael Jordon’ Wiki page has a number of backward and forward links
and most of links are NBA related while its neighboring page Kobe Byrant’ Wiki
page has similar recommendations to other pages in the web graph according to
the linking information. The similarity score is defined as below by adopting the
Jaccard measure, which is commonly used in information retrieval to measure
the similarity:
Sim(u, v) =
Σni=1min(Score(vi, u), Score(vi, v))
Σni=1max(Score(vi, u), Score(vi, v))
(4)
where u, v ∈ V .
We then select the top 10 neighboring pages with the highest similarity score
to extract textual information and construct feature set similar to the On-Page
features we discussed in Section 3.1.
Enhance Web Pages Genre Identification Using Neighboring Pages 287
4 Evaluations
4.1 Corpora and Data Preparation
In our experiment, we use two popular corpora: KI-04 corpus and 7-Web collec-
tion [14]. Each web page is associated with a specific source URL address and
belongs to a single genre class. We preprocess all of web pages in the dataset
before use classifiers to train. We select and tokenize text into words and remove
numbers, non-letter characters, stop words and special characters. We stem se-
lect terms using the Lovins stemmer and calculate TFIDF value for each page.
4.2 Evaluation Results
We evaluated our approach based on metrics adopted by some previous works
[9,11]. Pairwise F1 is defined as the harmonic mean of pairwise precision and
pairwise recall, where pairwise precision is the number of true positives divided
by the total number of elements labeled as belonging to the positive class. Recall
in this context is defined as the number of true positives divided by the total
number of elements that actually belong to the positive class.
Since our data is multi-class, the evaluation is done in two binary classifi-
cations, one-class-against-the-rest classification and pairwise classification. Both
classifications are measured by Macro-averaging, which means precision and re-
call are first evaluated ”locally” for each class then ”globally” by averaging over
the results of different classes. The Macro-averaging of precision PrecisionM
and recall RecallM are represented as PrecisionM =
∑ |C|
i=1 Precisioni
|C| , RecallM =∑ |C|
i=1 Recalli
|C| , where |C| is the total number of the classes.
Evaluations of Neighboring Pages Selection. We first evaluated our neigh-
boring pages selection model by apply different similarity measures in both KI-04
and 7-Web corpora. We select the top 10 neighboring pages with highest sim-
ilarity score generated by different similarity measures, and manually check if
these pages are the same genre as the original page. In this testing, GenreSim
achieves better results than others as shown at Table 1.
Comparisons of Individual Classifiers. This section is to discuss the com-
parisons of individual classifiers. All classifiers are implemented by SVM RBFK-
ernel in Weka API1. We split the dataset for classifiers training and testing,
the proportion is 80% and 20%. All classifiers are trained by use 10-fold cross
validation.
In addition, in order to evaluate the performance of our model to select
the most related neighboring pages for genre identification, we also use the
Google Similar Pages function2 to return the first 10 pages as neighboring pages.
Table 2 shows that Macro-averaging of four classifiers for the pages in the test
1 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/
2 http://www.google.com/help/features.html
288 J. Zhu, X. Zhou, and G. Fung
Table 1. Comparisions of Neighboring Pages Selection.
Model KI-04(%) 7-Web(%)
Co-citation 77.3 75.6
SimRank 81.7 79.5
PageSim 88.5 86.8
GenreSim 94.5 92.6
Table 2. Macro-averaging in Pairwise Classification
KI-04 Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%)
SVM On-Page Features 42.2 38.3 40.2
SVM Neighboring Pages 48.2 49.6 48.9
SVM Google Similar Pages 44.5 46.4 45.4
7-Web Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%)
SVM On-Page Features 58.1 48.3 52.7
SVM Neighboring Pages 43.2 59.7 50.1
SVM Google Similar Pages 41.2 51.8 45.9
Table 3. Macro-averaging in One-Class-Against-the-Rest Classification
KI-04 Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%)
SVM On-Page Features 78.2 73.3 75.8
SVM Neighboring Pages 88.2 88.3 88.2
SVM Google Similar Pages 78.3 84.2 81.1
7-Web Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%)
SVM On-Page Features 78.1 86.5 82.1
SVM Neighboring Pages 91.2 89.7 90.4
SVM Google Similar Pages 82.7 83.3 82.9
dataset KI-04 and 7-Web for pairwise classification whilst Table 3 shows that
Macro-averaging of four classifiers for the pages in the test dataset KI-04 and
7-Web for one-class-against-the-rest classification.
As the results shown in both tables, the classifier based on the feature of
neighboring pages generated from our algorithm achieves the best results in all
of three corpora though in some cases SVM On-Page Features classifier performs
better due to lack of text information in neighboring pages. In addition, the
classifier based on the neighboring pages generated by our model outperforms
the one generated by Google Similar Pages function in all cases.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a link-based graph model for genre identification of
web pages. Our approach uses additional information from neighboring pages
generated by our selection method to identify the genre of web pages.
Enhance Web Pages Genre Identification Using Neighboring Pages 289
The experiments indicated that our proposed approach is feasible. Next, we
will focus on investigating dynamic weighting for individual classifier to further
improve the ensemble performance of multiple classifiers.
References
1. Arasu, A., Cho, J., Garcia-Molina, H., Paepcke, A., Raghavan, S.: Searching the
web. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, 2–43 (2001)
2. Boese, E., Howe, A.: Effects of web document evolution on genre classification. In:
Proc. of the ACM 14th Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(2005)
3. Chen, G., Choi, B.: Web page genre classification. In: Proc. of 2008 ACM sympo-
sium on Applied computing, pp. 2353–2357 (2008)
4. Dong, L., Watters, C., Duffy, J., Shepherd, M.: An examination of genre attributes
for web page classification. In: Proc. of the 41th Annual Hawaii International Con-
ference on System Sciences, pp. 129–138 (2008)
5. Jeh, G., Widom, J.: Simrank: a measure of structural-context similarity. In: Proc.
of the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pp. 538–543 (2002)
6. Kanaris, I., Stamatatos, E.: Web page genre identification using variable-length
character n-grams. In: 19th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 7(1), pp. 3–10 (2007)
7. Kennedy, A., Shepherd, M.: Automatic identification of home pages on the web.
In: Proc. of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
pp. 99–108 (2005)
8. Kleinbery, J.M.: Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. Journal of
the ACM 46(5), 604–632 (1999)
9. Laender, A.H.F., Goncalves, M.A., Cota, R.G., Ferreira, A.A., Santos, R.L.T.,
Silva, A.J.C.: Keeping a digital library clean: New solutions to old problems. In:
Proc. of the 8th ACM Symposium on Document Engineering, pp. 257–262 (2008)
10. Lin, Z., King, I., Ly, M.R.: Pagesim: A novel link-based similarity measure for the
world wide web. In: Proc. of the 5th International Conference on Web Intelligence,
pp. 687–693 (2006)
11. Pereira, D.A., Ribeiro, B.N., Ziviani, N., Alberto, H.F., Goncalves, A.M., Ferreira,
A.A.: Using web information for author name disambiguation. In: Proc. of the 9th
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, pp. 49–58 (2009)
12. Qi, X., Davison, B.D.: Web page classification: Features and algorithms. ACM
Comput. Surv. 41(2), 1–31 (2009)
13. Salton, G., McGill, M.J.: Introduction to modern information retrieval (1986)
14. Santini, M.: Automatic genre identification: Towards a flexible classification
scheme. In: BCS IRSG Symposium: Future Directions in Information Access (2007)
15. Meyer zu Eissen, S., Stein, B.: Genre classification of web pages. In: Biundo, S.,
Frühwirth, T., Palm, G. (eds.) KI 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3238, pp. 256–269.
Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
